START right, it looks right.
START the nitrogen cycle, to be, it has.
START very good question, that is.
START she, where is, miri, hmm? she, where is, miri, hmm? janice, where is, hmm?
START with you what's the matter, hmm? i know, how should, hmm?
START she, where is, hmm? to her has something happened, hmm? yeesssssss.
START you feel all right, do not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no, i feel not all right! of us feel all right none! you see what's going on, cannot, hmm? herh herh herh.
START jim, i want not anything to happen to you. hmmmmmm.
START got to find janice, i have.
START all that is not, captain. got to find those communicators we have. herh herh herh.
START trying, we are trying, mister spock. trying very hard, we are. herh herh herh.
START good enough that is not! it, could this be, but test it without the ship's computers, we cannot.
START got to have those communicators, we have, jim.
START the vaccine, this is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START what the computers will tell us, that is.
START without them, beaker full of death could it be.
START hear them did you, hmm? few hours left, we only have. yeesssssss.
START i not care.
START got to care, you have. miri, going to tell you something i am. you, your friends, doing, all the onlies are going to get the disease unless we succeed in what we are. seen your friends get it, you have. hmmmmmm.
START it happens sometimes. herh herh herh.
START not sometimes. all the times, miri! as as you start growing up the way you are soon. you know why you do not like to play games anymore, do not, why you see not your friends the way you used to, hmm? it is because you are becoming a young woman, and you become a young woman the moment, the disease, you get. of you all.
START true that is not. it just happens sometimes.
START all the time, miri! happening to you right now, it is! look at it. look at it, miri, in you, it is! yes, hmmm.
START be the screen then it cannot. definitely something out there, captain, this way headed. herh herh herh.
START these meteorites could it be.
START no, something else, it is. still something out there, there is. yeesssssss.
START coming at the speed of light, is it, collision course. deflected it the meteorite beam has not, captain. yeesssssss.
START as we go steady.
START keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way, they were. yeesssssss.
START ship in trouble making a forced landing, sir. it, that is. no other message. herh herh herh.
START fix, have i. it comes from the talos star group. hmmmmmm.
START no ships or earth colonies that far out, have we. yeesssssss.
START with a survey expedition their call letters check. ss columbia. it disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago. hmmmmmm.
START take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here, would it.
START never been explored, records show the talos group has. to earth solar system similar, eleven planets. to be class m number four seems, oxygen atmosphere.
START then still be alive, they could, even after eighteen years. herh herh herh.
START we are going to go not, to be certain, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of survivors not without any indication, no. to the vega colony and take care of our own sick and injured first continue. the helm, you have. maintain present course.
START right, that is. unless we get anything more positive on it, to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent it seems. like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, i would, too.
START oh, with yours i concur, definitely. yeesssssss.
START good. glad you do, i am, because going to stop first at the vega colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also, we are. what the devil putting in there are you, ice, hmm?
START you think i need one what makes, hmm?
START sometimes a man'll tell his bartender things, never tell his doctor, will he. your mind what's been on, chris, the fight on rigel seven, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START it be should not, hmm? my only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
START was there anything you personally, done to prevent it, could have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START oh, smelled trouble should i have when i saw the swords and the armour. of that instead, of their warriors i let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one.
START chris, meet, you set standards for yourself no one could. like a human being except yourself you treat everyone on board, and tired and you, you now are.
START you bet, tired, am i. you bet. tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives, i am. tired of deciding, am i which mission is too risky and which is not, and not, who's going on the landing party and who does, and who lives and who dies. boy, had it, have i, phil.
START to the point of finally taking my advice, rest leave, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START well, for one thing, go home. with fifty miles of parkland around it nice little town. remember i told you, two horses, had i, and to take some food and ride out all day we used. hmmmmmm.
START ah, that sounds exciting. with a picnic lunch every day ride out.
START one place i might go, i said that is. i might go into business on regulus or on the orion colony.
START the only life available the point is this is not. whole galaxy of things to choose from, there is.
START beginning to talk like a doctor, you now are, bartender.
START take your choice. of customers we both get the same two kinds. the living and the dying. yeesssssss.
START the captain, this is. the talos star group, our destination is. our time warp, factor seven. hmmmmmm.
START acknowledged, all decks have, sir. herh herh herh.
START you that i thought i told when i am on the bridge. yeesssssss.
START but you wanted the reports by oh five hundred. oh five hundred now, is it, sir. herh herh herh.
START replacing your former yeoman, she is, sir. yes, hmmm.
START good job, she does, all right. it is just that i, get used to having a woman on the bridge, cannot. no offence, lieutenant. different, you are, of course. yeesssssss.
START settled into orbit, we have, sir. yeesssssss.
START our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, with inert elements but well within safety limits heavy.
START of earth zero point nine. herh herh herh.
START captain, hmm? reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. as it, i read it, as rounded metal bits they polarise out. parts of a spaceship hull, could be.
START of six prep a landing party. to it you feel up, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START sorry, number one. with this planet little information on, have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us, we will. herh herh herh.
START no indication of problems down there, there is, but let us take chances not.
START yes, sir. canyon to the left there is. set you there completely unobserved, we can. hmmmmmm.
START man: men, they are men. humans, they are humans. yeesssssss.
START the same old earth, and see it very soon, you will. yes, hmmm.
START and believe how fast you can get back you will not. well the time barrier's been broken. our new ships can.
START vina, this is. dead, her parents are. born almost as we crashed, was she.
START begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly, we will. yes, hmmm.
START affirmative on the, that is.
START to be healthy and intelligent you appear, captain. prime specimen.
START forgive her choice of words, you must, captain. lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists, is she.
START if spare you a moment, can they, like to make my medical report, i would. yes, hmmm.
START i think, time to show the captain our secret, is it. yeesssssss.
START excellent, their health is. almost too good.
START reason for our condition there is, but had some doubt if earth is ready to learn the secret we have. let the girl show you. accept your judgment we will.
START tired, you are, but worry, do not. feel much better soon, you will. you see it, do not, hmm? here and here.
START understand i not. yeesssssss.
START you will. perfect choice, you are.
START no survivors' encampment, there is, number one. all some sort of trap, this is. lost the captain, we have. read do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you hear me can, hmm? christopher pike, my name is, of the space vehicle enterprise from a stellar group at the other end of this galaxy commander. peaceful, our intentions are. you understand me can, hmm?
START it appears, magistrate, shockingly limited, that the intelligence of the specimen is. herh herh herh.
START you are speaking not, yet hear you, i can. yeesssssss.
START all right then, telepathy. read my mind, you can. read yours i can. now, to consider capturing me an unfriendly act unless you want my ship. hmmmmmm.
START if in here, you were, would you test the strength of these walls not, too, hmm? way out of any cage there is, and find it, will i.
START live deep underground, the inhabitants of this planet must, and probably manufacture food and other needs down there. our tests indicate the planet surface, without considerably more vegetation or some animals, to support life simply too barren.
START exactly. this planet's inhabitants an illusion placed in our minds by.
START perfect illusion, it was. us seeing just what we wanted to see, they had, with dignity and bravery human beings who'd survived, everything entirely logical, to the building of the camp right down, the tattered clothing, everything. be sure we understand the danger of this let now us. read our minds, the inhabitants of this planet can. create illusions out of a person's own thoughts, they can, memories, and experiences, of a person's own desires even out. to ignore illusions just as real and solid as this table top and just as impossible. yeesssssss.
START of us for any estimate what they might want one, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START they may simply be studying the captain, put together, to find out how earth people are. or something more could it be.
START then why are we doing anything not, hmm? stood up against hand lasers, that entry may have, but transmit the ship's power against it, we can. to blast half a continent enough. hmmmmmm.
START look. of ours brains three times the size. if we start buzzing about down there, liable to find their mental power is so great they could reach out and swat this ship as though it were a fly, we are. yes, hmmm.
START it is captain pike, got, have they. help, he needs help, and he probably needs it fast.
START rig to transmit ship's power, engineering deck will. try blasting through that metal, we will. yeesssssss.
START already probing the creature's thoughts, thousands of us are, magistrate. we find excellent memory capacity.
START come on, hide ourselves, we must. come, come. hurry. deserted, it is deserted. there'll be weapons and perhaps food. herh herh herh.
START rigel seven, this is.
START please, hide ourselves, we must.
START in a cage, was i, cell, of a zoo in some kind. still be there, i must. yeesssssss.
START they have reached into my mind and taken the memory of somewhere, been, have i. yes, hmmm.
START why, been a great pleasure, is it. the things that, learned in the last, is he. yeesssssss.
START absolutely. to think this boy spent practically his whole life alone on that planet. everyone killed, to learn from just a few microtapes. hmmmmmm.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START like a whole city in space, charlie. of a starship over four hundred in the crew, are there not, captain, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START four hundred and twenty eight, to be exact. do for you, is there anything we can, captain, hmm? medical supplies, provisions, hmm?
START hundreds. all human, like me. exciting that is. is that the right word, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START perfect, that is. the exact word, it is. hmmmmmm.
START you see. to keep charlie with us we'd like, but with his closest living relatives on colony five and your vessel going that way, why.
START like to see your ship now, i would. of it all. the people and everything. yes, hmmm.
START you keep interrupting, mister evans. considered wrong, that is.
START large supply of entertainment tapes we have, gentlemen.
START no, tight schedule to make, we have, captain. of us just twenty, making out fine, we are.
START this, a space first, must be. transport ship that needs not anything, hmm? yeesssssss.
START fine, we are fine, thank you. pleasant journey, captain.
START yeoman rand, charles evans, this is. to his quarters and drop his records off at doctor mccoy's office show him, if you will.
START yes, sir. with me come, please.
START girl are you, hmm? is that a girl, hmm? yeesssssss.
START girl, that is. yes, hmmm.
START tell me. the ship's supply of food concentrates could have lasted fourteen years not. yes, hmmm.
START to eat after that i found other things, just growing around.
START and to talk by just listening to the ship's tapes you learned, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the memory banks still worked. to me they talked, and back, i talked back. herh herh herh.
START why call me mister evans does he, hmm?
START because your name, that is. yeesssssss.
START not, he is not, well, he is like captain ramart not.
START well, no. one of a kind, captain kirk is, charlie. herh herh herh.
START like me do you, hmm?
START some, the other ship, they did like me not. i tried. trying to make people like me, i am. to like me i want them. yeesssssss.
START most seventeen year olds do. come on, go, let us. show you to your quarters, i will.
START you a present i brought.
START oh, thank you. i really appreciate it, but, but to go, have i. on duty, am i.
START like that kind do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, i, my favourite, it is. where get it did you, hmm? they have not any in the ship's stores.
START present, it is.
START i know, but where did, hmm? gee, late, i am late, charlie. to go, i really have.
START you stay and talk a little while cannot, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START look, off duty at fourteen hundred i am. why you not join me in recreation room six, deck three. yeesssssss.
START i thought. be angry, do not. not, i did not, i wanted.
START charlie, you, you, you just go not around slapping girls on the. okay, it is okay, but er, it again just do not. yeesssssss.
START be angry, do not.
START look, tell captain kirk or doctor mccoy what you did why you not. explain it to you, they will. okay, hmm? yeesssssss.
START but tell me, thasians, what reason would he have to lie if there are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START very intriguing question, that is. this quadrant scanners show no disturbances in, captain. yes, hmmm.
START good. doctor mccoy, working out, mister spock is.
START thank you. working out a training programme for charlie evans, he is. earth history, his own background, of thing that sort. like you to give him the necessary medical orientation on the problems of, i would, um, er, adolescence.
START well, you think it would be better for a strong father image like you, do not, hmm? to you he already looks up.
START yours, the job is, bones. get you nowhere, flattery will. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, did the boy make any reference at all to thasians not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START believe the legend do you, mister spock, that thasians still exist on that planet in some form, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START some intelligent form of life on thasus must charlie's very existence proves in fact there be. he could possibly have survived alone not. the ship's food concentrates, been exhausted in a year or so, would have.
START of thasus indicate very little edible plant life probes. yes, hmmm.
START and been known to be wrong, probes have, spock. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, speaking scientifically or emotionally are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START gentlemen, alive and he needs our help, the fact is the boy is here and he is.
START and he needs a father image he needs a guide and, jim.
START hmm. depend on your astute abilities to supply him with that, i will, or find him one. herh herh herh.
START sorry, i am sorry. it again i did, i did not.
START well, how do that did you, hmm?
START oh, do much card tricks, i can. of the men on the antares showed me one. yeesssssss.
START this i believe not!
START on earth today, thanksgiving, it is thanksgiving. if to eat synthetic meat loaf, the crew has, to look like turkey i want it. charlie. yeesssssss.
START captain, hmm? supposed to ask you something, i am. i why should not, hmm? i know not how to explain it. yeesssssss.
START it right out say, charlie. that usually works. yes, hmmm.
START me. i see. well, um, er, do with a lady, there are things you can, er, charlie, you er that. no right way to hit a woman, there is. i mean, one thing, man to man is, but, er, man and woman, er, it is, er, it is, er. it is well, er, another thing. understand do you, hmm?
START i not know. yeesssssss.
START on my way to the bridge now i am. yes, hmmm.
START with you, can i come, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i think not so, charlie.
START i will get in the way not. yes, hmmm.
START you boost your power can, antares. barely reading your transmission, are we.
START they are transmitting not. hmmmmmm.
START very well constructed it was not.
START with our probe scanners sweep the area of the antares transmission, mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START to the antares you think something happened, charlie, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i not know. herh herh herh.
START our scanners picking up some debris on, captain.
START what's left of the antares, the debris is. hmmmmmm.
START chief, been have you.
START on the game your mind is not, captain. check. the antares, hmm?
START with twenty men aboard lost a survey ship. no reason. obviously, aware of any trouble captain ramart was not. i, figure it, cannot.
START more immediate, my own concern is. the boy.
START usually follow you, can i, mister spock, but this time, hmm?
START to know what happened to the antares before we did he seemed.
START call it a pretty long reach for evidence i would, mister spock. come in, charlie. yeesssssss.
START its advantages on occasion, your illogical approach to chess does have, captain. hmmmmmm.
START to call it inspired i prefer. herh herh herh.
START as you wish. at any rate, yours, the game is. herh herh herh.
START of our chess master i place you in the hands.
START it is i know what. play, let us.
START be happening this should not. be getting stronger, this man should. you sure the respirator's functioning properly, hmm?
START this man dying, why is, hmm? hypo. hmmmmmm.
START dead, he is dead, doctor.
START the wounds were that severe not.
START uhura, monitor communications. there, tell mccoy i will be when i can. yes, hmmm.
START imminent, planet breakup is, captain. shrinking in size at an increasing rate. as to shrink in size the planet continues, its surface moves away from us.
START to spiral down to maintain the same distance from it forcing us.
START exactly. we, prepared to respond instantly to any sudden change, must be.
START tie into the helm, scotty. if call for power, we should, want it fast, we will.
START of compaction seems constant rate.
START then go see what the good doctor wants, i will. me informed of any change keep, mister spock. herh herh herh.
START know if it is this planet or what happened with joe, do not. sweating like a bridegroom i am. hmmmmmm.
START hey, why you not come down to the gym with me, kevin m'lad, hmm?
START why not, hmm? take the edge off, light workout will.
START sulu, what about. hey, sulu, be a fool, do not! hmmmmmm.
START intestinal damage was that severe not. to him in plenty of time, i got. still be alive, that man should. he died the only reason, jim, want to live is he did not. up, he gave up.
START supposition, that is, doctor, not a fact. herh herh herh.
START well, that may be. maybe. lost patients before, i have, but like that not. not joe's kind. that kind of man gives up not. hmmmmmm.
START going to ask me if it is connected, you mean that joe was down on the planet surface and you are.
START exactly what i was going to ask, that is. yes, hmmm.
START jim, decontaminated, he was decontaminated. been medically checked, is he. run every test we know for everything we know, we have.
START that is good enough not.
START well, possible, we are doing everything that is. yes, hmmm.
START why is mister sulu at this station not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START answered my question you have not. mister sulu, where is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START have no fear, o'riley's here. worth ten thousand of you, one irishman is. yes, hmmm.
START relieved, you are, mister riley. lieutenant uhura, take over this station. hmmmmmm.
START what i like that now is. let the women work too. universal suffrage. yeesssssss.
START to sickbay report, mister riley. yes, hmmm.
START sickbay, hmm? exactly where, heading, was i, sir. hmmmmmm.
START security. headed for sickbay, mister riley is. to it he arrives see. to the bridge captain kirk. herh herh herh.
START he died, did he not.
START i know, a friend of yours, was he. this, a terrible shock, must be. yes, hmmm.
START you know what joe's mistake was, hmm? he was born an irishman not.
START their symptoms, what were, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START this stage nonviolent at. slightly disoriented. with himself riley seemed rather pleased, as he were if. herh herh herh.
START both sulu and riley, locate and confine. with them medically checked i want every crewman who comes in contact. yeesssssss.
START sir, level two, corridor three reports a disturbance. with a sword mister sulu chasing crewmen.
START gravity pull increasing. shifted to two percent and should stabilise our position we have.
START helm is answering to control not.
START of here warp us out.
START impulse power then. of this orbit blast us out.
START engine room, power, we need power!
START mister scott, acknowledge. dead, our controls are. take her. hmmmmmm.
START sulu, me that give.
START protect you, i will, fair maiden.
START like you to teach me that sometime, would i.
START to sickbay take d'artagnon here. yeesssssss.
START scotty, power, we need power. engine room, acknowledge! hmmmmmm.
START captain kevin thomas riley of the starship enterprise, this is.
START captain kirk, this is. of the engine room get out, navigator. mister scott, where is, hmm?
START clear that tube, you, will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START captain. of descent at our present rate, less than twenty minutes before we enter planet atmosphere, have we.
START in, he ran in, you wanted us on the bridge said. herh herh herh.
START cut off both helm and power, he is.
START you get to the auxiliary, cannot, hmm?
START i cannot. hooked everything through the main panel in there, he is. to my office and pull the plans for this bulkhead get up. to cut through these wall circuits here, the only way to get that door open is.
START mister spock, fight in the aft wardroom. increasing, security reports incidents among the crewmen are.
START to alert baker two go. seal off main sections.
START all decks, alert system b two. repeat, to alert condition baker two go. seal off all main sections. stand by.
START going to seal off we are, captain, if minimise the spread of whatever this is, we can.
START i cannot, sir. cut off the alert channels, is he. herh herh herh.
START i cannot, sir. no way to do it there is. herh herh herh.
START to bridge sickbay.
START to the sickbay can you tie me in, hmm?
START getting you, i am, jim. look, this beast level can you keep, hmm? got sulu tranquillized and we are running tests on him i have. yes, hmmm.
START riley's the immediate problem, doctor. is there any way, do to snap him out of it, anything you can, hmm?
START negative, until get a little farther on these tests i can. herh herh herh.
START in the future, wear their hair loosely, all female crew members will, their shoulders about. yes, hmmm.
START set the jumpers up there, i have. you a signal stand by 'til i give. herh herh herh.
START and your loving eyes tears bedim. oh, yeesssssss.
START to bridge engineering. your helm try. have enough power to keep her stabilised, you will. here, have a look at that, let us. hmmmmmm.
START sixteen minutes left, captain. stabilised, we have stabilised, but still spiraling down. yeesssssss.
START me sickbay get. hmmmmmm.
START no intercom for sickbay, i have. he keeps switching channels on me. yeesssssss.
START see what, do to help doctor mccoy, you can. better check scotty first. move him faster. got to get through that bulkhead, he is. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, let me by i am trying to get to the bridge and this crewman will not.
START oh, yes, sir. take you home again, i will, janice. yeesssssss.
START doing my best, tell him i am. if i cut through the wrong circuits. hmmmmmm.
START fourteen minutes left, we have. herh herh herh.
START at the rate, proceeding, you are, left we calculations show that you will take a minute and a half more than have. you, afford a safety factor, cannot.
START biopsy lab. biopsy, my report, where is, hmm? biopsy, come in! harrison, my report, where is, hmm? going to the lab, i am.
START oh, good. need him conscious now i will. to examine him on circuits k one and three continue. yes, hmmm.
START of here get him out. yes, hmmm.
START have gotten here sooner, i would, me in the hallway sir but crewman moody stopped. yes, hmmm.
START sir, if cut him off, could i, you think i, do not.
START yes, sir. keep trying i will.
START got twelve minutes left, we have. take at least two or three of them to get the engines up to power now, it will. yeesssssss.
START call me when you have cut through. i be there want to. kirk out.
START nurse, hmm? doctor mccoy, where is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START gone to the lab, he is. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, nurse, hmm?
START nurse, you should. yes, hmmm.
START christine, please. things, i see things, you are how honest. you feel i know how. you hide it, but feeling, you do have. oh, hurt you, how we must, torture you.
START in control of my emotions i am.
START the others believe that. not, i do not. you, i love you. why i know not, but you, i love you. love you just as you are, i do. oh, you, i love you. yes, hmmm.
START sorry, i am sorry. yeesssssss.
START take, i will take. no dance tonight.
START of here get him out. yes, hmmm.
START scotty, got much time left we have not.
START it, what is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START turned the engines off, he is. completely cold. take thirty minutes to regenerate them, will it. yes, hmmm.
START change the laws of physics, i cannot. got to have thirty minutes, i have. yeesssssss.
START scotty, got six, we have. yeesssssss.
START captain, mix matter and antimatter cold you cannot. we'd go up in the biggest explosion since.
START balance our engines into a controlled implosion, we can. yeesssssss.
START only a theory, that is. never been done, it is. hmmmmmm.
START bridge, found mister spock yet have you, hmm?
START if to chance odds of ten thousand to one you wanted, maybe, of computers working weeks on the right formula assuming we had a row. yeesssssss.
START on the bridge mister spock is not, captain. yeesssssss.
START to bio mccoy. isolated it, we have. start preparing serum.
START water, it is water. this planet somehow on, to a complex chain of molecules water's changed. yeesssssss.
START doc, you let me out of here, will, hmm? all right i am.
START where been have you, hmm? what happened, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START my mother. never tell her i loved her, i could. yeesssssss.
START got four minutes, have we, maybe five.
START got to risk implosion we have. our only chance, it is. yeesssssss.
START never been done, it is. yeesssssss.
START tell me that again, do not, science officer! theory, is it. possible, it is possible. of fire since the last sun in these parts exploded we may go up into the biggest ball, but got to take that one in ten thousand chance we have!
START yes, i found mister spock! talking to mister spock, i am, understand do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START got it, have i, the disease. love. better off without it, you are, and better off without mine, am i. this vessel, i give, she takes. permit me my life she will not. got to live hers, i have. yeesssssss.
START beautiful yeoman, i have. noticed her have you, mister spock, hmm? allowed to notice her, you are. the captain's permitted not.
START jim, an intermix formula, there is. herh herh herh.
START now i know why, called she, is it.
START never been tested, is it. theoretical relationship between time and antimatter, it is.
START to touch flesh woman, to hold. to walk on a beach. few days, my shoulder no braid on. herh herh herh.
START to intermix stand by. call the formulae in from the bridge, will i. herh herh herh.
START engine room. set, we are set. hyperbolic course. yes, hmmm.
START direction. direction. it matters not. the way we came. hmmmmmm.
START take four minutes that'll. yeesssssss.
START the time we have not. have to risk it, we will. bridge, ready, we are ready.
START all right are you, jim, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START we found a cure. over that part of it we are. hmmmmmm.
START obviously, successful, we were successful. the engines imploded. yeesssssss.
START captain, off the scale, my velocity gauge is.
START as well engine power went off the scale. now travelling faster than is possible for normal space, are we. yeesssssss.
START time warp. going backward in time we are. helm, begin reversing power. slowly.
START back to normal time, we are, captain. yeesssssss.
START the time warp. what do to us did it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START regressed in time seventy one hours, we have. now three days ago, it is, captain. three days to live over again we have.
START open some intriguing prospects, this does, captain. since the formula worked, go back in time, we can, to any planet, any era. yes, hmmm.
START it someday we may risk, mister spock. to our next destination resume course, mister sulu.
START as she goes steady.
START make a good specimen, that should. herh herh herh.
START yeah. at night, down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero, gets it. yes, hmmm.
START i fell off that bank, sir. my hand cut. hmmmmmm.
START see it, let us. to the ship get back. to the sickbay report. herh herh herh.
START yes, sir. geological technician fisher. to beam up ready.
START i not know. of yellow ore some kind. herh herh herh.
START like a burnout that acted. yeesssssss.
START yes, all right, i am. just a little dizzy.
START me give you a hand let.
START get through there i cannot. nothing serious. leave the transporter room unattended, do not.
START right back, will wilson be, sir. herh herh herh.
START captain, hmm? all right are you, sir, hmm? you a hand can i give, sir, hmm? captain, hmm?
START all right, engineer, have my engines looked to i will.
START ship's manifests, sir. in order now, i think they are.
START you picked a good day, fisher. been lousy, business has. you do what'd, take a fall on purpose so, get a little vacation, you could, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i do for you, what can, jim, hmm?
START come in. yes, mister spock, it, what is, hmm?
START do for you, is there something i can, captain, hmm?
START well, check on you, doctor mccoy seemed to think i should.
START nice, that is. come on, spock, i know that look. it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, acting like a wild man, our good doctor said that you were, demanded brandy. yes, hmmm.
START you on again our good doctor's been putting. herh herh herh.
START hmm. well, in that case, if excuse the intrusion captain, you will, get back to my work, i will.
START tell him you were properly annoyed, i will.
START it, what is, scotty, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START this one up through the transporter a few seconds after they sent, that duplicate appeared. duplicate except it is not, an opposite, it is. of the same animal two, but different. one gentle, this. one mean and fierce, that. of savage some kind, ferocious opposite. captain, send mister sulu and the landing party up we dare not. if happen to a man, this should. yeesssssss.
START do here, jim will, janice. yeesssssss.
START me, hmm? my yeoman said that, hmm? been resting here since you left me, i have. alone, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START with it doctor mccoy reports that you demanded this brandy in sickbay and left. this bottle in yeoman rand's quarters i found.
START not true. i have been to the sickbay not. find out what's going on, let us. yeesssssss.
START then me and he said that we he kissed, the captain and he could order me, he that was. know what to do i did not. when you mentioned the feelings we'd been hiding, and you started talking about us.
START well, the captain, he is. just i could not. you started hurting me. to fight you i had, and your face scratch. hmmmmmm.
START yeoman, look at me. look at me, my face look at. any scratches, are there, hmm?
START sure i scratched you, was i. frightened, i was frightened. maybe. yeesssssss.
START yeoman. in my room, i was. it was me not. herh herh herh.
START if it had been not. understand, i can understand. to get you into trouble i want not. have even mentioned it i would not!
START it was me not! hmmmmmm.
START you, it was you, sir.
START do you know what, saying, you are, hmm?
START yes, i know what, saying, am i.
START to that bed back, bucko. come on, go, let us.
START this happen how did all, hmm?
START sir i know not, but when fisher came up, his su, covered with a soft yellow ore that had highly unusual properties, was it. caused an overload, it may have. tell, cannot, not yet.
START yes sir, but we dare not bring up the landing party. this animal it might be duplicated like. hmmmmmm.
START it take you to find the trouble, how long will, hmm?
START say, cannot, sir. herh herh herh.
START leave those four men down there, we just cannot. getting dark, it is. die, they will die. to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero at night the surface temperature of that planet goes down.
START doing everything we can, we are, sir. yeesssssss.
START your double about, captain. herh herh herh.
START yes, er, yes, have to find him we will. search parties, mister spock. organise search parties. hmmmmmm.
START take a chance on killing it we cannot. no previous experience, we have, happen to you, no way of knowing what would. yes, hmmm.
START yes, right, that is. we not know, but to be armed, the men have. to be armed, the men are, with their phasers locked, i repeat, locked, on setting number one. be any chance of him being killed there cannot. to be taken without, he is. if forced to fire, the men are, be killed he cannot.
START how, explain it to them, shall we, captain, hmm? to capture you, the search parties are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, make an announcement to the entire crew, will i, tell them what happened. good crew, it is. to know they deserve.
START captain, no disrespect intended, but announce the full truth to the crew you must surely realise you cannot. the captain of this ship, you are. you have the right to be vulnerable in the eyes of the crew not. afford the luxury of being anything less than perfect you cannot. if you do, faith, they lose faith, and you lose command.
START yes, know that, i do, mister spock. what i know not is why i forgot that just now. mister spock, if me slipping again you see, your orders, to tell me, your orders are. yeesssssss.
START section chiefs, to the search assign personnel. all search parties. yes, hmmm.
START to be set for stunning force and locked about the phaser weapons.
START oh, yes, yes. all hand phasers, set on base cycle, must be, stunning force.
START captain kirk, i am! hmmmmmm.
START wilson, me your phaser give. hmmmmmm.
START how been have you, hmm?
START already twenty degrees below zero, is it. exactly cannot. herh herh herh.
START is there any way we can help them not, hmm?
START transported down, thermal heaters were. they duplicated. they will operate not. hmmmmmm.
START then got to get those men up, we have. herh herh herh.
START got to find him before he, we have, but how, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START apparently, this double, however different in temperament, of the ship has your knowledge, its crew, its devices. this being the case, outguess him by determining his next move, perhaps we can. laid out, knowing how the ship is, you go to elude a mass search, where would, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to stun set and locked on base cycle, to kill not. your phaser what about, captain, hmm? you think we ought to get some help, do not, captain, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no. i want not anyone else to see the.
START captain, to tell you you ordered me.
START mister spock, if to be the captain, i am, got to act like one, i have. yeesssssss.
START hurt me you cannot. kill me you cannot. you cannot. you understand, do not, hmm? part of you, i am. you need me. you, i need you.
START he, regaining consciousness soon, will be, and his physical state is not knowing what, i think not i dare give him a tranquilizer of any kind. i think we'd better bind him.
START yes. yes, all right. with me what's the matter, hmm? herh herh herh.
START my observations judging from, captain, rapidly losing the power of decision, you are.
START point, you have, spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes, always, doctor. here an unusual opportunity to appraise the human mind, we have, or to examine, in earth terms, of good and evil in a man the roles. his negative side, which you call hostility, lust, violence, and his positive side, which as compassion earth people express, love, tenderness.
START it is the captain's guts, analysing, you are. of that are you, spock, hmm?
START yes, and what that makes one man an exceptional leader is it, hmm? we see indications that, his negative side, is it which makes him strong, his evil side that, if you will, properly controlled and disciplined, to his strength is vital. your negative side removed from you, to elude you the power of command begins. yeesssssss.
START your point, what is, mister spock, hmm?
START if to weaken your power of command continues, soon be unable to function as captain, you will. prepared for that, you must be. yes, hmmm.
START your intellect, you have, jim. fight with that, you can! hmmmmmm.
START if i seem insensitive to what, going through, you are, captain, the way i am, understand it is. hmmmmmm.
START you give us a status report can, captain, hmm? temperature's still dropping. now forty one degrees below zero. yes, hmmm.
START think you might be able to find a long rope somewhere and lower us down a pot of hot coffee do you, hmm?
START see what we can do, will i. yeesssssss.
START it, how bad is, hmm?
START i gave everybody the afternoon off. watching the store, i am. yes, hmmm.
START oh, lovely, building up, except that the frost is. using hand phasers to heat the rocks, we are. one phaser quit on us, three still operating. of getting us back aboard before the skiing season opens down here any possibility, hmm?
START spock, this is, mister sulu. have to hold on a little longer, you will. no other way there is. survival procedures, mister sulu. herh herh herh.
START apparently the body functioning weakened during the duplication process. to consider a fact i failed.
START dying he is not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START he die, how can, hmm? can i survive without him, hmm?
START know i not, jim. yeesssssss.
START be afraid, do not. my hand, here is. hold on. to be afraid you have not. i will let go not. hold on. be afraid if you use your mind and think you will not! think! do it, you can. it that is! hmmmmmm.
START jim, back, he is back! jim, use that brandy now, you can. in fact, join you i will. herh herh herh.
START to take him back inside myself, have i. survive without him, i cannot. him back i want not. like an animal, he is, thoughtless, brutal animal, and me, it yet is. me.
START jim, no different than anyone else, you are. our darker side, we all have. it, we need it! half of what we are, it is. really ugly it is not, human, it is human. hmmmmmm.
START yes, human. makes you the man you are, much what he is. god forbid i, to agree with spock, should have, but right, he was right. without the negative side, be the captain you would not. be you could not, and you know it. of command lies mostly in him your strength. herh herh herh.
START what i have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the goodness, you have.
START not enough. ship to command, i have.
START the intelligence, the logic. most of that, it appears your half has, and where man's essential courage comes from that perhaps is. for you see, afraid and you weren't, he was. hmmmmmm.
START it, what is, hmm?
START found a way to get the transporter working, have we, sir. herh herh herh.
START attached some bypass and leader circuits to compensate for the difference, have we. tied directly into the impulse engines, there should be more than a five point variation in the velocity balance not. i suggest we send the animal through. captain. yeesssssss.
START hurt him, do not.
START if this works not, i know not what will.
START been too much for him, the shock of putting him back together seems to have. yes, hmmm.
START dead, he is dead, jim. hmmmmmm.
START for once, with you i agree.
START necessary to know that the animal was terrified, no autopsy is, confused. split into two halves and suddenly thrust back together again, was it. thus shock induced by blind terror.
START it could understand not. you can. your intelligence controlling your fear, you have.
START could be, if, maybe. all guesswork so far. just theory. jim, why you not give me a chance to do an autopsy and let spock check the transporter circuits again. yes, hmmm.
START are you forgetting something not, captain, hmm?
START no, i think not i have for. yeesssssss.
START your men on the planet surface. left, how much time do they have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START it makes not sense. no harmful life forms reported, there are. pick up anything that did not belong here our sensors did not.
START correct, that is. at a loss to understand it, am i. herh herh herh.
START take charge of the landing party, mister spock. to all this i want some answers.
START she talk can, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START aurelan, hmm? aurelan, jim, it is jim. hmmmmmm.
START jim, hmm? sam, he is.
START dead, he is dead. but your son's still alive. got to help us, you have. hmmmmmm.
START here, you are. you, it is you, jim. yeesssssss.
START yes, here, i am here. to tell us what happened, you have, aurelan, to you and the others. herh herh herh.
START things. horrible things! their vessel from a planet visitors brought them in. ingraham b.
START of things what kind, hmm? yeesssssss.
START not the ship's crew's fault. their ship here the things made them bring. hmmmmmm.
START aurelan, important that you tell us, is it. of things what kind, hmm? herh herh herh.
START their fault not. hmmmmmm.
START when questions, she answers questions, any questions, as if she is fighting to get the answers out, it is. as exerting pain to stop her, though something is.
START to control us they use it. spreading, they are spreading, jim. to be their arms and legs they need us. forcing us to build ships for them, are they. let them, do not! let them go any further, do not! yes, hmmm.
START do everything i can, will i, jim, to save him. herh herh herh.
START extraordinarily quiet, the streets are, captain. seen no other denevans, have we, and gone, the ones we stunned earlier were when we came out.
START seen some kind of creature, you have, hmm? any alien form, hmm?
START peculiar buzzing sound. about to investigate it, we were.
START all right. go find out what it is, let us. your phasers on force three set, to kill. looking for some kind of creature, are we, and kill, we already know it will. hmmmmmm.
START incredible. been destroyed by our phasers, not only should it have, it evens not register on my tricorder.
START captain, it evens look real not. herh herh herh.
START life as we know or understand it it is not. yet obviously alive, t is, it exists.
START and bear up under full phaser power, it can.
START captain, it aboard i suggest we risk taking.
START too close in here, it is. it may be a trap in here. move out, let us.
START nurse. the second time he is come out of it that is. fighting us, either he is, or fighting us, something inside of him is.
START doctor, never looked like that before, the readings have, not even on mister spock.
START prepare to close, let us. nurse! hmmmmmm.
START doctor, that is all you are going to do not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START doctor, more of it in him, there is, his body entwined all through.
START miss chapel, if assist me as required you cannot, call another nurse in here. but do one or the other now. yeesssssss.
START he, how is, hmm?
START operate on spock in time did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no. for examination i just removed these. of these tentacles his body's full, his nervous system entwining and growing all about. herh herh herh.
START the same. evidently, when the creature attacks, much like a bee or wasp it leaves a stinger, of these in the victim's body leaving one. over the victim very rapidly it takes, and far, the entwining is, to remove far too involved for conventional surgery.
START sorry, i am sorry, jim. the lab, the science departments, all stumped, we are. yes, hmmm.
START bridge, sickbay, this is. tell doctor mccoy mister spock just left here.
START take the ship, i must. yes, hmmm.
START down! take it down, i must. yeesssssss.
START to the sickbay get him back. use security restraints. hmmmmmm.
START no longer be necessary, these restraints will. your sedatives, nor will, doctor. i, able to return to duty, will be. for my weakness earlier i apologise when i tried to take control of the ship. i simply did understand not. hmmmmmm.
START vulcan, i am, doctor. thing of the mind, pain is. the mind, controlled, can be. yeesssssss.
START he control it the way he says can, bones, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START who knows, jim, hmm? inflict upon him, i know the amount of pain the creature can, but whether, control it hour to hour, can he.
START my own will, i have, captain. me help let. yeesssssss.
START you, i need you, spock, but take any chances we cannot. keep you confined for a while longer, will we. if maintain control, you can, see, we will see. my nephew. if consciousness, he regains consciousness, he go through that, will, hmm?
START help them. what it takes or costs i care not. got to help them, you have. yes, hmmm.
START jim, are you forgetting something not, hmm? over a million colonists on that planet down there, there are, as much your responsibility just. your help they need, too. yeesssssss.
START vulcan i am. vulcan, am i. no pain, there is.
START mister spock, still confined to sickbay, i thought you were. yes, hmmm.
START here, now. where do you think, going, you are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START an order, that is, mister scott. hmmmmmm.
START aye, sir, and sorry i have to disobey it, i am. to transport down, the captain said no one was. mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START freeze right there, mister spock, or put you to sleep for sure, will i. mister scott in the transporter room, this is. me the captain get. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, to stay in the sickbay i gave you an order. yeesssssss.
START until gone, the pain was, captain. been discontinued by me, it has.
START he said, transporting down to the surface, was he, sir. that no one was to beam down unless you authorised it, your orders were. and knowing mister spock's determination on some things, better hold him here until i got your orders, i thought i would. yeesssssss.
START have to be captured and analysed, one of the creatures will, captain. have a clear opportunity to do so earlier we did not when i was attacked. since already affected, my nervous system is, as you pointed out, doctor, they can do much more to me i believe not.
START jim, ridiculous, this is. i want not my patients running around. be in bed, he should. herh herh herh.
START in complete control of myself, i am, doctor. in bed the fact that i am here proves that i belong not. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, your logic, as usual, is inescapable. beam him down. with us stay in constant touch. your phaser give him. need that, will he, too. herh herh herh.
START jim, sick, that man is. give me any damnable logic about him being the only man for the job, do not. yeesssssss.
START i have not to, bones. he is we both know. herh herh herh.
START you may be controlling the pain, mister spock, but far from all right, you are.
START yes. answer much questions that would. herh herh herh.
START do you understand what, suggesting, am i, captain, hmm? yeesssssss.
START so, i think so. this may be one cell in a larger organism. an incredibly huge organism, in fact. hmmmmmm.
START and although it is physically connected to the other cells not, nevertheless part of the whole creature, it is, guided by the whole, drawing its strength from the whole, which to our phaser weapons probably accounts for its unusual resistance. yes, hmmm.
START as we know it existing so differently from any living matter or energy, here, that it may have come, planet by planet, from an entirely different galaxy.
START apply from a place where our physical laws not. to destroy we may therefore find it difficult, captain.
START but not impossible, mister spock. the denevan that flew into the sun cried out that, free, was he, won, that he would. the angle to work on that is, gentlemen. of all this from medical and life science departments within the hour i want an analysis.
START sorry, i am sorry, captain. tried everything i can, i have. variant radiation, intense heat, as great as nine thousand degrees even.
START then wasting your time, you are. to be something that'll kill the creature without destroying the human host, there has. yeesssssss.
START which to be my point happens. die the thing will not, even at temperatures and radiation which would burn spock and your nephew to ashes.
START accept that, i cannot, bones. got fourteen science labs aboard this ship, we have. the finest equipment and computers in the galaxy. herh herh herh.
START captain, your concern i understand. for spock your affection, the last survivor of your brother's family, the fact that your nephew is. herh herh herh.
START no, no, bones. more than two lives at stake here, there is. let it spread beyond this colony i cannot, it means destroying a million people down there even if. yes, hmmm.
START for you i regret i see no other choice, captain. destroyed three civilisations, we already know this thing has. perhaps more.
START gentlemen, it stopped i want, too, but of destroying over a million people not at the cost. yeesssssss.
START including myself, doctor, and captain kirk's young nephew. understandably upsetting, but it spreads past here once, dozens of colonies beyond and billions of people, there are. herh herh herh.
START if killing five people saves ten, bargain, is it. your simple logic is that, mister spock, hmm?
START accept neither of those alternatives, will i, gentlemen. let this thing expand beyond this planet, i cannot, nor, intend to kill a million or more people to stop it, do i. i want another answer. putting you gentlemen on the hot seat with me, i am. i want that third alternative. yes, hmmm.
START sorry, i am sorry, jim. been over and over it, have we, made every conceivable test.
START to beam down to the planet's surface i therefore request permission. your nephew accompany me i also suggest that. herh herh herh.
START captain, this request lightly i make not. i know not how much longer i can hold out against the pain. but go through should he regain consciousness, i do know what the boy will.
START request denied. another answer, there must be. something in the sun killed that thing before the denevan died. all right. all right. tried heat, we have, radiation. the sun have, what other qualities or properties does, hmm?
START physically, it exists physically. space, it occupies space. mass, it has mass, therefore gravity. to energy it converts matter.
START jim, been through it and through it, have we. radiation, heat. herh herh herh.
START but one other thing you have mentioned not. bright, it is bright. it radiates a blinding light if, close enough, you are. yes, hmmm.
START to us not. but down on the surface, for the most part the creatures stayed in the shadows. they weren't simply hiding suppose. sensitive to light, they suppose are. light, like in a sun, close up.
START move deneva closer to the sun, you cannot, jim.
START no, but move the equivalent of the sun to deneva, you can. mister spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START good. get on it, let us. yes, hmmm.
START of course. one million candles per square inch, the light of the sun at the proximity where the denevan declared himself free was. if this works, the satellites we orb, produce light of such intensity that even someone in a closed, will it, affected by it, darkened area will be. herh herh herh.
START your masks put on. hmmmmmm.
START it worked! do it, we can. what's the matter, jim, hmm? do it, we can.
START it worked in a lab. with give it, the creature exposed to everything we can. but infected, what about the people who are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START well, i not know. maybe trial. hmmmmmm.
START maybe. no time for maybes, there is, bones. to know now we need. yes, hmmm.
START but have to put a, i would. yeesssssss.
START yes, to put someone who's infected under that light, we'd have.
START any idea of the risk, you have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to duplicate the conditions on the planet, we have, and spock.
START captain, need a host for the next step in the test to determine whether the creature can be driven from the body, you will. the logical choice i am. herh herh herh.
START know what one million candlelight per square inch can do to your optic nerves do you, hmm?
START no other way, there is, bones. to duplicate the brilliance that existed at the moment the denevan declared himself freed, we have.
START all right. rig up a protective pair of goggles, will i.
START completely, i agree completely. hmmmmmm.
START unfortunately, both right, you are. the only thing we can do, is it. all right, mister spock.
START spock, all right are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START gone, the creature within me is. free of it and the pain, i am. yeesssssss.
START and also quite blind, i am. an equitable trade, doctor. thank you. yeesssssss.
START doctor, of the first tests on the creature's remains the results. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of light at the creature i threw the total spectrum. it was necessary not. stop to think that only one kind of light might have killed it i did not.
START interesting. sensitive to certain sounds, just as dogs are which humans cannot hear, sensitive to light, these creatures evidently are which we cannot see.
START are you telling me that spock need have been blinded not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START need to throw the blinding white light at all i did not, jim. spock, i. hmmmmmm.
START my selection as well, doctor it was. done, it is done. hmmmmmm.
START satellite control, the captain, this is. energise all satellites. herh herh herh.
START dying, the things are, sir. working, it is working. yes, hmmm.
START it worked tell spock. yes, hmmm.
START yes, captain. happy to hear that, will he be. yeesssssss.
START bones, your fault it was not.
START yeoman, for starfleet command record this.
START been destroyed, the alien creatures on deneva have. yeesssssss.
START spock. see, you can. hmmmmmm.
START temporary, the blindness was, jim. something about his optical nerves there is which are not the same as a human's. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock. regaining eyesight, an emotional experience for most, would be. you, i presume, felt nothing, hmm?
START quite the contrary, captain. very strong reaction, i had. the face of doctor mccoy bending over me, my first sight was.
START 'tis a pity your brief blindness did increase your appreciation for beauty not, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START if finished, you gentlemen are, for starbase ten would you mind laying in a course, mister spock, hmm?
START unusual eye arrangement. turn up with something like that, i might have known he would. herh herh herh.
START i said, tell spock i said he was the best first officer in the fleet, do not. yeesssssss.
START been so concerned about his vulcan eyes, you have, doctor, you forgot about his vulcan ears. ahead warp factor one, mister sulu.
START of it stay on top, mister sulu. hmmmmmm.
START holding orbit, we are, sir. sluggish, the helm is.
START to overload control circuits threatening, captain. hmmmmmm.
START understood, engineer. mister spock, hmm? we, avoid these areas of turbulence, cannot.
START have them plotted in a few more orbits, i believe we will, captain.
START to manual switching, captain. this orbit do we maintain, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of great scientific importance, this is, captain. actually passing through ripples in time we are. yeesssssss.
START maintain orbit. to starfleet command open the channel. precautionary measure, lieutenant. to starfleet command my past week's log entries broadcast, with the unusual readings we had on the instruments and how they led us here starting. this planet inform starfleet command that apparently something or someone down on.
START some heart flutter. of cordrazine better risk a few drops. herh herh herh.
START tricky stuff. are you sure you risk want to. yeesssssss.
START about to make a medical comment, you were, jim, hmm?
START all plotted but one, captain. it now coming up on. to be fairly heavy displacement seems.
START bones! to your positions get back.
START set for cordrazine, was it. yes, hmmm.
START continue alert, decks four through eleven. as little as we do the medical department knows. in dosages approaching this, some record of wild paranoia, there is. yes, hmmm.
START confirmed by the library record tapes, captain. to recognise acquaintances subjects failed, became hysterically convinced that, in mortal danger, were they, and were seeking escape at any cost. to himself or to anyone else who might extremely dangerous.
START and the transporter at that time, captain, of the time disturbance was focused on the centre.
START so whatever's down there, in the heart of it, mccoy is. set up a landing party. go get him let us. kirk out. hmmmmmm.
START to the horizon these ruins extend. begin recording.
START and of considerable age. of ten thousand centuries old on the order.
START detail, fan out. this thing, what is, mister spock, hmm? to be pulsating with power of some kind it seems. analysis, please. yeesssssss.
START the source of all the time displacement, this single object is.
START i cannot. for impossible by any science i understand, this to do what it does is. operating even now, it is. of time displacement putting out waves and waves, which of miles away we picked up millions. yeesssssss.
START to enterprise landing party. of doctor mccoy no sign. search progressing. hmmmmmm.
START incredible power. it a machine as we understand mechanics cannot be. herh herh herh.
START then it, what is, hmm?
START you, what are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the guardian of forever, i am.
START machine or being are you, hmm?
START both and neither, am i. my own beginning i am, my own ending.
START to be couched in riddles i see no reason for answers. herh herh herh.
START as simply as your level of understanding makes possible i answer.
START time portal, captain. to other times and dimensions a gateway, if correct, i am correct.
START as for you correct as possible. obviously primitive, your science knowledge is.
START behold. to your own past a gateway, if you wish. yes, hmmm.
START killers! killers! i will let you get me not! kill you first, i will! i will let you get me not! assassins! murderers! killers! hmmmmmm.
START spock! if doorway back through time that is, take bones back a day in time could we somehow, then. yes, hmmm.
START relive the accident. avoided, this time be certain that the hypo accident is. look at the speed with which the centuries are passing, captain. to step through on precisely the day we wish. yeesssssss.
START guardian. you change the speed at can, hmm which yesterday passes? herh herh herh.
START made to offer the past in this manner i was. change, i cannot change. hmmmmmm.
START strangely compelling, it is not, hmm? to step through there and lose oneself in another world.
START fool, i am. capable of recording even at this speed, my tricorder is. missed taping centuries of living history, i have which no man before has ever.
START he, where is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START passed into what was, he has. yeesssssss.
START captain, lost contact with the ship, i have. talking to them i was. suddenly, dead, it went dead. no static, just nothing.
START to enterprise kirk. scotty.
START with the communicator nothing wrong, sir.
START your vessel, your beginning, gone, all that you knew is. herh herh herh.
START somehow changed history, mccoy has. hmmmmmm.
START you mean, stranded down here, are we, hmm?
START captain, frightened, i am frightened. yes, hmmm.
START there earth's not. at least, not the earth we know. totally alone we are. yeesssssss.
START recording images at the time mccoy left i was. your american history a rather barbaric period in. i believe, approximate just, can i when to jump. of the correct time perhaps within a month. week, if fortunate, we are fortunate.
START make sure we arrive before mccoy got there. vital we stop him before he does whatever it was that changed all history, it is. guardian, if successful, we are successful.
START then returned, you will be. as though none of you had gone, it will be. herh herh herh.
START captain, impossible, it seems impossible. able to find the right date, even if you were. yes, hmmm.
START then even finding mccoy, a miracle, would be. yes, hmmm.
START no alternative, there is.
START scotty, when waited long enough, you think you have. each of, have to try it, you will. you fail even if, at least you, alive in some past world somewhere, will be. herh herh herh.
START seen old photographs of this period i have. an economic upheaval had occurred. herh herh herh.
START to be costumed a little out of step with the time we seem. yeesssssss.
START afraid i am going to be difficult to explain in any case, i am, captain.
START well, mister spock, if disguise you, we cannot, find some way of explaining you, will we. yes, hmmm.
START prove interesting, that should. yeesssssss.
START get out of here, let us.
START look out, you, will, hmm? why you not watch where you are going, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, steal from the rich and give back to the poor later we will. going to like this century, i think i am. simple, to manage easier. going to have any difficulty explaining we are not. herh herh herh.
START police officer, you are. i recognise the traditional accoutrements. hmmmmmm.
START have no trouble explaining it, you were saying you will.
START obviously chinese, my friend is. i see, noticed the ears, you have. actually easy to explain, they are. yeesssssss.
START perhaps the unfortunate accident, as a child, had i. herh herh herh.
START the unfortunate accident, as a child, had he. his head in a mechanical rice picker he caught. but fortunately, actually a skilled plastic surgeon in civilian life, there was an american missionary living close by who was.
START all right, all right. your hands on that wall there drop those bundles and put! come on! herh herh herh.
START oh, to let you go out that way how careless of your wife.
START oh, yes, quite untidy, is it. here, me help you let.
START actually enjoying my predicament back there, you were. at times, you seem quite human. herh herh herh.
START captain, within your prerogative as my commanding officer, i hardly believe that insults are.
START first, about a week before mccoy arrives we i believe have, but we certain cannot be.
START arrives where, hmm? honolulu, boise, san diego, hmm? why outer mongolia not, for that matter, hmm?
START theory, there is. some logic to the belief that time is fluid, there could be, like a river, with currents, eddies, backwash. hmmmmmm.
START and to a certain time and place might sweep us there the same currents that swept mccoy, too. yes, hmmm.
START true that unless is, captain, no hope, we have. frustrating. locked in, the place and moment of his arrival, here is, of what he did even the images. if tie this tricorder in with the ship's computers for just a few moments i only could. hmmmmmm.
START you build some form of computer aid here could not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes, well, pose an extremely complex problem in logic, it would, mister spock. excuse me. of you i sometimes expect too much. yeesssssss.
START excuse us, miss. mean to trespass we did not. cold outside, is it. yes, hmmm.
START poor way to say hello, a lie is. it is that cold not.
START no. being chased by a policeman, we were. herh herh herh.
START these clothes. them, we stole them. have any money we did not.
START well, do with some help around here i could. doing dishes, sweeping, general cleaning. yes, hmmm.
START of payment at what rate, hmm? i need radio tubes and so forth. my hobby.
START for ten hours a day fifteen cents an hour. your names, what are, hmm?
START jim kirk, mine is. spock, his is.
START edith keeler, i am. start by cleaning up down here, you can.
START excuse me, miss. we, where are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START run this place do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START radio tubes and so on. of hobbies i approve, mister spock.
START you, sorry, will be.
START now, as sure somebody out there has said, am i, time to pay for the soup, is it. yeesssssss.
START shut up. shut up. i hear what she has to say want to. yeesssssss.
START years away, development of atomic power is, and space flight years after that.
START her most uncommon i find, mister spock.
START for tomorrow prepare. get ready. give up, do not.
START mister kirk. uncommon workmen, you are. been scrubbed and polished, that basement looks like it is.
START then report back for other work, we can, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes. seven o'clock in the morning. flop for the night, you have, hmm?
START new at this, you really are, are you not, hmm? place to sleep, a flop is. herh herh herh.
START vacant room at the place where i live for two dollars a week, there is. if you i will take you there want to.
START flop, we have.
START what we have, captain, hmm?
START to sleep a place.
START said so in the first place, one might have. yes, hmmm.
START captain, some platinum, i must have. small block, sufficient, would be, five or six pounds. to be used as a duodynetic field core by passing certain circuits through there... hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, brought you some assorted vegetables, i have, for myself baloney in a hard roll, and spent the other nine tenths of our combined salaries for the last three days on filling this order for you, have i. mister spock, this bag contains platinum not, silver or gold, nor likely to in the near future is it. herh herh herh.
START captain, asking me to work with equipment, you are which hardly very far ahead of stone knives and bearskins. herh herh herh.
START mccoy'll be along in a few days, perhaps sooner. no guarantee that these currents in time will bring us together there is. to work, this has. yes, hmmm.
START captain. captain, this rate in three weeks at, possibly a month, the first mnemonic memory circuits, i might reach. hmmmmmm.
START if leave immediately, you can, get you five hours work at twenty two cents an hour, i can. what, hmm? that, what on earth is, hmm?
START endeavouring, i am endeavouring, ma'am, to construct a mnemonic memory circuit using stone knives and bearskins. hmmmmmm.
START captain. for finely detailed work tools. herh herh herh.
START locked with a combination lock and you opened it like a real pro, that toolbox was. why do it did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START for my radio work i needed the fine tools. have been returned in the morning, they would.
START sorry, i am sorry, i cannot. hmmmmmm.
START if returned tomorrow morning, mister spock says that he needs the tools and that they will be, bet your reputation on that, you can, miss keeler. hmmmmmm.
START on one condition. me home walk, hmm? i still have a few questions, like to ask about you two, would i. oh, and give me that questions about little old us, do not, hmm? look. you know as well as i do how out of place you two are around here. herh herh herh.
START interesting. you estimate we belong, where would, miss keeler, hmm?
START you, hmm? his side at, as always been there and always will, you if have. and you, hmm? you belong in another place. i know not where or how. figure it out eventually, i will. yeesssssss.
START finish with the furnace i will.
START captain. even when he does not say it, he does. yes, hmmm.
START spock call you captain, why does, hmm? you in the war together were, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START together, we served together.
START and to talk about it you want not, hmm? why, hmm? do something wrong did you, hmm? afraid of something are you, hmm? it is whatever, me help let.
START me help let. hundred years or so from now, i believe, write a classic using that theme, a famous novelist will. recommend those three words even over i love you, he will. hmmmmmm.
START centuries from now, hmm? he, who is, hmm? where come from er does he, he come from, where will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START silly question. hear a silly answer want to, hmm? yeesssssss.
START planet circling that far left star in orion's belt. see, hmm?
START the stone knives and bearskins, how are, hmm?
START found our focal point in time, i may have.
START i think you may also find, a connection burning someplace, you have. hmmmmmm.
START yes. overloading those lines, i am. i believe, have our answer on this screen, will we, captain.
START and, captain, this a bit distressing you may find. hmmmmmm.
START see what you have, let us.
START slowed down the recording we made from the time vortex i have.
START her future we know. within six years from now, become very important, will she. nationally famous. herh herh herh.
START or captain, die this year, edith keeler will. her obituary i saw. of traffic accident some sort.
START you, mistaken, must be. they both true cannot be. hmmmmmm.
START captain, been looking for, edith keeler is the focal point in time we have, been drawn to, the point that both we and doctor mccoy have.
START two possible futures then, she has, and she lives or dies depending on whether, all of history, changed, will be. and mccoy. yes, hmmm.
START his condition in, what do does he, hmm? kill her does he, hmm?
START or her from being killed perhaps he prevents. know we not which. yes, hmmm.
START this thing fixed get. find out before mccoy arrives, we must. herh herh herh.
START captain, to set things straight again suppose we discover that in order, die, edith keeler must, hmm?
START why, hmm? so funny about man reaching for the moon, what is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START how you know, hmm? yeesssssss.
START know, i just know, all that is. it, i feel it. and more, i think that one day, take all the money they spend now on war and death, will they. yeesssssss.
START and it on life make them spend, hmm? yeesssssss.
START glad you got away, i am, too. why think you they want to kill us, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START look, fella, take a sip too much of that old wood alky you, and, and like it almost anything seems. herh herh herh.
START where, hmm? we, where are, hmm? earth, hmm? the constellations seem right, but. explain! this trick explain. yeesssssss.
START need at least two more days before i dare make another attempt i will.
START been in the city a week now for all we know could mccoy have, and happen tonight or tomorrow morning, whatever he does that affects her and changes history could.
START captain, obtained at the expense of thirty hours work in fused and burned circuits, our last bit of information was.
START know whether she lives or dies, i must, spock. know what to do, i must.
START you look terrible! better sit down, you would. come on.
START i cannot. to keep moving i got. i, let them find me, cannot.
START cot in the back room, there is. they will find you there not. come on.
START but right, she was right. the way, peace was. yes, hmmm.
START and all this because mccoy came back and somehow kept her from dying in a street accident as she was meant to. stop him, we must, jim.
START how die did she, hmm? what day, hmm?
START estimate general happenings from these images, we can, but trace down precise actions at exact moments i cannot, captain. sorry, i am sorry. hmmmmmm.
START spock, i believe, in love with edith keeler, am i. yeesssssss.
START jim, die, edith keeler must. yes, hmmm.
START hey, now, come on. you are ready to take on any tigers just yet not. lie down. yeesssssss.
START be, the most common question to ask would, where am i, hmm? i think not i will ask it. hmmmmmm.
START unconscious, i am unconscious, or demented.
START friend that talks about earth the same way that you do i have. would to meet him you like, hmm? herh herh herh.
START surgeon, i am, not a psychiatrist. leonard mccoy, i am, senior medical officer aboard the uss enterprise. yeesssssss.
START i mean not to disbelieve you, but hardly a navy uniform, that is. hmmmmmm.
START quite all right, it is. quite all right dear, it is, because in you i believe not, either. herh herh herh.
START following me are you, sir, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START captain, plan to eavesdrop i did not.
START no, of course, not, you did. herh herh herh.
START point out that, i must when she stumbled, died right there, she might have, caught her had you not.
START yet time it is not. here mccoy is not. yes, hmmm.
START that sure of our facts we are not. to say who's, hmm when the exact time will come? save her, to do do as your heart tells you, and millions will die who did die before not.
START to see the evening paper i thought you might like. yes, hmmm.
START no, not particularly. you know, convinced myself that this is all in a cordrazine hallucination, i have, but decided you are not, i have. yeesssssss.
START but not, if you are, you, what are, hmm?
START friend. when you showed up here, you looked like, use one, you could.
START i doubt not it. this place what about, hmm? run it do you, hmm?
START to, i try to.
START well, for me, it was, at least. saved my life, you may have. yeesssssss.
START of people drink from the wrong bottle sometimes lots.
START as wrong as the bottle i drank from not. to show my gratitude allow me. something i can do around here to thank you, there perhaps is.
START talk about that later, we can. to go, i have. taking me to a clark gable movie, my young man is. hmmmmmm.
START who movie, hmm?
START clark gable. you know, do not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START very strange that is. some rest, you get. see you later, i will. hmmmmmm.
START if we hurry, catch the clark gable movie at the orpheum, maybe we can. yes, hmmm.
START yes. in the mission, is he. he is. hmmmmmm.
START it, what is, hmm?
START mccoy! in, he is in. yeesssssss.
START you deliberately stopped me, jim. i, saved her, could have. know what you just did do you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START successful, we were successful. yes, hmmm.
START resumed its shape, time has. all is as, before, was it. possible, many such journeys are. me be your gateway let.
START captain, up there, the enterprise is. they are asking if we beam up want to.
START get the hell out of here, let us. yes, hmmm.
START that, what was, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START totally unbelievable, what my instruments read is, captain. twice, for split second each time, of our instruments seemed on the verge of winking out everything within range. hmmmmmm.
START facts, i want facts, not poetry.
START given you the facts i have, captain. this solar system simply blinked the entire magnetic field in. the planet below, the mass of which we are measuring, attained zero gravity. yes, hmmm.
START impossible, that is. describing, you what are. yes, hmmm.
START to immediate alert status all stations. stand by. yes, hmmm.
START you just did a complete life survey five minutes ago. how just picking it up now are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START inexplicable, captain. to subside this reading began at approximately the moment that the pulsation phenomenon began. yeesssssss.
START well, it, what is, this object, hmm? its physical makeup, hmm? yeesssssss.
START speculation. to the ship could this being present any danger, hmm?
START lieutenant uhura, an armed detachment of men ready to beam down with us, notify security to have. go, let us. any word comes through from starfleet command, it down immediately pipe. communications, priority one.
START you came! thank the heavens. still time, there is. too late it is not. still stop him, we can. but i, but i, need, your help need. yeesssssss.
START whatever that phenomenon was, of our crystals completely it drained almost all. mean trouble, it could.
START nothing. illogical. of such proportions an effect, unexplainable by any established physical laws that, aware of, am i. been able to ascertain one fact i have. though the effect, it was whatever, was unquestioningly widespread, strongest here on the planet beneath us, was it. yeesssssss.
START invasion status. all hands, the captain, this is. battle stations. i repeat, battle stations. no drill, this is.
START talk to him later, i will. thank you. kirk out.
START thank you, sir. considered all the alternatives, have i. my best guess is a prelude to invasion could it be. herh herh herh.
START i see. you mean, the bait we are. yeesssssss.
START from the top, mister spock. first, the phenomenon came from the planet below. secondly, apparently real and imminent, the danger is.
START third, in order, a closer examination of the planet's surface would be. my job, sir, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes. meanwhile, talk to our unexpected guest, will i. maybe, provide some answers, can he.
START how i came to be down there, that is, captain, pursuing the devil's own spawn, thing, chased across the universe, have i. humanoid outside, he is, but inside, hideous, he is, murdering monster. get him i will, captain. it, i swear it.
START this one man you say.
START your entire civilisation thing destroyed.
START how escape did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START inspecting magnetic communications satellites, i was. you believe me, you, do not, hmm?
START you up before we picked, of incredible effects our ship sustained a number. hmmmmmm.
START the thing that attacked you is he, hmm?
START yes. you my word i give. it, i swear it.
START any other facts we have not, any information.
START then join me in my holy cause, you will, hmm? me in visiting justice and vengeance upon him help. hmmmmmm.
START my only cause is the safety of my ship and the mission, on, are we. check your story out, you will beam down with me and i will. yeesssssss.
START negative, captain. our guest anything from, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to him according, creature of some sort down here, there is, humanoid.
START captain, no other explanations, you yourself said there were. why give you credence to this man, hmm?
START to comprehend your indignation i fail, sir. simply made the logical deduction that you are a liar i have.
START have it, let us. this time the truth. yeesssssss.
START no! come back in, you have, is it, hmm? well, stop, do not. here i am. me again come at. finish it we will! yeesssssss.
START you identify that can, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START trying, i am trying, captain. yes, hmmm.
START come! come! do you no good, will it. chase you to the very fires of hell, i will! hmmmmmm.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START get out of here, let us. yes, hmmm.
START captain, of the effect indicate it centred here on this planet readings, this very spot almost on.
START i told you, a thing, was it. all white, black and empty. terrible emptiness.
START get back to the ship, let us.
START him first he will kill us all if we kill not! kill! kill! kill! kill! kill!
START negative, captain. no more explain the occurrence of the second phenomenon than i can the first, can i. hmmmmmm.
START if shred of truth to what lazarus said, there is.
START that a single creature, responsible for an effect of such magnitude could a humanoid be, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to believe hard.
START but to fit the rest of his story seems. to an apparent confrontation with something his wounds testify. yeesssssss.
START assuming, a humanoid, there is, something, how do it does he, hmm? no weapons, he has, no power.
START captain, his alleged confrontations, i only know for certain that the occurrence of the phenomenon coincides exactly with the moments that lazarus has. yeesssssss.
START to see you in sickbay doctor mccoy asking, captain.
START i not know, jim. maybe, imagining things, am i, and not, maybe i am. you tell me.
START you tell me. why you brought me down here that is, it is not. herh herh herh.
START well, as you know, his forehead we both brought lazarus in here and i treated a deep abrasion on, right, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START then it, i bandaged it, for just a moment i stepped into this room. herh herh herh.
START bones, got much things to do, i have. to the point get. yes, hmmm.
START well, say, got the constitution of a dinosaur, is he, recuperative powers ditto. as know, we both know, bright young medic with a miraculous touch i am. why then, when i returned, trace of that wound on his forehead there was not. not even a bruise. like he had never been injured, it was.
START he, where is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i not know, jim. big ship, this is. just a country doctor, i am.
START lazarus, all right are you, hmm?
START yes. but impatient. decided to help me yet have you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no. ship's physician with a strange sense of humour, i have. herh herh herh.
START no joke, this is, jim. i know what i saw. herh herh herh.
START my way on. lazarus, with me, you are. bones, if time, i had time, laugh, i would laugh. herh herh herh.
START of radiation source, captain.
START how is it the scanners did pick it up before not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START because there it is not. hmmmmmm.
START what i mean, captain, to our usual scanning procedures is that according, nothing there that could be causing that effect there is.
START but there, it is there. yes, hmmm.
START affirmative. i confess, somewhat at a loss for words, am i. it may be described, though loosely and inaccurately, as our universe a rip in.
START of physical warp a kind, captain, in which none of our established physical laws apply with any regularity. however, with the dilithium crystals, able to localise it, was i. yes, hmmm.
START yes! it, that is! the dilithium crystals. with do it, their power we could. hmmmmmm.
START to the humanoid you refer, hmm?
START yes. got him, we have, captain, got him we have. yeesssssss.
START what the crystals have to do with it, hmm? of radiation all they show us the point. hmmmmmm.
START just it, that is, the key, that is. the way to trap him, that is. the solution, that is. captain, of you i beg. i plead, i demand. me the crystals give.
START of the question out. the very heart of the power of my ship, those crystals are. yes, hmmm.
START you fool! there will not be any ship if we kill not him. destroy all of you, he will.
START you, i warn you, captain. give me the crystals, you will. yeesssssss.
START threaten me, do not, lazarus.
START no threat intended. captain, have my vengeance, i will.
START check, i will check, sir. yes, hmmm.
START captain. the chamber, ready in ten minutes, will be, sir. my assistant and i will.
START fact. you needed the crystals you said. fact. them, an hour after you said you must have, missing, they were missing. fact. attacked, two of my crewmen were.
START and fact, captain. take the crystals i did not. the one i am not. my enemy find, find the beast, and find the crystals, you will.
START this beast get aboard my ship how'd, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START he did. is that enough not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no. transport up he did not. report, been made, would have.
START i tell you, dealing with a creature capable of destroying worlds, are we. hmmmmmm.
START why need the crystals does he, hmm? for what reason, hmm?
START for the same reason that i do. to me listen. humanoid, he is humanoid. why, he, pilot a spaceship, can he. compute formulas to destroy races, he can. steal an energy source for his vehicle so he can escape from me, can he. deaf are you, hmm as well as blind?
START sit down. the crystals certainly are here not. an unexplained radiation source on the planet, there is. obviously some connection. check it out, we will. organise a search party immediately. beam down with us, mister lazarus will. hmmmmmm.
START have reason to thank me you may not, depending on what we find. yes, hmmm.
START what believe you now, captain, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i believe the missing crystals are in your ship not. mister spock, hmm?
START to locate the source of radiation unable.
START why not, hmm? it spotted on the enterprise, you had. yes, hmmm.
START simply disappeared, it has, captain. hmmmmmm.
START of this terrain checked i want every inch. for footprints look, movement, anything. you spot anything call out if. be afraid to use your weapons, do not.
START coming out of it now, he is. yes, hmmm.
START all right, is it. on board the enterprise, you are. yeesssssss.
START the rock, i.
START your head how's, hmm? herh herh herh.
START you saved my life down there. i thank you want to. yeesssssss.
START i why should not, hmm?
START i have some questions i ask you want to. yeesssssss.
START go ahead. all right, it is.
START computer report of the evidence you gave at your first screening, this is. you a liar it calls, lazarus. for one thing, no planet at the location you said you came from, there is. been, there never has. if you want help from us, better start telling the truth, you would. hmmmmmm.
START believe me if i told you you would not. herh herh herh.
START have the truth now i will.
START my planet, my earth, or of it what's left, is down there beneath us. hmmmmmm.
START what saying are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START and time traveler, this thing you search for is, too, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START oh, yes. fled me across all the years, he is, to a dead future on a murdered planet he destroyed all the empty years. help me! to kill him give me the tools i need! the crystals! let him get away, do not! let him get away, do not.
START lazarus, hurt, you are. i know. i sympathise, but got four hundred and thirty other men to worry about i have. those crystals, now where are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START you, i told you, got them, he is. them, he took them. the thing! the thing!
START in much pain, is he. yes, hmmm.
START drive a man harder than pleasure, sometimes pain can. sure you know that, i am, doctor.
START well, worry, do not, going anywhere he is not. this time not.
START true, captain, but the fact that our ship's instruments are specifically designed to locate and identify any object in our universe, more significant to me is, it energy or matter be. hmmmmmm.
START but unable to identify the source of the radiation on the planet, by using those instruments you were.
START correct. which to be impossible would seem.
START then to one alternative what you say leads obviously. from our universe the source of radiation is not. hmmmmmm.
START concerned, you are, hmm?
START my friend, he is. yeesssssss.
START poor choice of friends, you have. examined, he will be. if lying, he is lying, die, he will die. if telling the truth, is he, find that business has taken a turn for the worse, he will. take him. you like not to be pushed. very good. you may be a man, deal with, can i, baroner. with me come.
START this day on from, of more than three people no public assemblages. to be cleared through this office all publications. neighbourhood controls, established, will be, hostages selected. of crimes against the state a somewhat lengthy list. hmmmmmm.
START what he claims to be, he is, commander, vulcanian merchant named spock. his main concern seems to be how, carry out his business under our occupation, would he.
START the usual. of apprehension regarding us a certain amount. remarkably disciplined, the mind is. yes, hmmm.
START sure, you are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i used force four, which to break down any pretence is sufficient.
START very well, lieutenant. would to try our little truth finder you like, hmm? herh herh herh.
START understand i not.
START and proud of it, you are. herh herh herh.
START tool, is it, weapon. somewhat drastic, but very efficient. herh herh herh.
START are you sure, all right, you are, hmm?
START perfectly, baroner. but an interesting experience, was it. yes, hmmm.
START all right, vulcan, you may go. but an enemy alien, you are. under our scrutiny at all times, will you be. if to warn you, i have.
START not necessary, commander. you very well i understand.
START to your council return, baroner. published, you will receive our official notifications as soon as they are. in the meantime keep the people in order. your responsibility, it is.
START or killed, will i be. hmmmmmm.
START exactly right, that is. killed, will you be.
START be all the terror they think it is that mindsifter cannot. yeesssssss.
START try and avoid it, i will. yeesssssss.
START sorry, i am sorry, sir. notice you we did not. yeesssssss.
START captain, our energies toward the immediate problem i strongly suggest we direct. our mission here accomplishing.
START really think i was going to beat his head in you did not, did you, hmm?
START you might i thought.
START right, you are. but as you say, job to do, we still have. yes, hmmm.
START receive no help from the organians we will. yeesssssss.
START maybe, but sooner or later, start resenting how the klingons run things, will they. if do something to strike back, we could prove to them they could, to keep the klingons off balance.
START to be ineffective verbal persuasion seems. perhaps a more direct approach, hmm?
START exactly what i had in mind, that is. mister spock did i or did i see something that looked like a munitions dump outside of kor's headquarters not, hmm?
START i think, time we did a little simple and plain communicating, is it. tonight.
START very meritorious idea, captain.
START short of tools, are we.
START certain the klingons will provide whatever is necessary, i am. pleasure doing business with you, it is, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START with delayed action fuse. yes, hmmm.
START these crates contain chemical explosives. make a most satisfactory display, they should.
START right, you were, mister spock. most satisfactory display.
START but violence, that was.
START fight back, we did it to show you that you can. you have not to be sheep, wolves, you can be. yes, hmmm.
START to destroy terrible.
START full of examples of civil populations fighting back successfully against a military dictatorship, history is. be able to destroy the klingons we may not, but tie them up, we can. their installations blow up, their communications disrupt, to them make organia useless. yeesssssss.
START eventually arrive, our fleet will. in the meantime, ours, the battle is. successful one can it be.
START captain, such a thing again, i implore you never to do.
START why, hmm? afraid of retribution are you, hmm? to you does your personal freedom mean so little, hmm?
START you understand us how little, captain.
START all i understand is that you apparently have not the backbone to fight and protect your loved ones. herh herh herh.
START of courage you speak. the difference between courage and foolhardiness obviously you know not. the brave ones who die, it always is. the soldiers. i hope, continue to savour the sweetness of your life, you will. you disgust me. hmmmmmm.
START what are you do with him going to, commander, hmm?
START no need to use your machine on him, there is, commander. tell you his name, i can. captain james t, is it. kirk. hmmmmmm.
START for some reason, destroy you, he feels that he must, commander, destroy him, just as you feel you must. yeesssssss.
START going to be rather difficult now, that is. it is not, captain, hmm? what an admirable people. always betray your friends do you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START want you to harm him i did not. sorry, i am sorry, captain. for the best, was it. of it, no harm would come.
START used to the idea of dying, am i, but no desire to die for the likes of you, i have. yeesssssss.
START you i blame not, captain. lock up the vulcan. to my office take the captain. have a talk before i do what must be done, will we.
START have a drink with me, you will, captain, hmm?
START what want you from me, hmm? herh herh herh.
START oh, very great deal, but first i talk want to. just talk. yes, hmmm.
START you think, going to sit here and just talk with the enemy, am i, hmm?
START destroyed, something was, hmm? nothing inconsequential, i hope. yeesssssss.
START hardly. quite important to us, they were, but replaced, can they be. of the federation you, much like us, you are.
START nothing like you we are. democratic body, we are.
START come now. i am referring to minor ideological differences not. i mean that, similar as a species, are we. on a planet of sheep, here we are. two tigers, predators, hunters, killers, and precisely that, is it which makes us great. and universe to be taken, there is.
START very large universe, it is, commander, the klingons full of people who like not.
START excellent. then matter of testing each other's wills, it shall be. of power. survival, earned, must be, captain. me about the dispersal of your starfleet tell.
START take a lot longer than that, it will, commander. yeesssssss.
START longer than that i will wait not. you, i respect you, captain, but war, this is, to win a game we klingons play. to the cell with his friend take him. and watch him closely.
START no use, is it, jim. no way out, there is.
START how much of the twelve hours do, left, have we, hmm?
START six hours, forty three minutes, if punctual, the klingons are. yes, hmmm.
START count on them being punctual, i think we can. blowing that munitions dump was enough not. if of here we get out, got to carry the attack directly to kor, have we. these organians. yeesssssss.
START to understand they seem not. most peculiar. yes, hmmm.
START nevertheless, our orders still stand. got to make some attempt to neutralise the klingon occupation, have we. yes, hmmm.
START get the chance we may not, captain. very thick, these walls are.
START and guards every few feet down the hall, there are. hmmmmmm.
START oh, you are there, gentlemen. in good health, i trust you are, hmm? go, shall we, hmm? herh herh herh.
START receive no help from the organians we will. yeesssssss.
START maybe, but start resenting how the klingons run things, sooner or later they will. if we could prove to them, do something to strike back, could they, to keep the klingons off balance. yeesssssss.
START to be ineffective verbal persuasion seems. perhaps a more direct approach, hmm?
START exactly what i had in mind, that is. mister spock did i or did i see something that looked like a munitions dump outside of kor's headquarters not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START time we did a little simple and plain communicating, i think it is. tonight.
START very meritorious idea, captain. herh herh herh.
START short of tools we are. herh herh herh.
START certain the klingons will provide whatever is necessary, am i. pleasure doing business with you, it is, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START with delayed action fuse.
START these crates contain chemical explosives. make a most satisfactory display, they should. herh herh herh.
START right, you were, mister spock. most satisfactory display. yes, hmmm.
START but violence, that was.
START we did it to show you that, fight back, you can. you have not to be sheep, wolves, can you be. herh herh herh.
START to destroy terrible.
START full of examples of civil populations fighting back successfully against a military dictatorship, history is. we may be able to destroy the klingons not, but tie them up, we can. their installations blow up, their communications disrupt, to them make organia useless.
START eventually arrive, our fleet will. in the meantime, ours, the battle is. it, a successful one, can be. yes, hmmm.
START captain, such a thing again, i implore you never to do.
START why, hmm? afraid of retribution are you, hmm? to you does your personal freedom mean so little, hmm?
START you understand us how little, captain. yes, hmmm.
START the backbone to fight and protect your loved ones all i understand is that you apparently have not. hmmmmmm.
START of courage you speak. obviously you know not the difference between courage and foolhardiness. the brave ones who die, it always is. the soldiers. continue to savour the sweetness of your life, i hope you will. you disgust me. yeesssssss.
START what are you do with him going to, commander, hmm?
START no need to use your machine on him, there is, commander. tell you his name i can. captain james t, it is. kirk. yeesssssss.
START for some reason, destroy you, he feels that he must, commander, destroy him, just as you feel you must. hmmmmmm.
START going to be rather difficult now, that is. is it not, captain, hmm? what an admirable people. always betray your friends do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i did want you to harm him not. sorry, i am sorry, captain. for the best, it was. of it, no harm would come. yeesssssss.
START used to the idea of dying, i am, but no desire to die for the likes of you, i have. herh herh herh.
START i blame not you, captain. lock up the vulcan. to my office take the captain. have a talk before i do what must be done, we will.
START have a drink with me, you will, captain, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START what want you from me, hmm?
START oh, very great deal, but first i talk want to. just talk.
START you think, going to sit here and just talk with the enemy, am i, hmm? yeesssssss.
START destroyed, something was, hmm? nothing inconsequential, i hope. herh herh herh.
START hardly. quite important to us, they were, but replaced can they be. of the federation you, much like us, you are.
START nothing like you, we are. democratic body, are we.
START come now. i am referring to minor ideological differences not. similar as a species we i mean that are. here, on a planet of sheep, are we. two tigers, predators, hunters, killers, and precisely that, it is which makes us great. and universe to be taken there is. yeesssssss.
START very large universe, it is, commander, the klingons full of people who like not.
START excellent. then it, a matter of testing each other's wills, shall be. of power. earned must survival be, captain. me about the dispersal of your starfleet tell. yeesssssss.
START take a lot longer than that, it will, commander. yeesssssss.
START longer than that i will wait not. you, i respect you, captain, but war, this is, to win a game we klingons play. to the cell with his friend take him. and watch him closely.
START no use, it is, jim. no way out, there is. yes, hmmm.
START left we how much of the twelve hours do have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START six hours, forty three minutes, if punctual, the klingons are. hmmmmmm.
START count on them being punctual, i think we can. enough blowing that munitions dump was not. if of here we get out, got to carry the attack directly to kor we have. these organians.
START to understand they seem not. most peculiar. yes, hmmm.
START nevertheless, our orders still stand. got to make some attempt to neutralise the klingon occupation, we have.
START get the chance we may not, captain. very thick, these walls are. herh herh herh.
START and guards every few feet down the hall, there are. yes, hmmm.
START oh, you are there, gentlemen. i trust, in good health, you are, hmm? go, shall we, hmm?
START yes. violence to you, your captors plan to do. permit that we cannot. to take you away i came.
START to them you turned us over. to trust you now you expect us, hmm?
START is there really a choice, captain, hmm? you safety i offer. herh herh herh.
START we, stay here, cannot. look, this is the first place they will.
START come here they will not, captain. you may believe me. yeesssssss.
START you turn us in first, then get us out. what doing now are you, turn us in again and collect it, waiting for the klingons to post a reward so you can, hmm?
START you understand us how little, captain. yes, hmmm.
START we understand what happened to the guard at the citadel, nor do. herh herh herh.
START concern yourself about them, do not.
START to them what happened, hmm? herh herh herh.
START why, to them nothing happened, captain. nothing at all.
START you see i am busy, do not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START the two federation prisoners. gone, they are gone.
START you mean, escaped, have they, hmm?
START i swear. at fault, no one was. the guards, constantly on duty watching the cell, ten of them were. then to give them food when they opened it, they simply weren't there, and no way out, there was.
START if lying to me, you are.
START is, all you can do, that is, smile, hmm? yeesssssss.
START free, you are, captain.
START i know how i am free want to, and why. herh herh herh.
START indeed, there are several questions, like to ask as well, would i. hmmmmmm.
START of yours this idiotic placidity, anything to protect yourselves, your refusal to do. yeesssssss.
START already answered that question, we have. to us, unthinkable, violence is. yes, hmmm.
START returned immediately, they will be. so know we mean what we say, you that will, listen. yeesssssss.
START klingon phasers, those are. take the door. get down, gentlemen.
START of my headquarters in the courtyard,
START hear them did you, hmm?
START yes, of course, captain. but changed, nothing has.
START well, mister spock. it seems, up to you and me, is it. hmmmmmm.
START appear so, it would, captain.
START invested a great deal of money in our training, the federation has. about due for a small return, they are. two hours with, have we which to do it in.
START but only two. die, more organians will.
START no. die on account of us, no more will, mister spock. those phasers, where are, hmm?
START i, tell you, cannot.
START told us a great deal about how you hate violence, you have. me where those phasers are unless you tell, going to have more violence than you know what to do with, you are.
START you mean, actually use force, you would, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START entirely up to you, it is.
START ayelborne, of no matter, this is. better let him have what he wants, you perhaps would. he. yes, hmmm.
START very well, but do you no good, it will. in that cabinet, they are. yes, hmmm.
START gentlemen, no great love for you i have, your planet, your culture. despite that, mister spock and i are go out there and quite probably die going to, some things worth dying for, in an attempt to show you that there are. hmmmmmm.
START only two of you against an army, there are. you realise that what you intend to do will be hopeless, do not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START come on, mister spock, get out of here, let us. yeesssssss.
START of course, allow it we cannot. very bad, to stop them is.
START necessary, it is necessary. they may harm one another. yeesssssss.
START wait until darkness, will they.
START wait, we will wait.
START mister spock, can we get those two guards, hmm? you say the odds on our getting out of here, what would, hmm?
START pretty close approximation that is.
START to be accurate i endeavour.
START quite well, you do. your phaser on stun set. after the top dog, we are, of the pack not the members. herh herh herh.
START but for it if the situation calls, we kill, is that clear, hmm? herh herh herh.
START take the one on the left i will. fire. hmmmmmm.
START begun, it has begun.
START hard, will it be.
START understand these people i cannot. yeesssssss.
START they know what death is, they, do not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to be worried about anything they seem not. yes, hmmm.
START to be a military governor bad enough, but to govern a population of sheep! very well, lieutenant, round up two hundred more. hmmmmmm.
START if me what i want to know you tell not, kill you here and now, i will. is that clear, hmm?
START to gather two hundred more, i am.
START well, the odds now, what are, hmm?
START to one less than seven thousand, captain. got this far we it is remarkable have.
START to one less than seven thousand. well, getting better. getting better.
START you are just stay where, commander.
START done well to get this far through my guards, you have.
START so, here, you are. interested in knowing that a federation fleet is on its way here at the moment, you will be. preparing to meet them, our fleet is. yes, hmmm.
START wait and see the results before you kill me, shall we, hmm?
START i intend not to kill you unless i have to.
START sentimentality, mercy. of peace the emotions. your weakness, captain kirk. the klingon empire shall win. of it think, as here, we sit here, in space above us the destiny of the galaxy, decided for the next ten thousand years, will be. you a drink can i offer, hmm? toast the victory of the klingon fleet, we can. yes, hmmm.
START you may be premature. many possibilities, there are.
START today we conquer. if some day, defeated, are we, well, its fortunes good and bad, war has. so strong we do you know why are, hmm? because unit we are. part of the greater whole, each of us is, always under surveillance. like myself even a commander, always under surveillance, captain. if note, you will. hmmmmmm.
START it, what is, spock, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START inexplicable, captain. extreme heat. as well not only the weapons but the bodies.
START terribly sorry to be forced to interfere, we are, gentlemen, but permit you to harm yourselves, we cannot.
START what talking about are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START put a stop to your violence we have.
START stopping this, you are, hmm? you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of violence on this planet now radiate a temperature of three hundred and fifty degrees all instruments. inoperative, they are inoperative.
START you contact them i suggest. you too, captain. now within range of your communications device, your ship is. yeesssssss.
START to enterprise kirk. come in.
START i, explain it, cannot. just closing in on the klingon fleet, we were when. yeesssssss.
START my fleet, helpless, it is helpless. yeesssssss.
START you done, what have, hmm?
START as here, i stand here, of the klingon empire i also stand upon the home planet, and of your federation the home planet, captain. putting a stop to this insane war i am. yes, hmmm.
START talking nonsense, you are. yeesssssss.
START being done, is it.
START you, just stop the fleet, cannot. you the right what gives, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START interfere, you cannot. your business what happens in space is not.
START to an immediate cessation of hostilities unless both sides agree, your armed forces all, they may be wherever, immediately immobilised, will be. yes, hmmm.
START legitimate grievances against the klingons, we have. invaded our territory, have they, our citizens killed. openly aggressive, are they. take over half the galaxy, they have boasted that they will.
START why not, hmm? the stronger, are we! tried to hem us in, you have, cut off vital supplies, our trade strangle! been asking for war, you have! yes, hmmm.
START the ones who issued the ultimatum to withdraw from the disputed areas, you are!
START they are disputed not! clearly ours, they are. and with some kind of trick now you step in. herh herh herh.
START no trick, it is, commander. simply put an end to your war, have we. your military forces all, they are wherever, are now completely paralysed. yes, hmmm.
START we find interference in other people's affairs most disgusting, but given us no choice, you gentlemen have. hmmmmmm.
START be the first to be on our side, you should. two hundred hostages killed. yeesssssss.
START been killed, no one has, captain. yeesssssss.
START died here in uncounted thousands of years, no one has. yeesssssss.
START liars, you are. meddling in things that are none of your business, you are. yes, hmmm.
START understand even if you have some power that we not, no right to dictate to our federation, you have. herh herh herh.
START to handle their interstellar relations how! the right, we have.
START to wage war, captain, hmm? to kill millions of innocent people, hmm? to destroy life on a planetary scale, hmm? is that what, defending, you are, hmm?
START well, no one wants war. but proper channels, there are. right to handle their own affairs, people have. eventually, have, we would have.
START oh, have peace, eventually you will, but died, only after millions of people have. true that in the future, it is, become fast friends, you and the klingons will. work together, you will.
START most discordant, your emotions are. to seem inhospitable we wish not, but gentlemen, leave, you must. yes, hmmm.
START yes, leave us. intensely painful to us, the mere presence of beings like yourselves is. hmmmmmm.
START what you mean, like yourselves beings, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of years ago millions, captain, humanoid like yourselves, we were, but developed beyond the need of physical bodies, we have. of us that which you see is mere appearance for your sake. hmmmmmm.
START captain, trick, is it. handle them, we can. an army, i have.
START been transmitting a contact signal every five minutes i have. is dead air i all get. shall i continue, hmm? herh herh herh.
START maintain transmission pattern until, established orbit, have we.
START mister spock, one hundred and fifty men, there were, women, and children in that colony. the chances of survivors, what are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START absolutely none, captain. such a recent discovery, berthold rays are. have full knowledge of their nature we yet not. known, it is known, however, that living animal tissue disintegrates under exposure. sandoval's group could have survived after three years not. yeesssssss.
START are you saying that those people built a future in a place knowing they might survive not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START saying they knew there was a risk, i am. herh herh herh.
START and what about us, hmm? to send people to the planet's surface can we afford, hmm?
START the breakdown of tissue develops immediately not. risk a limited exposure, we can.
START established orbit we have, sir, and pinpointed a settlement, i have. yeesssssss.
START thank you, mister painter. mister spock, to accompany me to the planet's surface equip a landing party of five. include doctor mccoy and a biologist. want them in ten minutes, will i.
START another dream that failed. nothing sadder, there is. to make the trip from earth it took these people a year. they came all that way and died.
START hardly that, sir. to omicron ceti three welcome. elias sandoval, am i.
START seen anyone outside our group for four years since we left earth we have not. been expecting someone for some time we have. work properly our subspace radio did not, and i am afraid we did have anyone who could master its intricacies not.
START actually, mister sandoval, come here we did not because of your silent radio. yes, hmmm.
START it makes little difference, captain. here, you are. happy to see you, we are. come, me show you our settlement let. yes, hmmm.
START on pure speculation, just an educated guess, say that man is alive, i would.
START captain, being bombarded by berthold rays, this planet is, as our reports indicated. this intensity at, safe for a week if necessary will we be. but. yes, hmmm.
START but be alive these people should not.
START is it possible that, not, are they, hmm?
START with him you shook hands, jim. warm, his flesh was. alive, he is alive. no doubt about that, there is.
START also no question of the fact that berthold rays are incontrovertibly deadly, there is. no miracle connected with it, there is, doctor, you know that. no cures, no serums, no antidotes. if exposed long enough, a man is, he dies.
START gentlemen, debating in a vacuum, we are. go get some answers, let us. herh herh herh.
START two other settlements, there are, but forty five colonists here, we have. herh herh herh.
START the reason for the dispersal, what was, hmm? herh herh herh.
START we felt three groups, better potential, would have. if to strike one group, disease were, less likely to be affected, the others would be. you see, an ideal agricultural planet, omicron is. we determined to suffer the fate of expeditions that went before us not. herh herh herh.
START leila, our guests come meet. leila kalomi, this is, our botanist. captain kirk, this is, doctor mccoy, mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START met before i mister spock and have. been a long time, it is. herh herh herh.
START mister sandoval, mission here, we do have. examinations, tests. hmmmmmm.
START by all means, make them. i think, find our settlement an interesting one, you will. simple one, our philosophy is, return to a less complicated life, that men should. few mechanical things here, have we. no vehicles, no weapons. harmony here, we have. complete peace. herh herh herh.
START we will try to interfere with your work not. yes, hmmm.
START we looking for anyway, what exactly are, sir, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START whatever looks right not, whatever that is. when to farms it comes, i would know what looked right or wrong if it were two feet from me not.
START it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no cows. even built for them this barn is not, for storage just. hmmmmmm.
START to think of it come, seen any animals we have not. no horses, no pigs, not even a dog. nothing.
START known the vulcanian, you have, hmm?
START love him did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START if i did, important only to myself, was it. hmmmmmm.
START how feel did he, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START never expressed to me, mister spock's feelings were. said he has none to give, it is.
START would him to stay with us now you like, to be as one of us, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no choice there is, elias. stay, he will stay.
START that'll be all. you very much thank. hmmmmmm.
START spock here, captain. to be a total absence of life on the planet there seems, with of the colonists and various types of flora the exception.
START not at the moment, sir. conducting various tests with the tricorder, am i, but inconclusive, results are.
START no animals. peculiar, that is. yes, hmmm.
START yes, especially in view of the fact that the records for this expedition indicate that, have some for breeding and food purposes, did they. apparently, of them survived none.
START like to see the medical records on the expedition, would i. yes, hmmm.
START yes, you might i thought.
START captain, been looking for you, have i. seen our fields and crops you have not. like to show you and the doctor what we have accomplished here, i would. yeesssssss.
START i am afraid, have to bow out, will i. to continue with these medical examinations, i have. however, if to be as perfect as yours i find everyone else's health, i. herh herh herh.
START to throw away his shingle he promised. yeesssssss.
START find no weaklings here, you will. captain.
START the reason, this is, captain. grow anything we plant in it, this soil will. perfect world, is it. moderate climate we have, moderate rains all year round. it gives us all we need. perfect, it is perfect.
START work to attend to myself, i have, captain. yes, hmmm.
START i heard sandoval saying, grow anything here, could they. true, that is, sir. got a variety of crops in, they have. grains, potatoes, beans. yes, hmmm.
START your point make. herh herh herh.
START well, sir, for an agricultural colony, actually very little acreage planted, they have. enough to sustain the colony, there is, but very little more. yes, hmmm.
START like a jigsaw puzzle all one colour, it is. to where the pieces fit in no key. why, hmm?
START mccoy, this is, jim. i think, better get back here, you would. yeesssssss.
START no, but like you to see this for yourself, i would.
START my way on. yeesssssss.
START sandoval's medical record, four years ago when the expedition left earth. his lungs from lobar pneumonia suffered he registered scar tissue on when he was a child. no major operations, but an appendectomy, there was. received all required inoculations, et cetera.
START nothing, but i examined that man no more than two hours ago. you know what his readings were, hmm? perfect, perfect, and perfect. examined here i just like everyone else have. yeesssssss.
START no. of that and tested it on myself i thought. it accurately recorded my lack of tonsils and those two broken ribs, once, had i. it did record the scar tissue on sandoval's lungs not, but supposedly removed, it did record a healthy appendix where one was. herh herh herh.
START nothing. not even insects. yet your plants grow, and survived exposure to berthold rays, you have.
START explained, can that be.
START never understood the female capacity to avoid a direct answer to any question, i have. hmmmmmm.
START and i never understood you. until now. come, there was always a place in here where no one could. only the face you allow people to see, there was. only one side, allow them to know, you would.
START like to know how your people have managed to survive here i would. yes, hmmm.
START you, i missed you.
START logically, all be dead, you should. hmmmmmm.
START if you how we survived i tell, you try to understand how we feel about our life here, will, hmm? about each other, hmm?
START alien to me, emotions are. scientist i am. hmmmmmm.
START mister sandoval, received orders from starfleet command to evacuate all personnel from this colony, within the hour i have. naturally, inform your people to begin preparations, you will. have accommodations for you aboard the enterprise, we will. hmmmmmm.
START an arbitrary decision on my part it is not. my orders i have.
START captain, entirely unnecessary, it is. in no danger here, we are.
START explained the berthold rays to you and their effect, we have. you understand, cannot, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START doctor, you understand, how can i make, hmm? all in perfect health, your own instruments have shown that we are. had no deaths here, have we. yes, hmmm.
START your animals what about, hmm? yeesssssss.
START that answers my question not, sir. your animals die why did all, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START captain, you stress very unimportant matters. we will leave not.
START it is much further not. herh herh herh.
START yet explained the nature of this thing you have not.
START important its basic properties and elements are not. what is important gives life is it, peace, love. herh herh herh.
START describing was once known in the vernacular as a happiness pill, what you are. and you, as scientist, possible should know that that is not. hmmmmmm.
START come. one of the first to find them, i was. the spores. hmmmmmm.
START it should hurt not.
START no, i cannot. please, do not!
START like this not. hurt us it did not. herh herh herh.
START i am like you not.
START now. now, to all of us and we to you you belong. no need to hide your inner face any longer there is. we understand.
START you, i love you. love you i can.
START captain, very valid, your arguments are, but to us they apply not. yeesssssss.
START being unreasonable, you are.
START excuse me. to remove all the colonists, my orders are. exactly what i intend to do, that is, with your help or without.
START would to use a butterfly net on him you like, captain, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no, i think, use a, will we.
START captain, checked out everything we have. it all seems normal, for the absence of any animals except.
START orders to evacuate all colonists to starbase twenty seven we have. herh herh herh.
START we have seen them since we began our check not.
START desalle said he was examine some native plants he found going to. did spock call in at all, hmm?
START like a dragon that one looks. you see the tail and the dorsal spines, hmm? yeesssssss.
START never seen a dragon, have i.
START i have. on berengaria seven. but never stopped to look at clouds before i have. or rainbows. you know, tell you exactly why one appears in the sky, i can, but always been out of the question, considering its beauty has. herh herh herh.
START yes, what want did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes, captain. what want did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i believe not i want to tell you. yes, hmmm.
START spock, i know not what you think you are doing, but an order, this is. to me at the settlement in ten minutes report back. evacuating all colonists to starbase twenty seven, we are.
START no, i think not so. hmmmmmm.
START you think not so, what, hmm?
START so i think not, sir. herh herh herh.
START spock, to me immediately report. yeesssssss.
START spock. open, the frequency is, but he answers not. yes, hmmm.
START that did sound at all like spock not, jim. herh herh herh.
START no. like him if he mellowed a little i thought you said you might. yes, hmmm.
START say that i did not. yes, hmmm.
START you find spock, how will, hmm? yeesssssss.
START open, the frequency is. act as a homing device, will it. contact desalle. you here have him meet. of two make sure the landing party work in teams. i want not anybody left alone down here.
START what doing with those things are you, desalle, hmm?
START to take a close look at these i want you, doc. very interesting, they are. yeesssssss.
START mister spock. out of your mind are you, hmm? told to report to me at once, you were.
START want to i did not, jim. hmmmmmm.
START you, hmm? yes, see that, can i. miss kalomi, have to come back to the settlement and prepare to transport up to the ship, you will. herh herh herh.
START there'll be no evacuation, jim, but go back and get you straightened out, perhaps we should. hmmmmmm.
START mister sulu, under arrest, mister spock is, and in your custody until we get back to the enterprise, is he.
START very well. with me come.
START mister sulu understands, you, do not, mister sulu, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, now, i see now. remove the colony, of course we cannot. wrong would it be.
START i know not what these plants are or how they work, but all going back to the settlement with me, you are, and going aboard the ship, those colonists are. hmmmmmm.
START i can see the captain, difficult, will be. yeesssssss.
START how many of those beam up did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START oh, nigh onto a hundred by now, must be.
START the captain, this is. me up beam. herh herh herh.
START lieutenant, to admiral komack at starfleet put me through.
START oh, sorry, i am sorry, captain. i, do that, cannot.
START what you mean, do that, you cannot. follow standard procedure. an order, that is. yeesssssss.
START oh, it is i know, captain, but you see, out, all communications are.
START to your stations get back. to your stations get back.
START sorry, i am sorry, sir. all transporting down to join the colony, we are. herh herh herh.
START to your station i said get back. yes, hmmm.
START mutiny, this is, mister.
START heard that word a lot lately, have i. perfect. everything's perfect.
START bet you have even grown your tonsils back, i will.
START look, bones, your help i need. you run tests can, blood samples, to give us a lead on what these things are anything at all, to counteract them how, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to counteract paradise who wants, jim boy, hmm? herh herh herh.
START beamed down, almost the entire ship's complement has. hmmmmmm.
START very pleased, i am. proceeding quite well, the entire landing operation is. yeesssssss.
START to create something called a mint julep he went off. drink, that is, jim. hmmmmmm.
START captain, why you not join us, hmm?
START your own private paradise in.
START made it that, the spores have. yes, hmmm.
START where originate did they, hmm? yeesssssss.
START impossible to say, it is. they finally landed here they drifted through space until. you see, they actually thrive on berthold rays. to inhabit the plants act as a repository for thousands of microscopic spores until they find a human body. yes, hmmm.
START in return, of mind they give you complete health and peace. yeesssssss.
START no need or want, have we, captain. yeesssssss.
START true eden, it is, jim. belonging and love, there is.
START no wants. no needs. for that we weren't meant. of us none. no ambition, man stagnates if he has, to be more than he is no desire. hmmmmmm.
START what we need, we have. herh herh herh.
START understand you not, jim, but come around sooner or later, you will. join us. please. yes, hmmm.
START going back to the ship i am.
START engineering, hmm? scotty, hmm? biochemistry lab, hmm? security, hmm? is there anyone on board, hmm? the captain, this is.
START to mister spock enterprise. hmmmmmm.
START yes, jim. what now is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START joined you, i have. now, i understand now. yeesssssss.
START wonderful, jim. when you beam down, will, hmm?
START there are some things in my quarters i pack want to.
START good. leila and, meet you at the beam down point, will i.
START what's keeping you, jim, hmm? been waiting, we have. herh herh herh.
START been packing some things, i have, and i realise, some equipment here that we should have down at the settlement, there is. yeesssssss.
START want me to beam up a party do you, hmm?
START no, i think you and, handle it, can i. why you not beam up now, hmm? yeesssssss.
START just a moment. it will take long not. mind do you, hmm?
START to beam up ready, jim.
START oh, nigh onto a hundred by now must be. yeesssssss.
START the captain, this is. me up beam. yes, hmmm.
START lieutenant, to admiral komack at starfleet put me through. herh herh herh.
START oh, sorry, i am sorry, captain. do that i cannot.
START what you mean, do that you cannot. follow standard procedure. an order, that is. yeesssssss.
START oh, it is i know, captain, but you see, out, all communications are. herh herh herh.
START to your stations get back. to your stations get back.
START sorry, i am sorry, sir. all transporting down to join the colony, we are. herh herh herh.
START to your station i said get back.
START mutiny, this is, mister.
START heard that word a lot lately, i have. perfect. everything's perfect. yes, hmmm.
START bet you have even grown your tonsils back, i will. yes, hmmm.
START look, bones, your help i need. you run tests can, blood samples, to give us a lead on what these things are anything at all, to counteract them how, hmm?
START to counteract paradise who wants, jim boy, hmm?
START beamed down, almost the entire ship's complement has. herh herh herh.
START very pleased, i am. proceeding quite well, the entire landing operation is. yeesssssss.
START to create something called a mint julep he went off. drink, that is, jim. yeesssssss.
START captain, join us why you not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START your own private paradise in. herh herh herh.
START made it that, the spores have. hmmmmmm.
START where originate did they, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START impossible to say, it is. they finally landed here they drifted through space until. you see, they actually thrive on berthold rays. to inhabit the plants act as a repository for thousands of microscopic spores until they find a human body.
START in return, of mind they give you complete health and peace. herh herh herh.
START no need or want, we have, captain. yeesssssss.
START true eden, it is, jim. belonging and love, there is.
START no wants. no needs. for that we weren't meant. of us none. no ambition, man stagnates if he has, to be more than he is no desire.
START what we need, we have. hmmmmmm.
START understand you not, jim, but come around sooner or later, you will. join us. please. herh herh herh.
START going back to the ship i am. hmmmmmm.
START engineering, hmm? scotty, hmm? biochemistry lab, hmm? security, hmm? is there anyone on board, hmm? the captain, this is. yeesssssss.
START to mister spock enterprise. herh herh herh.
START yes, jim. what now is it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START joined you, have i. now, i understand now. yeesssssss.
START wonderful, jim. when you beam down, will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START there are some things in my quarters i pack want to. hmmmmmm.
START good. meet you at the beam down point i leila and will. hmmmmmm.
START what's keeping you, jim, hmm? been waiting we have.
START been packing some things, have i, and some equipment here that we should have down at the settlement, i realise there is.
START want me to beam up a party do you, hmm?
START no, handle it i i think you and can. why you not beam up now, hmm? herh herh herh.
START just a moment. it will take long not. mind do you, hmm?
START to beam up ready, jim. hmmmmmm.
START man, what makes you think you are, hmm? an overgrown jackrabbit, you are, with a hyperactive thyroid an elf. herh herh herh.
START jim, i not understand. yes, hmmm.
START of course you not understand. you have not the brains to understand. is printed circuits, you all have.
START captain, if excuse me, you will. yes, hmmm.
START teacher, my mother was. my father an ambassador. hmmmmmm.
START computer, your father was, like his son. of traitors an ambassador from a planet. of integrity a vulcan never lived who had an ounce. yes, hmmm.
START captain, do not. yeesssssss.
START traitor from a race of traitors, you are. to the core disloyal, of your subhuman race rotten like the rest, and got the gall to make love to that girl, you have.
START had enough, hmm? realise what it took to get under that thick hide of yours i did not. anyhow, i know not what you are so mad about. it is every first officer who gets to belt his captain several times not.
START that to me deliberately, you did. hmmmmmm.
START believe me, mister spock, painful in more ways than one, it was.
START the spores. gone, they are gone. anymore i belong not. yeesssssss.
START you said, benevolent and peaceful, were they. violent emotions overwhelm them, destroy them. to make you angry enough to shake off their influence, i had. the answer, that is, mister spock.
START that may be correct, captain, but hardly logical, trying to initiate a brawl with over five hundred crewmen and colonists is.
START something else in mind, i had. you put together a subsonic transmitter can. hook into the communications station and broadcast over the communicator, something we can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START done can it be.
START good. get to work let us. yeesssssss.
START captain. court martial offence, striking a fellow officer is. herh herh herh.
START well, if both in the brig, we are, who's build the subsonic transmitter going to, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START quite logical, that is, captain. hmmmmmm.
START well now, little early to be counting stars, it is, miss leila. yes, hmmm.
START waiting for mister spock and the captain to transport down, i am. some equipment to be moved, had they. but been so long, is it. i wish, come back, would he. yeesssssss.
START well, now, i think, fix that for you, can i. enterprise, hmm? herh herh herh.
START leila, this is. i borrowed the doctor's communicator. i was worried something, happened to you, might have. yes, hmmm.
START yes. yes. quite well, i am.
START aboard, can i come, hmm? never seen a starship before i have. yeesssssss.
START still at the beam down point are you, and is the doctor there, hmm?
START to both questions yes. herh herh herh.
START to doctor mccoy give your communicator back. you will need it to beam up not. take a few moments, will it. just wait there. out.
START mister spock, strictly your concern, miss kalomi is, but should you talk to her while, still under the influence of the spores, is she, hmm?
START back shortly, will i be, captain.
START no longer with us, you are, are you, hmm? wrong, i felt something was.
START necessary, it was necessary. yeesssssss.
START to the planet with me come back. belong again, you can. with me come back, please.
START lost you, i have, have i not, hmm? and not only you, lost all of it, i have. the spores. lost them, i have, too. herh herh herh.
START and for my good, this is, hmm? mind if i say i still love you do you, hmm? you never told me if, another name, you had, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START hear this they will not, of course. more a sensation of feeling it, will it be.
START as their skin though somebody had put itching powder on.
START precisely. begin to work on their nerves in a few minutes, it should.
START what think you you are doing, hmm?
START sorry i i said was. yeesssssss.
START clumsy, more like you are. herh herh herh.
START if you had gotten in my way not. hmmmmmm.
START come on. it up break. it up break.
START well, doctor, been thinking about what sort of work i could assign you to, i have.
START what you mean, of work what sort, hmm? doctor, i am. hmmmmmm.
START not any more, of course. we need not you. as a doctor not.
START oh, no, hmm? would you like to see how fast, put you in a hospital, can i, hmm?
START the leader of this colony, am i. assign you whatever work i think suitable, i will. yes, hmmm.
START done nothing here, we have. no accomplishments, no progress. three years wasted. to make this planet a garden we wanted.
START stay here, you cannot. survive without the spores you cannot. after, cleared at the starbase, you have, relocated you could be. you want it depends upon what.
START i think i would, to get some work done i think we'd like. to do the work we started out.
START mccoy, this is. like to talk to the captain, sandoval would.
START just a moment. all beginning to call in, they are, captain. rather contritely, say, i should say. to speak to you sandoval wishes. herh herh herh.
START start making preparations, mister sandoval. begin transporting your people aboard as soon as more of our crew checks in, we will.
START well, jim, just examined the last of the colonists, i have, and all in absolutely perfect, they are, perfect health. over by the spores a fringe benefit left.
START well, the second time man's been thrown out of paradise, that is.
START no, no, bones. this time we walked out on our own. for paradise maybe we weren't meant. meant to fight our way through, maybe we were. struggle, our way up claw, for every inch of the way scratch. maybe we, stroll to the music of the lute, cannot. march to the sound of drums, we must.
START we have heard much from you about omicron ceti three not, mister spock.
START little to say about it, i have, captain, happy, except that for the first time in my life i was. yeesssssss.
START nothing, captain. open, hailing frequencies are. herh herh herh.
START received an answer to your message yet have you, captain, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START nothing yet, ambassador. awaiting a reply, we are. today's the first time we have had any evidence, picked up our signal, have they.
START sure are you, hmm?
START positive. over and over it repeats.
START to mean something is that supposed, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START disregard that signal, you will, captain. yes, hmmm.
START mister fox, their planet, it is. herh herh herh.
START captain, in the past twenty years, been lost in this quadrant, thousands of lives have. lives that, been saved if the federation had a treaty port here, could have. here to get it, we mean to have that port and i am. yes, hmmm.
START quite prepared to take that risk, am i.
START you are. thinking about this ship, i am, my crew. yes, hmmm.
START my orders, have i, captain, and now, yours, you have. proceed on course, you will. to me achieve orbit status and just leave the rest. well aware that my mission gives me the power of command, you are. i now exercise it. proceed on course, you will. direct order, that is. herh herh herh.
START you can that, sir, but i will lower the screens not.
START figure prominently in my report to the federation central, your name will.
START well, scotty, done it, you now have. yes, hmmm.
START you join me in a drink will not, captain, hmm? find our trova most interesting, you will. yes, hmmm.
START come to drink i did not.
START what you used to destroy disintegration chamber number twelve, i assume that is.
START very efficient weapon. i am afraid of using it not.
START correct, my first impression was. barbarian, you are.
START sound so incredulous, do not, captain. of course you are. are, we all are. killer first, builder second. hunter, warrior, and be honest let us, murderer. our joint heritage, that is, not is it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START what you want, captain, hmm?
START i contact my ship want to. my communicators, where are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START take much chances you, councilman. hmmmmmm.
START worried about your ship, you are, captain. trying to save a world, i am. herh herh herh.
START if you, i were you, think about saving my life, i would.
START will you have a drink not, captain, hmm?
START and discuss our differences, then we can.
START interested in discussing our differences i am not. to realise the risk you are taking you seem not. we make not war with computers and herd the casualties into suicide stations. the real thing, we make, councilman. destroy this planet, could i. yeesssssss.
START you talk to your ship why do you think i let not, hmm?
START i need not the ship for that.
START you mean, with a disruptor all by yourself, destroy this planet, you can, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START exactly what i mean, that is.
START no idea you were so formidable, i had. yeesssssss.
START you seem to think, joking, am i. the communicators, where are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START if you, i told you, captain, you walk right out and get them would, hmm? yeesssssss.
START like that something.
START very well, captain. in the war room, they are. go left down the corridor, left again. unguarded, they are unguarded. hmmmmmm.
START alive is he, hmm? pity. man like that, preferred to die fighting, would have. to the council room take him.
START robert fox, am i. the honour of addressing anan seven, have i, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to eminiar welcome, mister ambassador.
START mister ambassador, truly sorry for what must happen i am.
START your pardon i beg, hmm? yeesssssss.
START been declared war casualties, you and your party have. taken immediately to one of our casualty stations so that your deaths may be recorded, will you be.
START you mean, to be killed, are we, hmm?
START correct, that is, mister ambassador. it very much i regret, but nothing i can do about it, there is.
START to enterprise spock, come in. yeesssssss.
START mister scott, mister spock, is it.
START overdue, the captain is. suffered no casualties among us, we have. important, this is. under no circumstances shall any one beam down from the enterprise. killed the moment they arrived would they be.
START i knew, a rotten ring to it, had it. herh herh herh.
START to maximum phaser range and stand by for further orders orbit out. spock out. yeesssssss.
START what are you do going to, mister spock, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START find the ambassador and the captain. yeoman tamula, this young lady from immolating herself you stay here and prevent. her down if necessary knock. killing situation, this is. to protect yourself, do what you must. clear, hmm?
START what doing are you, hmm? representative of the united federation of planets, i am! special representative! hmmmmmm.
START please, mister fox. ladies and gentlemen, you may be injured move quickly away from the chamber or. hmmmmmm.
START what doing are you, mister spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of diplomacy practicing a peculiar variety, sir.
START take you to a place of comparative safety, i will, then find the captain, i must.
START him, they have him. the guards told us. to the council room under heavy guard they took him.
START by now, mister ambassador, sure you realise that normal diplomatic procedures are ineffective here, am i. hmmmmmm.
START never been a soldier, i have, mister spock, but i learn very quickly.
START very well, sir. get, we need all the help we can. yes, hmmm.
START captain, in, surely you can see the position we are. if to our disintegration chambers your people report not, violation of an agreement that dates back five hundred years, is it. yeesssssss.
START responsible for your agreements my people are not.
START responsible for an escalation that will destroy everything will you be. of people horribly killed millions. of our culture here and yes complete destruction, the culture on vendikar. disaster, disease, starvation, horrible, lingering death, pain and anguish! yes, hmmm.
START to frighten you that seems.
START frighten any sane man, it would. herh herh herh.
START yes. quite right, you are. yes, hmmm.
START you understand, do not, captain, hmm? done away with all that, we have. now, threatening to bring it down on us again, you are. of yours more important than the hundreds of millions of innocent people on eminiar and vendikar are those five hundred people, hmm? you, what kind of monster are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START barbarian, i am. you said it yourself. yeesssssss.
START spoken only figuratively i i had hoped would. hmmmmmm.
START oh, no. quite accurate, you were. to prove it to you i plan. yes, hmmm.
START to the enterprise open a channel. me no choice you give, captain. bandits we are not, but to act as bandits you force us. herh herh herh.
START enterprise, anan seven, this is, of the high council of eminiar first councilman.
START to the surface unless you immediately start transportation of all personnel aboard your ship, the hostages, killed, will be. thirty minutes, you have. it, i mean it, captain.
START all that it means is that i will be around for the destruction not. me give general order twenty four you heard. destroy eminiar seven, that means in two hours the enterprise will. yeesssssss.
START you would do this not. of millions of people hundreds.
START start it i did not, councilman, but liable to finish it, i am. yeesssssss.
START councilman, i received a message from vendikar. nearly up, our time is. short by several thousand, our quota is. of reneging on the treaty they accuse us. hmmmmmm.
START you see, hmm? started, it is started. yes, hmmm.
START wrong, you are. begun, it hasn't begun. yeesssssss.
START less than two hours, you have, councilman.
START has nothing to do with it what i want or want not. automatic, escalation is. stop it, you can! hmmmmmm.
START stop it, hmm? counting on it, am i.
START open a channel, lieutenant. the commander of the uss enterprise, this is. yeesssssss.
START the entire inhabited surface of your planet, destroyed, will be.
START that long to surrender your hostages, you have.
START i do, what can, hmm? somebody, tell me.
START talk, we now will.
START assumed you needed help, i had. i see, in error, am i.
START to enterprise kirk. come in, scotty. yeesssssss.
START everything's secure here. maintain position. if to plan everything goes according, beam us up in ten minutes, you can. if from us you hear not, carry out general order twenty four on schedule.
START as you saw your captain behave behave. done, it is done.
START with you joy be. peace and contentment.
START quite all right. of doctor mccoy be careful. yes, hmmm.
START formulating a theory, i am, captain.
START you speak in strange whispers. the way of landru this is not.
START and peace and harmony. of the body are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START one, the body is.
START blessed be the body, and to all of its parts health. herh herh herh.
START soulless society, this is, captain. no spirit, it has, no spark. indeed peace and tranquillity, all is. of the factory the peace, of the machine the tranquillity. all parts working in unison. herh herh herh.
START and when something unexplained happens, disrupted, their routine is. hmmmmmm.
START until received, new orders are. the question is, who gives those orders, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no landru, there is, captain, not in the human sense.
START thinking the same thing i am, you are. mister spock, pulled, the plug must be. yeesssssss.
START die, landru must.
START to a living that refers, growing culture. think this one is do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to you all joy, friends. yes, hmmm.
START the prophecy says. herh herh herh.
START never mind what the prophecy says. if you be liberated from landru want to, need your help we will.
START you are of the body not!
START doc, i want not to hurt you. yes, hmmm.
START landru, where is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START we find him, where do, hmm?
START we see not him. him, we hear him, of audiences in the hall. hmmmmmm.
START this building in, hmm?
START of it snap out! like men start acting.
START to enterprise spock. status report.
START mister spock, been trying to reach you, i have.
START still decaying, the orbit is. it six hours i give, more or less.
START scotty, stand by. doing the best we can we are. how's mister sulu, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START an order, that is. watch him. captain out.
START war, there was. convulsions. destroying itself, the world was. our leader, landru was. he saw the truth. he changed the world. he took us back, to a simple time back. of peace and tranquillity a time. yes, hmmm.
START to him what happened, hmm?
START still alive, he is. here now, he is. he sees. he hears. destroyed ourselves, we have. please, no more.
START you wanted freedom you said. time you learned that freedom is never a gift, it is. to be earned, it has. come on. going to find landru, we are.
START no, no, wrong, i was wrong! i submit, i bear myself to t, of landru, will he! yes, hmmm.
START too late for that, it is.
START all right, up to you, is it. to landru take us. herh herh herh.
START the hall of audiences, this is. yes, hmmm.
START but landru, this is.
START landru! landru. the archons, we are. the archons, we are. come to speak, have we. the archons we are. we talk to you want to.
START to save you despite my efforts, causing great harm, you have invaded the body and you are. herh herh herh.
START no intention of causing harm we have. yes, hmmm.
START necessary, obliteration is. strong, the infection is. for of the body the good, die, you must. great sorrow, it is. herh herh herh.
START to die we intend not.
START all who saw you, all who know of your presence here, excised, must be. the memory of the body, cleansed, will be.
START to me listen. herh herh herh.
START useless, captain. projection. herh herh herh.
START yes, mister spock. have a look at the projector, let us. hmmmmmm.
START of course. to be, had it. landru. yes, hmmm.
START machine. machine's concept of perfection, this whole society is. peace, harmony.
START landru, i am landru. intruded, you have. yes, hmmm.
START been neutralised, your devices have. so with you, it shall be. landru, i am landru. yeesssssss.
START landru, i am landru. he, i am he. he was all that, i am. his experience, his knowledge.
START but his wisdom not. programmed you, he may have, but he could have given you a soul not. machine, you are. yeesssssss.
START irrelevant, your statement is. obliterated, you will be. the prime directive, the good of the body is.
START of the body the good, captain. the key that is. hmmmmmm.
START yes. the good, what is, hmm?
START landru, i am landru. hmmmmmm.
START dead, landru is. machine, you are. been put to you, a question has. answer it. yeesssssss.
START the harmonious continuation of the body, the good is. peace, the good is, tranquillity. the directive, the good of the body is. hmmmmmm.
START then i put it to you that, disobeyed the prime directive, you have. harmful to the body, you are. yes, hmmm.
START the body is. it exists. healthy, it is healthy.
START dying, the body is. destroying it, you are.
START ask a question do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you done to do justice to the full potential of every individual of the body what have, hmm?
START without of choice freedom, no creativity, there is. without creativity, no life, there is. the body dies. yours, the fault is.
START aiding the body are you, or destroying it are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START not necessary, captain. no guidance, they have. for the first time in their lives possibly.
START peace, order, and maintained, tranquillity are. the body lives, but to me i reserve creativity. herh herh herh.
START then the body dies. necessary for the health of the body, creativity is. yeesssssss.
START impossible, this is. yes, hmmm.
START this truly landru is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of him what's left, this machine six thousand years ago after he built and programmed.
START create the good, you must. the will of landru that is, nothing else.
START but evil, there is.
START then the evil, destroyed, must be. the prime directive, that is. and the evil, you are.
START the evil, you are. the evil, destroyed, must be. fulfill the prime directive.
START captain, all right are you, hmm?
START gone, the heat rays are, captain, and to normal mister sulu's back. herh herh herh.
START excellent, scotty. to beam up landing party stand by. go and see how the others are doing, let us. finish up here, marplon can.
START the late landru, captain. of engineering a marvellous feat. of directing the lives of millions of human beings a computer capable.
START but only a machine, mister spock. the original landru programmed it with all his knowledge but he could give it his wisdom not, his compassion, his understanding, his soul, mister spock.
START make a splendid computer, you would, mister spock.
START very kind of you that is, captain. yes, hmmm.
START it going how's, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START wished for a world as peaceful and secure as the one landru provided, how often mankind has. yeesssssss.
START maintenance section eighteen. working on the intrepid, the section is. reschedule. on priority one, the enterprise is. that makes three times, read it, you have, jim. is there an error, hmm?
START no. but of the crewman the death.
START regulations, captain. and this sworn deposition the extract from your ship's computer log confirming, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to enterprise kirk.
START mister spock with that computer log extract where is, hmm?
START been there ten minutes ago should he have, sir.
START great pity, it is. the service, afford to lose men like lieutenant commander finney, cannot. yes, hmmm.
START i agree. i waited until the last possible moment. on red alert, we were. the storm got worse. to jettison the pod, had i. herh herh herh.
START you so long what took, mister spock, hmm?
START captain, i, i believe i.
START take that, i will. yes, hmmm.
START you are there. i just wanted one more look at you. my father the man who killed. yeesssssss.
START that is so not. my friend, was he.
START your friend, hmm? you hated him all your life! why you killed him, that is, you murderer! you murderer! you murderer! yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, you please would, hmm?
START miss finney, with me come, please. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, you jettisoned the pod after the red alert you say, hmm? yeesssssss.
START my sworn deposition, you have. yeesssssss.
START then, captain, i must presume, committed willful perjury, you have. this extract from your computer log says you jettisoned the pod before red alert going to. to the base consider yourself confined. determine whether a general court martial is in order, official inquiry will. yeesssssss.
START of days couple.
START to see me go in a hurry, hmm?
START oh, take to get a new records officer, i just wondered how long it would.
START talk plainer than that, you can. yeesssssss.
START i can, but i think the point's been made. friend of ours, ben was. yes, hmmm.
START come on, jim. go, let us. hmmmmmm.
START go on. finish. friend of yours, ben was, and. herh herh herh.
START go on. waiting to hear the rest, am i.
START tell us why you not, hmm?
START the point, would what be, hmm? already made up your minds, you have. excuse me, bones.
START if any doubt, you have, indeed captain james kirk of the enterprise, that was. yeesssssss.
START yes, i know. friend of his are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START in these trying times, of the few one. doctor leonard mccoy. and you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START areel shaw. and friend, i am, too. an old one. yeesssssss.
START of my old friends look like doctors all. of his look like you all. well, me for a drink you might as well join. with this inquiry coming up, going to need all the friends he can get, is he.
START recording inquiry. matter. captain kirk, james t. subject. of death circumstances, lieutenant commander finney, benjamin. hmmmmmm.
START begin with your relationship with commander finney, let us. for a long time you knew him, you did not, hmm?
START yes. an instructor at the academy, he was when i was a midshipman, but that did stand in the way of our beginning a close friendship not. his daughter jamie, here last night, who was, was named after me.
START common knowledge that something happened to your friendship, it is. hmmmmmm.
START no secret, is it. assigned to the same ship some years later, we were. i relieved him on watch once and found a circuit open to the atomic matter piles that, been closed, should have. another five minutes, blown up the ship could it have.
START i closed the switch and logged the incident. sent to the bottom of the promotion list, he drew a reprimand and was. yeesssssss.
START and for that he blamed you, hmm?
START yes. been at the academy for an unusually long time as an instructor, he had. as result, late in being assigned to a starship, he was. the delay, he felt, his record looked bad on. my action, he believed, made things worse.
START comment. to be appended this inquiry service record of lieutenant commander finney. hmmmmmm.
START get into the specifics of the storm, now let us, captain. yes, hmmm.
START at the top of the duty roster, his name was.
START if you, he blamed you.
START blamed me that he never rose to command a ship, he may have, but jobs on the basis of who blames me i assign not. finney's turn, it was, and him, i assigned him. just checked in with me from the pod, had he when we hit the leading edge of the storm. not too bad at first. i signalled a yellow alert. then we began encountering pressure, variant stress, force seven, the works. i finally signaled a red alert. finney knew, a matter of seconds, had he. i gave him those seconds and more. but apparently it was enough not.
START then why, captain, your ship does the computer log from, made automatically at the time, still on yellow alert, indicate that you were, hmm when you jettisoned and not on red? herh herh herh.
START know i not. been a mistake, there is. yes, hmmm.
START seem so, it would. could the computer be wrong, hmm?
START running a survey right now, mister spock is, but next to impossible, the odds are.
START stop recording. now, look, jim. not one man in a million could do what you and, done, have i. command a starship. hundred decisions a day, of lives staked on you making every one of them right hundreds. played out, you are, jim. exhausted. hmmmmmm.
START you see it is that the way, hmm? yeesssssss.
START physical breakdown. possibly even mental collapse. hmmmmmm.
START admitting a man died would i be because. yes, hmmm.
START thinking of the service, i am. have it smeared i will not.
START all right. his bad judgment by an evident perjurer who's either covering, his cowardice, or. yes, hmmm.
START as far as you go, that is, sir. telling you i was there on the bridge, i am. i know what happened. i know what i did. herh herh herh.
START in the transcript, it is, and lie computer transcripts not. telling you i am, captain, you accept a permanent ground assignment either, or the whole disciplinary weight of starfleet command is light right on your neck going to. yes, hmmm.
START so the way we do it now, that is, hmm? it under the rug sweep, and me along with it, hmm? your life not on. to fight i intend.
START draw it, hmm? it, i demand it. and right now, commodore stone. right now. herh herh herh.
START areel. here, doctor mccoy said you were. felt it in the air, should i have, like static electricity. hmmmmmm.
START get you everywhere, flattery will.
START four years, seven months, and of days an odd number. counting, not that i am.
START you look marvellous. changed a bit you have not. hmmmmmm.
START but changed for you, things have, they have not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START oh, heard about that, you have, have you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START lawyer in the judge advocate's office, am i, remember, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i remember. forget it, let us. much lost time to make up for, have we. yes, hmmm.
START taking it very lightly, you are.
START of an innocent man the confidence. yes, hmmm.
START are you, hmm? that is what the rumours indicate not. hmmmmmm.
START look, let us talk shop not. hmmmmmm.
START jim, ruin you, this could. you take some advice, will, hmm? yeesssssss.
START talk you into anything, i never could. all right. fire away. yes, hmmm.
START build its case on the basis of kirk versus the computer, the prosecution will. to defend on that basis now if your attorney tries, have a chance you will not. hmmmmmm.
START there, what other choice is, hmm?
START up to your attorney that is, and why he is got to be a good one, that is. herh herh herh.
START no, busy, i am busy. yes, hmmm.
START well, be able to handle two cases at once, a girl with your ability should. herh herh herh.
START jim, be serious. you are an ordinary human not. starship captain, you are, and stepped into scandal, you have. if any way they can do it, there is, slap you down hard and permanently for the good of the service, will they. herh herh herh.
START made any recommendation you still have not.
START samuel t. cogley, attorney at law. if save you, anyone can, he can. paying you a visit, he will be. jim, got to go, i have. yes, hmmm.
START areel, you still have told me how you know so much about what the prosecution's going to do not.
START because, jim kirk, my dear old love, the prosecution, i am, and to do my very best to have you slapped down hard, i have. of the service broken out, in disgrace. yeesssssss.
START spending some time together, i figure we will be, so in, i moved in. hmmmmmm.
START crowding you i hope i am not. herh herh herh.
START what's the matter, hmm? you like books, do not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START oh, them fine i like, but computer takes less space. herh herh herh.
START computer, huh, hmm? one of these in my office i got. contains all the precedents. of all the great legal decisions written throughout time the synthesis. i never use it.
START got my own system i have. books, young man, books. of them thousands. if so important time was not, show you something i would. my library. of books thousands. yeesssssss.
START and the point would what be, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to be either an obsessive crackpot who's escaped from his keeper or samuel t, you have. cogley, attorney at law. yeesssssss.
START afraid so i am. yeesssssss.
START now in session, this court is. appointed as members of this court space command representative lindstrom, i have, starship captains krasnovsky and chandra. captain kirk, i direct your attention to the fact that, a right to ask for substitute officers if you feel that any of these named harbour any prejudiced attitudes to your case, you have. yeesssssss.
START no objections, i have, sir. hmmmmmm.
START consent to the service lieutenant shaw as prosecuting officer and to myself as president of the court do you, hmm?
START mister spock, as first officer, you know a great deal about computers, you, do not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START possible for a computer to malfunction, is it, not is it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START know of any malfunction do you, hmm which has caused an inaccuracy in the enterprise computer?
START based on your mechanical survey of the enterprise computer ordered by the defendant prior to this trial, that answer is, not is it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START now the stardate. hmmmmmm.
START but inaccurate, the computer is, never the less. hmmmmmm.
START why say you that, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START pressed before the red alert, it reports that the jettison button was.
START in other words, then exist it reports that captain kirk was reacting to an extreme emergency that did not. yes, hmmm.
START and impossible, that is. hmmmmmm.
START is it, hmm? you watching him the exact moment he pressed the jettison button were, hmm?
START no, occupied, i was occupied. already on yellow alert, the ship was. yes, hmmm.
START then you dispute the finding of the log, how can, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i dispute not it. i merely state that, wrong, is it. yes, hmmm.
START oh, hmm? on what you base that statement, hmm?
START i know the captain. in, he is in. herh herh herh.
START to speculate instruct the witness not.
START lieutenant, half vulcanian, am i. speculate vulcanians not. i speak from pure logic. if positive gravity, i let go of a hammer on a planet that has, see it fall to know that it has in fact fallen i need not.
START i see not what that has to. yes, hmmm.
START gentlemen, characteristics just as inanimate objects do, human beings have. impossible for captain kirk to act out of panic or malice, it is. it is his nature not. hmmmmmm.
START your opinion in. hmmmmmm.
START yes. my opinion in.
START for the enterprise i now call the personnel officer. yes, hmmm.
START as personnel officer of the enterprise in the course of your duties, familiar with the service records of all aboard you would be, hmm?
START with to records officer finney reference, to close a circuit was there in his service record a reported disciplinary action for failure, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START and that officer, who was, hmm? herh herh herh.
START this courtroom now the captain kirk who sits in, hmm?
START to the stand i now call doctor mccoy.
START service rank, lieutenant commander. position, ship's surgeon. current assignment, uss enterprise. commendations, of honour legion. of valour awards. decorated by starfleet surgeons.
START just heard the testimony of your own personnel officer, you have, that, an action of the then ensign kirk, was it, which of the then lieutenant finney placed an unerasable blot on the record. psychologically, doctor, possible that lieutenant finney blamed kirk for the incident is it, hmm?
START hated kirk down through the years, he could have, for being passed over for promotion blamed him, for never being given a command of his own blamed him, correct, hmm? yeesssssss.
START have, he could have. hmmmmmm.
START now, hypothesise let us, doctor. normal for a person to return affection for hatred is it, hmm?
START tend to at first resent and then actively dislike the person who hates us do we not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START wait a minute. follow you i quite not. hmmmmmm.
START hypothetically. would captain smith begin to hate lieutenant commander jones once he learned that lieutenant commander jones hated and detested him not, hmm?
START well, yes, i suppose, happen, could it.
START then you, i ask you, possible that captain kirk became aware of lieutenant commander finney's hatred toward him and perhaps is it not, even involuntarily, to reciprocate began, hmm?
START any normal human, doctor. possible is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START but he is that kind of a man not. hmmmmmm.
START theoretically possible is it, doctor, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes. possible, it is possible.
START well, sir, the truth is, been holding back till we get this preliminary business out of the way i have. like to call captain kirk to the stand, would i.
START it please the court may.
START for the prosecution court recognises counsel. herh herh herh.
START of captain kirk the prosecution concedes the inestimable record. hmmmmmm.
START want to slow the wheels of progress i would not. but then on the other hand, want those wheels to run over my client in their unbridled haste i would not.
START of valour awards, of honour medal, with cluster silver palm, for conspicuous gallantry starfleet citation, of heroism karagite order.
START stop. i think, enough, that is. want to slow things up too much i would not.
START now, captain, despite what these machines indicate, you jettisoned the pod was there indeed a red alert before, hmm?
START tell us about it. hmmmmmm.
START the right thing, you did, but again, would you do it, hmm?
START given the same circumstances, do the same thing without hesitation, would i, because to save my ship, the steps i took in the order i took them were absolutely necessary if i were. and more important than my ship, nothing is. hmmmmmm.
START the prosecution wishs to dishonour this man not, but facts, facts are. invite the attention of the court and captain kirk to this visual extract from the enterprise computer log, i must. play back. what, about to see is precisely what took place on the enterprise bridge during the ion storm, you are.
START need somebody in the pod for readings, we will. yeesssssss.
START top of duty roster, mister finney is, captain. hmmmmmm.
START attention, commander finney, to pod for reading on ion plates report. herh herh herh.
START reverse. stop. with magnification on the panel go forward. freeze that. now signalling a yellow alert, captain kirk is. go forward, normal view. yes, hmmm.
START it fast make, ben. to go to red alert, i may have.
START our course hold, mister hanson. herh herh herh.
START to get out of there stand by, ben. yes, hmmm.
START as she goes steady, mister hanson.
START freeze that! if notice, the court will, the log plainly shows the defendant's finger pressing the jettison button. the condition signal reads yellow alert. not red alert, but simply yellow alert. when jettisoned, the pod containing lieutenant commander finney was, the emergency did as yet exist not.
START but the way it happened that is not.
START computers not lie. yes, hmmm.
START suggesting that i did are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START suggesting that maybe you did have a lapse, i am. possible, it was possible, you know, with under, the strain you were. still time to change our plea there is. get you off, i could. hmmmmmm.
START two days ago, have staked anything on my judgment, i would.
START for decisions just like that one i spent my whole life training. my whole life. possible that is it, hmm when the moment came? no. i know what i did. pull out if you want to, you can.
START no place to go, there is, to court and hear the verdict except back. yes, hmmm.
START run a complete megalyte survey on the computer, have i.
START tell you what you found, will i. nothing, right, hmm?
START to forget to thank you for your efforts not bitter enough.
START no. all bad it is not, mister spock. who knows. to beat your next captain at chess you may be able. kirk out. hmmmmmm.
START jamie. lieutenant commander finney's daughter, this is. hmmmmmm.
START mister cogley, got to stop this, we have. take a ground assignment make him. his fault i realise it was not. i will make any trouble not. his plea make him change. hmmmmmm.
START too late for that, it is, jamie, but i am glad you blame not me anymore for what happened.
START just so upset that night, i was. sorry, i am sorry.
START say any more, do not. hmmmmmm.
START but to, i have to. you and dad had been until i read through some papers he wrote i never realised how close, to mother and me letters. i know not how i ever could have thought that you. mister cogley, ruining jim will change what's happened not.
START very commendable, that is, miss finney, but most unusual. after all, accused of causing your father's death, captain kirk is, and indicate his guilt, the evidence would.
START just thinking of jim, i was.
START i know, and you, i thank you. to go and change i have. you ready, hmm?
START well, to see it to believe it, had i. hmmmmmm.
START about to lop off the captain's professional head, they are, and sitting here playing chess with the computer, you are.
START true, that is.
START why, thank you, doctor. just won my fourth game, i have. herh herh herh.
START for yourself observe. to king's pawn four rook.
START exactly. for chess some months ago i programmed it myself. the best i, been able to attain was a draw, should have. hmmmmmm.
START well, why just sitting there are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START transporter room, stand by. beaming down, we are.
START now in session, court is. entertain motions before delivering its verdict, the board will. for the prosecution counsel, hmm?
START for the defence counsel, hmm?
START sir, just been brought to my attention, some new evidence has. like to ask the court to, would i.
START objection! rested his case, counsel for the defence has.
START this evidence, of what nature is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i, tell you, cannot, have to show you, i will. yes, hmmm.
START is saving an innocent man's career a theatric, hmm? i. yeesssssss.
START kindly direct their remarks to the bench, counsels will.
START all but one. the most devastating witness against my client is a human being not. machine, it is, an information system. of the enterprise the computer log. this court adjourn and reconvene aboard that vessel can ask.
START and i repeat, of rights i speak. none, a machine has. man must. the right to face his accuser, my client has, and if you grant not him that right, brought us down to the level of the machine, you have. indeed, elevated that machine above us, you have. my motion be granted i ask that, and more than that, gentlemen. of humanity in the name, of the machine fading in the shadow, it, i demand it. it, i demand it!
START how many games of chess win from the computer did you, mister spock, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START for chess months ago i personally programmed the computer. to my own i gave the machine an understanding of the game equal. either the computer cannot make an error and assuming that i not, stalemate after stalemate would the best that could normally be hoped for be, and yet i beat the machine five times. someone, either accidentally or deliberately, of that computer adjusted the programming and therefore the memory banks.
START could, had an effect on the visual playback we saw, that have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START object! the witness, making a conclusion, would be. yeesssssss.
START hypothetically, mister spock. hypothetically, miss shaw. if you suggest had been done what, beyond the capabilities of most men would it be. is that true, hmm?
START what man aboard ship would it be beyond not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START and at the moment, no records officer, you have. hmmmmmm.
START affirmative. until lost, he was lost, lieutenant commander finney, our records officer was. hmmmmmm.
START captain kirk, you tell the steps you took to find mister finney after the storm, will, hmm?
START painstaking, it is, to find a man who's presumably injured and unable to respond thorough attempt in and around the ship.
START it presupposes, not does it, to be found that a man wishes, hmm? yeesssssss.
START your pardon i beg, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START of this size on a ship, could a man evade such a search, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to warp standing by, sir.
START full report to spacefleet command, shall i make, sir, hmm? yeesssssss.
START not yet. our beam they may trace. well out of range we wait until are.
START his range is can we know, captain, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START take an educated guess, we can. their solar system at the point we entered.
START of pursuit still no sign. instruments clear, sir. herh herh herh.
START to change may i take a moment, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes, you might i think. your glass slippers turn in. over, the ball is. yes, hmmm.
START to believe it ever happened hard.
START captain, about to warp we are. yeesssssss.
START to port hard, mister sulu.
START the planet gothos, that was, captain. herh herh herh.
START with as the mouse us. yes, hmmm.
START again, there it is. dead ahead.
START to starboard ninety degrees, mister sulu.
START turning, captain. nut veering off from it not.
START or us, it toward us.
START captain, beaming down you are not.
START yes, i am, doctor mccoy. going to see our playful mister trelane and whatever it takes to make him give up our ship, am i. stand by communications. mister spock. if you receive not a message from me within the hour, leave the vicinity at once. no turning back.
START weigh against you with the court, any attempt at demonstrations will, and unbreakable, this time my instrumentality is.
START had enough of your games, i have. herh herh herh.
START come to plead in your court i have not, trelane.
START you, i warn you. already been taken down in evidence against you, anything you might say has. hmmmmmm.
START come for one purpose, i have. to get back my ship.
START made you angry with our will to survive, have we, we have not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START then me alone vent your anger on. the one who led the others i was. the one who shot out your mirror machine, i was.
START and really think that was the only medium of instrumentality at my command did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i took that chance. willing to pay the price for chancing wrong, am i.
START oh, then admit to the charge, you do, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, anything! to continue its journey just allow the enterprise. you pompous.
START done you no harm, those people have. herh herh herh.
START living beings, we are, for your amusement not playthings.
START silence! over, this trial is. guilty, you are. on all counts, guilty, you are. and to your own laws according, no choice in fixing punishment, this court has. hang by the neck, you will, captain, until dead, you are, dead, dead! hmmmmmm.
START glad you weren't disappointed, i am.
START why, captain, still angry, you are. sustained that moment, would that i could have. ah, no matter. last request, you have, hmm?
START trelane, if you think, going to cheerfully and obediently stick my head in that noose, am i. yeesssssss.
START you still have learned not. no choice, you have. oh, becoming quite tiresome, this is. all so very easy, is it. hmmmmmm.
START your problem, that is, trelane. easy, everything is. given you a bad habit, it is. you are aware of it not, but it, you have. think you not, trelane. your problem, that is. you miss opportunities, like your anger before and mine right now. oh, you enjoy it, but you could have accomplished it without me not, and you know why, hmm? because bumbling, you are, inept fool.
START here, an opportunity to experience something really unique, you have, and wasting it, you are. you commit murder want to, hmm? go ahead, but the sport in a simple hanging, where is, hmm?
START yes. of murder the terror. the suspense. the fun. herh herh herh.
START oh, intrigued, i am intrigued. go ahead, captain. what you suggest, hmm? herh herh herh.
START personal conflict between us. like the duel before not, but the real thing. the stakes, human life. mine.
START the idea, that is.
START yes, but do better than that, you can. enough sport in just killing me with a sword there is still not. yeesssssss.
START i know. that, dull, will be. have to have something more fanciful, will we. me see let. hunt. royal hunt. predator against predator. now, you may go hide in the forest anywhere and i shall seek you like. that strike you, how does, captain, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START me very well it strikes. but have to make it worth my while, you will, trelane. up the stakes why not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes. playing our game, we while are, my ship free. it continue on its way let. in return, give you a contest you will remember, i will. yes, hmmm.
START to your ship always back. oh well. if add spice to the pursuit, will it, your terms i accept, captain.
START let me notify the enterprise that, go, can it.
START ah ha! captain kirk. try harder, you must, captain. too easy, this is.
START enterprise. enterprise, you hear me can, hmm?
START touche, captain. touche. confess you scored first, i must. but after all, this game before i never played.
START and have at it again, let now us! yeesssssss.
START remember, trelane. to let my ship go you promised. yeesssssss.
START yes, but such sport, this is. fetch all the others back to play, i must. so victory, this is. sweet taste, it has. down, captain. your knees on!
START you have won not, trelane. yes, hmmm.
START i have. run you through, i could! herh herh herh.
START but won anything you have not. hmmmmmm.
START your knees on, captain!
START no! still taste as sweet does it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START you, i order you. been beaten, you have. yes, hmmm.
START but defeated i am not.
START got a lot to learn about winning, you have, trelane. yes, hmmm.
START to defy me you dare!
START in fact, got a lot to learn about everything, you have, have you not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START fix you for that i will! you cheated! played the game right you have not. show you i will!
START no! no. this planet, you said i could have. yes, hmmm.
START gone far enough, this has.
START you always stop me when i am having fun. yeesssssss.
START disobedient and cruel, you are. told you before, have we.
START in now, time to come, trelane. yes, hmmm.
START but i want not to come in, and not, i will not. general, i am, and i will listen to you not.
START but why, hmm? i did do anything wrong not. just playing, i was. yes, hmmm.
START but finished studying my predators yet i have not.
START this is studying them not. yes, hmmm.
START if take proper care of your pets, you cannot, have them at all you cannot.
START oh, but winning, i was winning. winning, i was winning. hmmmmmm.
START beings, they are beings, trelane. spirit, they have spirit. superior, they are superior.
START grow up, you will, trelane. understand, you will. along, now come. herh herh herh.
START oh, but you said i could. you promised. any fun, i never have. yes, hmmm.
START stop that nonsense at once, or be permitted to make any more planets you will not.
START oh, but you saw. winning, i was winning. have won, i would. honest. yes, hmmm.
START have, i would have. have, i would have. have, i would have. i would. i would. i would. i would.
START captain, been disturbed, we regret that the life paths of yourself and your companions have. yeesssssss.
START you, who are, hmm? trelane, who is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START forgive our child, you must. ours for indulging him too much, the fault is. punished will he be. herh herh herh.
START have let him intercept you had we realised your vulnerability we would not.
START to enterprise captain. to enterprise captain. herh herh herh.
START me up beam, mister spock. free to go, we are.
START for normal approach colony beta six clears us, sir.
START for the record, how we describe him, hmm? pure mentality, hmm? of intellect force, hmm? embodied energy, hmm? superbeing, hmm? he, classified, must be, sir.
START of war god, mister spock.
START then small boy, and very naughty one at that. hmmmmmm.
START make a strange entry in the library banks, will it. yes, hmmm.
START then very strange small boy, was he. one the other hand, probably doing things comparable to the same mischievous pranks you played, was he when you were a boy.
START yes. dipping little girls' curls in inkwells. stealing apples from the neighbours' trees. tying cans on.
START forgive me, mister spock. known better, should i have. yes, hmmm.
START delighted, i shall be, captain.
START to shuttlecraft galileo captain. stand by, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START you, i remind you, captain, entirely opposed to this delay, am i. to get those emergency medical supplies to makus three in time for their transfer to the new paris colonies, your mission is. herh herh herh.
START i like not to take chances. out of control on new paris, the plague is. get those drugs there on time, we must.
START no problem. to galileo captain. take off all systems cleared for.
START three point seven. sir, i.
START your mind please make up, mister latimer. yes, hmmm.
START to be expected, that is, mister spock. extremely disruptive, quasars are. just how much, we not know. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, increasing, radiation is. herh herh herh.
START i cannot, sir. nothing happens.
START to enterprise galileo. to enterprise galileo. come in, please. yeesssssss.
START being drawn right into it, are we. hmmmmmm.
START to enterprise galileo. to enterprise galileo. out of control we are, of murasaki three one two being pulled directly into the heart. being hit by violent radiation on outer hull. course three point two five. herh herh herh.
START me a fix on the galileo try and get. yeesssssss.
START blank, scanners are, captain. we are getting a mass of readings, never seen, have i. nothing makes sense.
START to the ninth power metres negative ionic concentration one point six four times ten, radiation wave length three hundred seventy angstroms. harmonics upward along entire spectrum.
START it, what is, captain, hmm?
START ionized this complete sector, that thing out there has. of our instruments work none. at least four complete solar systems in the immediate vicinity. and out there somewhere, twenty four foot shuttlecraft, off course, of control out. child's play, finding a needle in a haystack would be.
START opposed to this from the very beginning, was i. of the very highest priority, our flight to makus three is.
START aware of that, i am, commissioner. at the same time, certain scientific duties i must perform, have i, and one, investigating the murasaki effect is.
START yes, but lost your crew, you have. yeesssssss.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START me do, what would you have, turn around and leave them there, hmm? yeesssssss.
START you should have sent them out in the first place not.
START yes, i agree. if nothing, we stand by and do, just giving them an invitation to come down and slaughter us we are.
START frequently appalled by the low regard you earthmen have for life, i am.
START well, practical about it, are we. they hit us i say we hit them before.
START to me seems logical. herh herh herh.
START it does, indeed. to me it seems logical, also. but to take life indiscriminately,
START i am interested in the opinion of the majority not, mister gaetano. weighed, must components be. to ourselves our danger as well as our duties to other life forms, friendly or not. third course, there is. hmmmmmm.
START get us killed, that could.
START not, i think not. doctor mccoy.
START to the ship you and yeoman mears return. assist mister scott in any way possible. back shortly will we be.
START gentlemen, follow my orders to the letter, you will, firing only when so instructed, and my designated targets at. herh herh herh.
START talking, you now are. yes, hmmm.
START fire to frighten, we will, mister gaetano, to kill not. hmmmmmm.
START oh, for the. you saw what, to latimer, did they! yes, hmmm.
START in command, i am, mister gaetano. the orders and the responsibility, mine, will be. follow me.
START the mists. see them i cannot.
START them, i hear them. directly ahead of us, they are. several, i believe. to two o'clock and to ten o'clock direct your phasers.
START yes, i know. but fortunately, giving the orders, am i. take aim please, and fire when i give a signal.
START killed them, i still say we should have. hmmmmmm.
START it was necessary not. do for us what needs to be done, fear will. mister boma, return with me to the galileo, you will. mister gaetano, you remain on guard here. with the ship keep in contact. herh herh herh.
START find them did you, hmm?
START yes, them, we found them. bother us again they will not.
START not, i hope not. an idea, scotty has.
START dangerous, it is dangerous, but work, it might work.
START adjust the main reactor to function with a substitute fuel supply, i can. hmmmmmm.
START all very well, that is, but substitute supply we have not. herh herh herh.
START aye, we do. our phasers. adapt them and use their energy, can i. take time, will it, but possible, it is possible.
START trouble is, to be our only defence they happen.
START also seem to be our only hope, they would. yeesssssss.
START they will attack for at least several hours not. by then, with luck, we, gone, will be.
START if get a full load, can i, be able to achieve orbit with all hands, we should. maintain it long, not that we can. yes, hmmm.
START to maintain it very long we have not, mister scott. in less than twenty four hours, forced to abandon its search in order to make a rendezvous will the enterprise be. if maintain orbit after that time, we cannot, it will make any difference not. if we burn up in a decaying orbit or die here on the planet's surface, we shall surely die. doctor, your phaser. to work go, mister scott.
START they came back all right, sir. my opinion in, now safe for human transport, the transporters are.
START good. the captain, this is. landing parties one, two, and three, to transporter room for immediate beaming down to surface of the planet report. ordinance condition one .
START captain, big planet, it is. sheer luck if our landing parties find anything, it will be. yeesssssss.
START depending on luck, i am, lieutenant. it is almost the only tool, that'll work, have we. hmmmmmm.
START to mister scott for conversion take this back, doctor. yeesssssss.
START to gaetano nobody knows what's happened, and like nothing's happened at all you hand over his phaser.
START just where going are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START certain scientific curiosity about what's become of mister gaetano i have. to the ship return, please.
START i not know. risk his neck locating gaetano and if he finds him, he will, just as liable to order him to stay behind, he is. you tell me. yeesssssss.
START really think the ship will ever leave do you, hmm?
START well, unless we get these phasers back it will not. yes, hmmm.
START well, mister spock, they did stay frightened very long not, did they, hmm? yeesssssss.
START most illogical reaction. our superior weapons we demonstrated. they, fled, should have. hmmmmmm.
START you mean they, respected us, should have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, rational process, respect is. ever occur to you they might react emotionally did it, with anger, hmm?
START doctor, i am responsible for their unpredictability not. yes, hmmm.
START perfectly predictable to anyone with feeling, they were. as well admit it you might, mister spock, your precious logic brought them down on us. yeesssssss.
START they done anything why have not, hmm?
START studying us, they are, for the moment.
START studying us, mister spock, hmm? to learn rather quickly they seem.
START all right, spock, all the answers, you have. what now, hmm?
START mister boma, increasingly hostile, your tone is.
START my tone is the only thing that is hostile not, mister spock! yes, hmmm.
START sick and tired of your logic, i am!
START use a little inspiration, we could. yeesssssss.
START strange. step by step, made the correct and logical decisions, have i. and died, yet two men have.
START and brought our furry friends down on us, you have. hmmmmmm.
START miscalculated regarding them, i do seem to have, and your parts inculcated resentment on. be greater than the whole the sum of the parts cannot.
START much longer how, mister scott, hmm?
START that will be long enough not. yeesssssss.
START doctor, only drain so fast, a phaser can.
START how long think those plates will hold out under this do you, hmm? got to do something, we have! hmmmmmm.
START got your hands full, you have. yeesssssss.
START at last report, getting some readings, were they. herh herh herh.
START interested in the last report i am not. i know now want to. herh herh herh.
START two hours and forty three minutes, you have, captain.
START oh, yes. so you are. well, girls, i suppose, turn something up, you can. yes, hmmm.
START we regret that some of, been made uncomfortable.balance of terror, you have. hmmmmmm.
START the ceremony, carried on all viewing screens, will be, sir. yes, hmmm.
START call for you from the bridge, there was.
START to outpost four maintain course. me informed keep. kirk out. yes, hmmm.
START since of the first wooden vessels the days, had one happy privilege, all shipmasters have. of uniting two people in the bonds of matrimony that. gathered here today with you, we are, angela martine, and you, robert tomlinson, of your fellows in the sight, with our laws and our many beliefs so that you may pledge your in accordance.
START now maximum, our speed is, sir. herh herh herh.
START position, this velocity eight minutes from outpost four at, sir. yes, hmmm.
START talked to my engine room, have i, sir. get more speed out of her we will. yeesssssss.
START there much doubt who's attacking cannot be, sir.
START mister spock, this star sector on our screen put. our position now show. to all decks signal this, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START what you know not and must be told is that my command orders on this subject are precise and inviolable. no act, no provocation.
START both these outposts and this vessel, considered expendable, will be. captain out. yeesssssss.
START been attacked, we know outpost four has, sir, so if we intercept romulans now.
START after a whole century, romulan ship look like, what will, mister stiles, hmm? radio and identify themselves, i doubt they will. hmmmmmm.
START no idea that history was your specialty, had i.
START family history. in the space service then, there was a captain stiles was. two commanders and several junior officers. all lost in that war, sir.
START their war, mister stiles. not yours. forget it, do not. yes, hmmm.
START to our nearest command base open a channel. our position and status quarter hour reports on. yeesssssss.
START battle stations. to battle stations all hands. battle stations. battle stations. all decks acknowledge. all decks acknowledge, sir. all stations show green. yes, hmmm.
START energise main phasers, mister styles. to full power all weapons. hmmmmmm.
START to full power all weapons. phaser control room.
START you will get off my hook this easily not. going to marry you, i am, mister, battle or phaser weapons notwithstanding. yeesssssss.
START well, meanwhile, temporarily at least, still your superior officer, i am. so with it get, mister.
START and my sensors showing on, captain. at least, still there, is it.
START sir, with outpost four regaining contact. to speakers switching. yes, hmmm.
START kirk here. minutes away, we are, hansen. your status what's, hmm?
START for us can you locate the intruder, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START in the neutral zone we are. enter they will not. if you refuse, me the glory of the kill permit, commander.
START attack, we will attack, but my order on.
START you require assistance here, will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START this time, handle things without your help, will we, vulcan. yeesssssss.
START stiles, you hear me can, hmm? fire! stiles! hmmmmmm.
START captain. to beam your survivors aboard our ship standing by. to abandon your vessel prepare. hmmmmmm.
START it serve to die, what purpose will, hmm?
START all right are you, mister spock, hmm?
START alive, i am alive, sir. but be i would not. me out of the phaser room mister spock pulled. my life he saved. his life after i he risked. yeesssssss.
START i saved a trained navigator so, return to duty, could he. capable of no other feelings in such matters, i am. yes, hmmm.
START we finally received an answer from command base, sir. support whatever decision you have to make, they say they will.
START it never makes any sense. to know that there was a reason, we both have. hmmmmmm.
START all right, i am. hmmmmmm.
START all great neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hands, will. yes, hmmm.
START that voice. back, he is back. that man on the stage. certain of it i am. kodos the executioner, that is. herh herh herh.
START you mean to tell me, called me three light years off my course just to accuse an actor of being kodos, you have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START kodos, he is kodos. sure of it, i am. yes, hmmm.
START you discovered a new food concentrate you said. to put in my log what am i supposed, you lied that, hmm? with false information that you diverted a starship, hmm? only in trouble you are not, put me in trouble, you have, too. yeesssssss.
START it to trap kodos, did i! hmmmmmm.
START dead, kodos is.
START we had believed this possible not. of your race show a unique hatred of captivity the customs and history. even when it is pleasant and benevolent, you prefer death. for our needs this makes you too violent and dangerous a species. hmmmmmm.
START use you he means that they cannot. free to go back to the ship, you are.
START and it, that is. no apologies. of us you captured one, of us threatened all. hmmmmmm.
START condemned the talosian race to eventual death, your unsuitability has. sufficient is this not, hmm?
START shown your adaptability, no other specimen has. our last hope, you were. yes, hmmm.
START but some form of trade would not, mutual cooperation. yes, hmmm.
START learn our power of illusion and destroy itself, your race would, too.
START get back to the ship let us. herh herh herh.
START i cannot. go with you i cannot. yes, hmmm.
START sir, it just came on. shut the power off we cannot.
START go with you, you see why i cannot.
START the female's true appearance, this is.
START me in the wreckage they found, dying, of flesh a lump. me, they rebuilt me. everything works, but never seen a human, had they. no guide for putting me back together, they had. hmmmmmm.
START necessary to convince you her desire to stay is an honest one, was it. hmmmmmm.
START give her back her illusion of beauty, you will, hmm?
START mister spock, coming on again, the system is. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, explicit, even if regulations are, come to me and explained, you could have.
START to face the death penalty ask you, too, hmm? enough, one of us was, captain. yeesssssss.
START er, mister spock, when finished, you are, come back and see me. i talk to you want to. this regret table tendency, been showing lately towards flagrant emotionalism, you have.
START to insult me i see no reason, sir. i believe, been completely logical about the whole affair, have i.
START to starbase eleven welcome, captain. to see you the commodore's waiting. curious why you suddenly changed course and came here, is he. hmmmmmm.
START to divert here immediately we received a subspace message asking us. herh herh herh.
START oh, jim, understand this, i just cannot. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock received a starbase transmission, of the enterprise a message from the former commander, fleet captain pike, urgently requesting that we divert here. herh herh herh.
START if my first officer states he received a transmission from. herh herh herh.
START jim, i am doubting anyone's word not. simply telling you it is impossible i am.
START you not know, hmm? you actually know not what's happened to captain pike, hmm? been subspace chatter about it for months, there is. sorry to have to be the one to show you, i am. upstairs in the medical section, is he. hmmmmmm.
START when promoted to fleet captain, was he. yes, hmmm.
START your age about. big, handsome man, vital, active. hmmmmmm.
START over the enterprise from him i took. for several years spock served with him.
START his problem what's, commodore, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of a cadet vessel inspection tour. old class j starship. of the baffle plates ruptured one. yeesssssss.
START still alive, he went in bringing out all those kids that were. to be prepared just wanted you gentlemen.
START once more, jose. here, spock stated he received a message for us to come. his log he entered same in. all the proof i require that is. hmmmmmm.
START and what those record tapes show, hmm? no message sent from here. your vessel no message received by. yeesssssss.
START then been deliberately changed, i suggest the record tapes have. change record tapes, a computer expert can, duplicate voices, say anything, say nothing.
START hospitalised, the fact remains that your first officer's former captain is, horribly injured, this base at, and to be the only one who heard that message that same first officer seems. herh herh herh.
START if requested a leave, he had wanted to see captain pike he could have. have granted it, i would. yes, hmmm.
START well, true of course, that is. herh herh herh.
START who would divert us here want to, hmm? no trouble in the space sector we are patrolling now, there is. no alien problems. yeesssssss.
START oh, introduced miss piper, have i, jim, hmm? captain kirk, this is, miss piper. yeesssssss.
START i recognized the captain immediately. mutual friend described you, sir. lieutenant helen johansson. yeesssssss.
START she knew you she merely mentioned, sir. herh herh herh.
START something to report, you have, miss piper, hmm?
START oh, yes, sir. afraid our investigation turned up very little, am i, commodore. , there is, of course, with captain pike mister spock's years of service. to this former commander indications of his extreme loyalty.
START miss piper, vulcan can no sooner be disloyal than, exist without breathing, can he. for his present commander that goes as well as his past.
START forced to consider every possibility, we are, sir. have sent a message we can be certain captain pike cannot. in his condition, under observation every minute of every day, is he. yeesssssss.
START and to move totally unable, jim. constructed to respond to his brain waves, his wheel chair is. oh, turn it, can he, it forwards move, or backwards slightly. yeesssssss.
START with the flashing light, say yes or no, he can.
START no way he could even have asked for that message to be sent, there is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to starbase enterprise. request confirmation. hmmmmmm.
START sir, security area, this is. what doing here are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START security clearance, i have, chief. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, this is. herh herh herh.
START you will discuss this with ship's crew or starbase personnel not. read do you, hmm?
START stand by. warp out of orbit in one hour, we will.
START tried questioning him, have they. almost agitated himself into a coma, he is. yes, hmmm.
START he live, how long will, hmm?
START as as any of us long. blast medicine anyway. learned to tie into every human organ in the body except one, we have. the brain. all about, the brain is what life is. now, think any thought that we can, that man can, and love, hope, as much as we can dream, but reach out he cannot, and reach in, no one can.
START to what no, hmm? question him for days, could they, weeks, they stumble on the right thing before. herh herh herh.
START bones, anything to do with spock, could this have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you at all i read not, jim.
START either a message was received, what i mean is. one of two things, it was. either someone sent a message diverting us here, or someone on board the ship lied about receiving it. could that someone be mister spock, hmm?
START jim, forgetting how well we both know spock, the simple fact that, a vulcan means he is incapable of telling a lie, is he.
START also half human, he is. yeesssssss.
START and completely submerged, that half is. completely embarrass him, to be caught acting like us or even thinking like us would. herh herh herh.
START he would make a false entry not. yes, hmmm.
START false entry in the log right now, there is which does not jibe with the established facts. how explain you that. hmmmmmm.
START well, it, what is, hmm? sickness, hmm? injury, hmm? it, how bad is, hmm?
START probably somebody discovered a hangnail. beam up and let you know i will, jim. yes, hmmm.
START oh, certifying i ordered you to read it, i am. this planet know anything at all about, hmm?
START with half vulcan science officer named spock.
START commodore! captain pike, gone, he is gone!
START mendez here. it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of orbit out, mister spock. with no navigator on duty seems strange.
START the enterprise knows where, going, is she, mister hansen.
START to hail us someone's trying, sir.
START maintain radio silence, lieutenant. first officer spock, this is. this date per starfleet orders, been placed in temporary command of the enterprise i have. secret, while our destination is, relatively simple, our mission is. assigned captain kirk medical rest leave until our return, starbase command has. his, his instructions are that you will obey my orders as you would. first officer out. yes, hmmm.
START what's going on around here, hmm? who said jim needed a medical rest leave, hmm? and me being needed aboard the ship this call about. checked everywhere, have i.
START doctor, to keep certain things from you i regret they elected. you come with me, will, please. yeesssssss.
START sir, scanners report an object following us, of a starbase shuttlecraft about the size. reverse helm, shall we, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START but our speed at, never catch us, they will. in case they reach us want to. yes, hmmm.
START your orders, you have, mister hansen. make no contact, we will. hmmmmmm.
START to enterprise starbase shuttlecraft one. come in, please. enterprise, commodore mendez and captain kirk. if you read me, ordered to reply, you are. it on all emergency frequencies repeating, jim.
START headed for talos four, spock is, all right. herh herh herh.
START of us fast pulling ahead. down to sixty three point three, fuel is. if we turn back now, just got barely enough to get us back to the base, we have.
START to enterprise shuttlecraft, come in. to enterprise shuttlecraft, come in. enterprise, come in!
START to sensors lock on. measure object now following the enterprise.
START computed. class f shuttlecraft, object is. duranium metal shell, ion engine power.
START stop. to starbase how long before shuttlecraft's fuel supply forces return, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START computed. already past point of safe return, shuttlecraft is. yeesssssss.
START you any way blast. no right to come along, you had.
START of oxygen left two hours.
START dead if he makes it to talos four, is he. why would he get pike there want to, hmm? to mankind the command reports stated talos contained absolutely no practical benefits.
START some logical reason for going there, spock would have. yes, hmmm.
START maybe. maybe, just gone mad, is he.
START with the same answers i keep wondering who might be after us in a shuttlecraft and i keep coming up, but be right i cannot, can l, mister spock.
START computer control. to shuttlecraft following us lock on.
START to tape abel seven baker go. execute instructions. yes, hmmm.
START the captain is it, mister spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START sir, reversing, the engines are. brought herself to a dead stop, she is.
START the first officer speaking, this is. security, to the bridge send an armed team. transporter room, to beam captain kirk aboard stand by. effective until then, in operational command, lieutenant hansen is. hmmmmmm.
START first officer out. doctor, as senior officer present, to you for arrest i present myself.
START mutiny, the charge is, doctor. to take command i never received orders.
START mister spock is, er, under arrest. to quarters enough is confinement, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START adequate, doctor. make no trouble i will. hmmmmmm.
START all right, captain. to you locked on. yeesssssss.
START to you transferring command, sir. yeesssssss.
START accepting command. mister spock, where is, hmm?
START his quarters in, under arrest. herh herh herh.
START his quarters, after what, done, is he, lieutenant, hmm? yeesssssss.
START reverse power. this position hold. to report tell whoever gave those orders. hmmmmmm.
START sir, nobody up there giving orders, there is. the computers running the ship, mister spock has.
START to comply unable. hmmmmmm.
START convened, this hearing is. mister spock, aware of your right to counsel of your choice, you are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of no less than three command officers a mutiny requires a trial board. since only two of that rank available, there are. yeesssssss.
START sir, three officers of command rank available, i must point out that there are. yourself, commodore mendez, and captain christopher pike. yes, hmmm.
START denied. complete invalid, captain pike is. herh herh herh.
START find he is still on the active duty list, i believe you will. hmmmmmm.
START have the heart to retire him we did not, jim. got you, he is. up to, he whatever is, planned it well, he is. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, aware in pleading guilty that a further charge involving the death penalty must be held against you should this vessel enter the talos star group are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START why, hmm? what accomplish to go there or to take captain pike there does it, hmm? i know why want to.
START of the record are your comments a part, sir, hmm?
START yes, on the record, is it. herh herh herh.
START to comply with the request you just made, sir, that i explain the importance of talos four going to. herh herh herh.
START by asking why, opened the door to any evidence he may wish to present, you have. apparently what, in mind, had he. hmmmmmm.
START your evidence present. screen on.
START thirteen years ago, this is. the enterprise and its commander, captain christopher pike.
START tell you at this time, i cannot, sir. yes, hmmm.
START unless the court asks a prisoner why, commodore. ask that question, you did. yes, hmmm.
START maneuvered into asking, you mean i was. out of order, your evidence is. yes, hmmm.
START forced to contest that i am, commodore. i see more want to. hmmmmmm.
START that right, you have, captain, but just because the prisoner is your first officer and your personal friend.
START nothing to do with it, that has.
START as i stated, gentlemen, thirteen years ago, this was. on routine patrol, we were when the ship's sensors detected something ahead. at first we were certain what it was not. yes, hmmm.
START the meteorite beam has deflected it not, captain.
START as we go steady. yes, hmmm.
START keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way, they were. herh herh herh.
START fix, i have. it comes from the talos star group. yes, hmmm.
START with a survey expedition their call letters check. s.s. columbia disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago. yeesssssss.
START take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here, it would. yes, hmmm.
START never been explored, records show the talos group has. to earth solar system similar, eleven planets. to be class m number four seems, oxygen atmosphere. yes, hmmm.
START we are going to go not, to be certain, hmm?
START of survivors not without any indication, no. to the vega colony and take care of our own sick and injured first continue. the helm, you have. maintain present course. yeesssssss.
START right that is. unless we get anything more positive on it, to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent it seems. like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, i would, too. hmmmmmm.
START oh, with yours i concur, definitely. yeesssssss.
START good. glad you do, am i, because going to stop first at the vega colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also, are we. what the devil putting in there are you, ice, hmm?
START you think i need one what makes, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START sometimes a man will tell his bartender things, never tell his doctor, will he. your mind what's been on, chris, the fight on rigel seven, hmm? yeesssssss.
START it be should not, hmm? my only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
START was there anything you personally, done to prevent it, could have, hmm?
START oh, smelled trouble, should i have when i saw the swords and the armour. of that instead, of their warriors i let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one.
START chris, meet, you set standards for yourself no one could. like a human being except yourself you treat everyone on board, and now, tired and you, you are.
START you bet, tired, am i. you bet. tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives, i am. tired of deciding i am which mission is too risky and which is not, and not, who's going on the landing party and who does, and who lives and who dies. boy, had it i have, phil.
START to the point of finally taking my advice, rest leave, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, for one thing, go home. with fifty miles of park land around it nice little town. remember i told you, two horses, had i, and to take some food and ride out all day we used.
START ah, that sounds exciting. with a picnic lunch every day ride out. herh herh herh.
START one place i might go that i said is. i might go into business on regulus or on the orion colony. hmmmmmm.
START the only life available the point is this is not. whole galaxy of things to choose from there is.
START beginning to talk like a doctor, you now are, bartender. hmmmmmm.
START take your choice. of customers we both get the same two kinds. the living and the dying.
START the captain, this is. the talos star group, our destination is. hmmmmmm.
START screen off. mister spock, truly amazed at your technical prowess in somehow manufacturing all this, i am. you on your imagination i congratulate. but court of space law, this is, not a theatre. yes, hmmm.
START in no position to bargain, you are. ridiculous, this is. this man mutinied, your ship stole, abducted captain pike. well, for gone far enough, me this has. herh herh herh.
START heard the full story we still have not. to continue i vote. hmmmmmm.
START and not, i vote we do. deadlock, and since i am.
START not a deadlock. still one member of the trial board to be heard from, there is. yes, hmmm.
START settled into orbit, we have, sir. yes, hmmm.
START our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, with inert elements but well within safety limits heavy. herh herh herh.
START of earth zero point nine.
START captain, hmm? reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. as it, i read it, as rounded metal bits they polarise out. parts of a spaceship hull, could be.
START of six prep a landing party. to it you feel up, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START sorry, number one. with this planet little information on, have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us, we will.
START no indication of problems down there there is, but take chances let us not.
START yes, sir. canyon to the left, there is. set you there completely unobserved, we can.
START man: men, they are men. humans, they are humans. yeesssssss.
START the same old earth, and see it very soon, you will. hmmmmmm.
START and you will believe how fast you can get back not. well the time barrier's been broken. our new ships can. yeesssssss.
START vina, this is. dead, her parents are. born almost as we crashed, was she. yeesssssss.
START begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly, will we.
START yes, affirmative on the. yeesssssss.
START to be healthy and intelligent you appear, captain. prime specimen.
START forgive her choice of words, you must, captain. lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists, she is. herh herh herh.
START if they can, er, sp a moment are you, like to make my medical report, would i.
START i think, time to show the captain our secret, is it. yeesssssss.
START excellent, their health is, almost too good. herh herh herh.
START reason for our condition, there is, but had some doubt if earth is ready to learn the secret, we have. let the girl show you. accept your judgment, we will. yeesssssss.
START tired, you are, but worry, do not. feel much better soon, you will. you see it, do not, hmm? here and here. yes, hmmm.
START i, i not understand. yeesssssss.
START you will. perfect choice, you are.
START it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START for you plead signal, sir. go ahead, uhura. yeesssssss.
START receiving transmissions from talos four, hmm? then been seeing are we the images have. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, aware of the orders regarding any contact with talos four, you are. deliberately invited the death penalty, you have. you have only finished yourself not, spock, but finished your captain as well, you have.
START the commodore, aware that captain kirk knew nothing of this, must be. hmmmmmm.
START and aware a captain is responsible for everything that occurs on his ship, you are. to return this vessel back to manual control i order you.
START sir, decline, i respectfully decline. hmmmmmm.
START very well. earned the consequences, you have. in recess, this court is. herh herh herh.
START do you know what, doing, you are, hmm? lost your mind have you, hmm?
START captain, jim, stop me, do not. let him stop me, do not. your career and captain pike's life, is it. see the rest of the transmission, you must. yeesssssss.
START no matter where, travelled in the galaxy, have i, jim, more like home than anywhere else, this bridge is. yeesssssss.
START to me, always like my child, was she. there in the san francisco navy yards, was i when her unit components were built.
START jim, realise how many of the tools i use in sickbay were designed by sarah i did not. hmmmmmm.
START as with warp drive the first medical officer aboard a ship equipped, afraid i had to come up with new ideas all the time, am i.
START unnecessary, your modesty is, mrs. april. well known, your achievements as a pioneer doctor in space are.
START and nice to know the lady is as intelligent as she is beautiful, it is. much like the flower she carries. hmmmmmm.
START oh, doctor, get you everywhere, flattery will. but afraid my flower is dying, am i. yeesssssss.
START native of capella four, is it, is it not, hmm?
START yes, but life span of only a few hours, it has. seedling, this morning it was, within a few hours it, dead, will be.
START excuse me, captain. to be notified you asked when we made visual contact with the beta niobe nova. yes, hmmm.
START thank you, mister spock. mrs. april, about to see another of the galaxy's most beautiful sights, you are, the beta niobe's supernova.
START beautiful, it is beautiful, but also very deadly. hmmmmmm.
START travelling at a safe distance from the nova, we are, mrs. april.
START beta niobe. present, you were when the star first started its explosion, jim.
START captain, picking up an unidentified object travelling at an incredible speed, sensors are, with the enterprise presently on collision course.
START put the ship on red alert. how fast travelling is it, mister spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START be impossible to achieve, at a speed that should. of warp thirty six something on the order.
START ever been recorded as travelling at that speed, no natural object has. yes, hmmm.
START natural object i believe it is not, but ship. herh herh herh.
START but who, the technology to build a ship that could travel at such a speed, would have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no known race, captain. nevertheless, contact us in one point four minutes, it will.
START hard about, helmsman. for twenty four mark seven change course. herh herh herh.
START correction, captain. on a collision course only by coincidence, the ship was. apparently heading for the heart of the beta niobe nova, it is. yes, hmmm.
START captain, that ship is responding not. herh herh herh.
START all right, if talk they will not, slow them down, we will. mister sulu, put a tractor beam on that ship.
START having a small effect on other ship's speed, we are, captain. dropped to a speed of warp thirty two, it has.
START captain, making visual contact, are they. hmmmmmm.
START it on the screen put, lieutenant. hmmmmmm.
START never heard that language before, have i. yeesssssss.
START run that message through the universal translator, lieutenant uhura. speaking in, perhaps it can tell us what language she is. hmmmmmm.
START captain, the answer, the universal translator has. speaking the same universal language we speak, the woman is, but speaking in reverse, she is. yes, hmmm.
START lieutenant, hear that tape backward, let us, which to us should sound forward.
START open hailing frequencies again, lieutenant. tell her, endangering her life if she remains on her present course, is she.
START no use, sir. refusing to answer, she is. hmmmmmm.
START yes, scotty, it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START mister arex, our speed, what is, hmm?
START mister spock, with the beta niobe nova how long until the alien vessel makes contact, hmm?
START no choice, i have. to release the tractor beam i have. destroy this ship and four hundred and thirty people to save one person, i cannot. mister sulu, our beam release. yes, hmmm.
START sir, i, release the tractor beam, cannot. yes, hmmm.
START what you mean, mister sulu, hmm? yeesssssss.
START inoperative, our controls are. responding like it should the ship is not. yes, hmmm.
START to manual override go.
START got to release that beam, we have, or going to follow that ship into the nova, are we! yes, hmmm.
START now warp twenty, our speed is, and contact the nova in one minute fifty eight point three seconds, the other ship will.
START sorry, i am sorry, commodore, mrs. april. it looks as though we may reach babel not.
START as starship personnel, always prepared to give our lives, we were, captain. hmmmmmm.
START still starship personnel, are we, captain. yes, hmmm.
START still one chance, there is. after that ship enters the nova, burn up and break contact with our tractor beam, it should. mister spock, to apply full braking power and execute course change, how long will we have, hmm?
START up to warp twenty two and increasing, we are, captain. forty two point eight five seconds to correct our course after the alien ship enters the nova, we shall have.
START mister scott, going to apply full braking power in a minute, we are.
START aye, captain. almost gone, our engines are. yes, hmmm.
START contact beta niobe in fifty two point three seconds, the alien vessel will, captain.
START contact in thirty nine seconds. thirty eight, thirty seven. yes, hmmm.
START thirteen, twelve, eleven. yeesssssss.
START to execute course change get ready, mister sulu. hmmmmmm.
START something's wrong, captain. still being pulled by the alien ship, we are. yes, hmmm.
START impossible. been destroyed instantly, should it have.
START apparently, not, was it, captain. still connected to her, our tractor beam is.
START and still increasing speed, we are. with the nova in thirty five point one eight seconds contact.
START been able to survive the heat of a nova, that other ship may have, but the enterprise cannot. mister scott, how about that full braking power, hmm?
START as badly off as before, are we, captain. no control of the ship as long as that alien lassie has us in tow we have.
START got to work, it is.
START fourteen seconds, thirteen, twelve. yes, hmmm.
START never mind, mister spock, no use, it is.
START still here, we are. lieutenant uhura, can, us a visual, you get, hmm? herh herh herh.
START we, where are, hmm?
START yes, scotty. we doing down there, how are, hmm?
START well, to learn to run the ship all over again we just had. working in reverse, every control is. yeesssssss.
START all right. lieutenant uhura, going to contact that ship again we are. we need some answers.
START sure captain kirk has other problems besides your flower, am i, dear.
START understand you not. about to die, before we entered this universe it was. and now, in full bloom again, is it. yes, hmmm.
START as if it were growing younger again, it is. holding it i i can almost feel it while am.
START captain, the flower is the only thing on board that is growing younger not. herh herh herh.
START also running backward, ship's chronometers are. reversed in this universe, the flow of time is. the longer we stay here, the younger, become, will we.
START responding to our call, the alien ship is, captain.
START understand her now, i can, without of the universal translator the aid.
START also working in reverse, apparently our brains are, captain, so now understand her language, we can. why the ship seems to be operating in the reverse to us, that is.
START captain james t kirk of the uss enterprise, i am. to prevent you from entering the beta niobe nova we tried. burn up, we assumed your ship would. yes, hmmm.
START you, who are, hmm? how come to be in our universe did you, hmm?
START her universe in, dead star, a nova is which comes to life! and of a nova in her universe and one in our universe occur together when the explosions, possible to travel between the two universes, it is.
START then return the same way, we must, through the two novas.
START little choice we have.
START gentlemen, sure none of us mind growing younger instead of older for a change i am. yes, hmmm.
START me, it pleases me, jim. if we stay here long enough, no longer be at the mandatory retirement age, i will. yeesssssss.
START nevertheless, open to suggestions i we must return home and am.
START logical that we must reproduce the conditions that brought us here, it is. occupy the same space in both universes in order to create a gateway for us to travel through, two novas must. our universe one star dying in, and recreate the correct conditions, one being born here would.
START take a remarkable coincidence, that would, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START tell karla five that mister spock, commodore april and myself, beaming down, will be. yeesssssss.
START given us coordinates to beam down to her son's laboratory, karla five has, captain.
START her son, hmm? we have not time for children's games right now, scotty, but beam us down.
START my son may i introduce, karl four.
START most logical. if reversed, the flow of time is, then born at an old age, one is, and dies in infancy. born before you, your descendants are, and born after you, your ancestors are.
START then the young child in the playpen.
START remain forever awed with the differences between our universes, we could, karla five, but discover a way to return to our positive matter universe, we must.
START to coordinate this to our own universe we need. that, can we do, spock, hmm?
START assuming beta niobe and amphion occupy the same space, any other novas occupying the same space in both universes, we can determine if there are. herh herh herh.
START correct, commodore. now if, watch the star map, you will, see the milky way, you will. beta niobe, here is, and earth, here is. with arret it corresponds exactly. by superimposing both star maps, see where two stars occupy the same place in both universes we will. in the same space, the red spheres indicate where two stars are. novas in both universes, no pair are. yeesssssss.
START if bring one of them to life prematurely, stars begin as dead stars here then we could. hmmmmmm.
START yes, act as a midwife giving birth to a star, we could. then we, two novas in the same position and theoretically return home, would have. hmmmmmm.
START but to pass through the novas at my ship's top speed to avoid burning up, i had. capable of such a speed your ship is not. yes, hmmm.
START true, that is, captain.
START welcome to use my ship, you are, captain.
START crew of four hundred and thirty, i have, karla five. suitable for only a few people, your ship is.
START use her ship to transport us we cannot, captain, but use it as an unmanned ship with our tractor beam attached, we could. hmmmmmm.
START work, it could work. how we arrived here in the first place, that is. hmmmmmm.
START work, it should work, yes. but plunging tail first into a supernova, any miscalculation anywhere along the way and we will be.
START to babel after all we just might get you, commodore.
START glad to get home, i will be, but to babel not necessarily. of my career it only means the end, jim.
START yes, karla five. burn to a crisp or escape into our own universe, will we. either way, never hear from us again, you will. for the sacrifice of your vessel thank you.
START meeting the speed of karla five's unmanned vessel, we are, captain.
START to the time of birth how much time before the youngest crew member returns, hmm?
START eighteen minutes thirty seven seconds in real time. but long before that we shall all be children. and, captain, that also means, losing our knowledge at an alarming rate, are we. soon be unable to operate the enterprise, it is possible we will.
START our course, how is, mister sulu, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START know i not. what am i doing here, hmm? all this equipment, what is, hmm?
START too young, is he, captain. yeesssssss.
START mister arex, take over for him. lieutenant uhura, to navigation console report. hmmmmmm.
START sorry, i am sorry, sir, all this equipment i understand not. what i do with these controls, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START never mind. spock, for sulu and uhura can you fill in, hmm?
START yes, captain, but fill in for you, who will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START what you mean, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START at what age become a starship captain did you, hmm? and when enter starfleet academy did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START you mean i see what. yes, hmmm.
START as vulcan, i age the slowest. capable of assuming command longer than anyone else will i be. but become too young to know what to do i even will.
START ten minutes fourteen point twenty one seconds, captain. to spare we shall arrive with only moments. need to disconnect the tractor beam at the appropriate time we will. herh herh herh.
START tractor beam, hmm? how we do that, spock, hmm?
START captain, assume command, i must. no longer able to command the enterprise, you are. herh herh herh.
START you say whatever. what shall i do, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, as long as, aboard, am i, senior officer, i am. to pull rank i hate, but capable of command only for a few minutes will you be, to complete the manoeuvres necessary to take us home not long enough.
START correct, you are, of course. commodore april, yours, command is. yes, hmmm.
START commodore, hmm? captain april, i am, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START to them make sure no harm comes, sarah. we have to ignite that dead star if, going home, are we. mister spock, still capable of following orders, you are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START very good. your post at the navigation console assume.
START directly ahead, the dead star is, captain, of galactic plane twelve degrees south.
START vessel armed, captain. to impact nine seconds. eight, seven, herh herh herh.
START hang on, going right into the heart of the nova, are we. yeesssssss.
START it, we did it! home again we are! all right, we are. home, we are home. stopped, the reverse aging process has.
START but the enterprise crew, all children, they are.
START enter the transporter, can they. of their original molecular structure it retains a memory. hmmmmmm.
START but what about us, hmm? to use the transporter we have not. remain young, we can, our lives over again live. command a starship once more, you could. hmmmmmm.
START to be able to live one's life over again what a blessing, if the life, led has left you unfulfilled, you have. no sarah, i want not to live it all over again. i could improve one bit on what we have had together not.
START received a message from the federation that might bring you some cheer, we have. lieutenant uhura, to commodore april and his wife would you relay it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of commodore april's heroic actions aboard the uss enterprise this stardate in view, reviewing his mandatory retirement, we are, and consider his appeal to remain federation ambassador at large, will. yeesssssss.
START well, good. just because someone is seventy five years old does not mean they are ready to stop giving service to the galaxy! hmmmmmm.
START blossomed again, i see your flower has.
START yes, our trip into the negative universe gave it a second life. of us a second life it gave all. yeesssssss.
START to thank you and the others of your federation for your invaluable assistance we of dramia wish, captain kirk. herh herh herh.
START our medical assistance programs we hope through. to develop and strengthen relations with star systems such as yours, supreme prefect. well, shall we, hmm? to enterprise kirk. beam us aboard, scotty.
START if so kind you would be, captain. yeesssssss.
START here a warrant for the arrest and trial of one of your party, i have, captain.
START the wanton slaughter of hundreds of people is a joke not, captain. yes, hmmm.
START slaughter, hmm? of people hundreds, hmm?
START to this according, responsible for a plague, doctor mccoy was which ravaged the planet dramia two some nineteen years ago, captain.
START me see that let.
START as note, you will, captain, perfectly in order, the warrant is, your own federation approved by.
START doctor mccoy arrested, hmm? for murder, captain, hmm? sir, if to beam down you want me and some of the men, just in case.
START your doctor mccoy headed a mass inoculation programme on dramia two, nineteen years ago. when his force left, massive plague struck the planet, of its people killing most.
START that means he was responsible for it not. yeesssssss.
START tell, his trial will, captain.
START trial, hmm? you mean kangaroo court. heard about dramian justice, i have. herh herh herh.
START captain, becoming emotional, you are. yes, hmmm.
START of course i am. bones harming other beings. you know better, spock. better, i know better. not bones.
START i wish as sure could i be, jim. i, i just not know. possible that i really did is it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START been coincidence could the termination of your inoculation programme and the subsequent outbreak of plague have, doctor. yeesssssss.
START or my part a tragic mistake on. hmmmmmm.
START i buy not that, bones. guard! herh herh herh.
START be assured by your friend's plans, do not. swift, dramian justice is. to save you too swift for them, perhaps. hmmmmmm.
START no, captain. spotty, the historical records of this solar system are, at best, going back nineteen years. technical data, they mostly are, meteor showers, auroras, radiation reports.
START it is there. herh herh herh.
START plague, dramia two. of unknown origin, of victim characterised by pigmentation changes in skin, debilitation, death. natural immunity, certain species known to have, notably vulcan. hmm. interesting. herh herh herh.
START sure, you are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, commander. planning to visit dramia two to investigate the case, the earth captain is. hmmmmmm.
START of arrival estimated time, mister sulu, hmm?
START to warp six increase, mister scott. we may be racing against time.
START contact i shall make, sir, hmm? yeesssssss.
START planning something, you are, captain, hmm?
START my guess unless i miss, friend demos, that is. herh herh herh.
START he attacks what if, sir, hmm?
START he, why should, hmm? we have contacted him not, so we must have detected him not. have to explain an attack, he would. besides, probably prefer to sneak aboard, he will, seeing that we carelessly left the hangar doors open.
START but open the hangar doors are not, captain.
START ah, yes. take care of that oversight, you, will, mister sulu, hmm?
START now, now, demos. hardly in a position to take on an entire crew, you are.
START and you are in authority to conduct an investigation in our star system not.
START remind me to report my conduct to the federation, you will, will you mister spock not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to the federation now i demand that you report!
START i would, but out of communications range we unfortunately are. yes, hmmm.
START then proceed to your starbase and report your act, will i.
START stowaway, you are, commander.
START been tricked, have i.
START good. then safe for us to beam down to dramia two, it is. shall we, gentlemen, hmm?
START sure it is safe, you are, captain, hmm?
START decidedly. difference, there is, captain.
START now, now, mister spock, you are trying to scare our dramian friend not, are you, hmm? of course, you can back out if, like, you would, commander. yeesssssss.
START ever been to i not the most enchanting place have. hmmmmmm.
START of flowers plagues seldom leave behind fields, captain. herh herh herh.
START outsiders they like not.
START an outsider surely you are not, commander. dramian, you are. yeesssssss.
START between the world of the living and the world of the walking dead, the distinction here is. yeesssssss.
START inhospitable or not, he must get away not. hmmmmmm.
START disappeared, he is disappeared. almost as if he dematerialised, it is. hmmmmmm.
START advise against that i would, captain. hmmmmmm.
START i am sure you will mind if i ignore your advice not. yes, hmmm.
START seem to be advisable, caution would, captain. herh herh herh.
START on the line, bones' life is, mister spock.
START cave dwellers, hmm? of your civilisation in the midst, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of your doctor mccoy and his inhumane methods a result. yes, hmmm.
START you say it, demos, but not, that does. herh herh herh.
START you, he attacked you because you are an earthling, captain, mccoy, even as was. yeesssssss.
START but how survive the plague did he, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START he, like the others who remain here, was away at the time. to their planet to find that their families had succumbed to the plague they returned. he and a few others, their grief senseless in, to live here in desolation chose. you see, captain, no actual survivors, there were. herh herh herh.
START then tell us, you can. remember do you, hmm?
START with the disease in our computer records the pigmentation changes associated, captain.
START get underway for dramia, let us. hmmmmmm.
START sir, that, who is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START pour on the coal, i will, captain.
START hope the trial hasn't started, let us.
START yes, mister spock. it, what is, hmm?
START hardly fit to testify at the trial, he is, captain. yeesssssss.
START got to save him, we have. yeesssssss.
START that it is not. it is.
START captain, blue, you are.
START been activated, general order six has, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START good. to sickbay report, mister sulu. hmmmmmm.
START but sir, monitor, who will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i assure you, capable, am i, mister sulu. yeesssssss.
START to get mccoy, we have. must find an antidote.
START the enterprise, this is. speak with the supreme prefect, i must.
START incapacitated, the captain and all of the crew members are. aboard the enterprise, the plague is.
START the same. release doctor mccoy temporarily, you must. needed to find an antidote, he is. hmmmmmm.
START witness in mccoy's behalf, we have. trust me, you must.
START impossible. stricken, he too is. yeesssssss.
START to get mccoy got.
START if permit me, you will, captain, to get mccoy i might be able. yeesssssss.
START infect the planet, i cannot, captain. and get mccoy i can. yeesssssss.
START spock, and jim gone out of your minds have you, hmm? why, jailbreak, this is! yeesssssss.
START doctor, with me, just come, please. yeesssssss.
START no, spock. illegal, it is illegal, what it is, that is. besides, stand trial, i must. to find out, have i.
START doctor, stand trial, you will, find out, you will, found and antidote for the plague, you after have which is about to kill everyone aboard the enterprise. hmmmmmm.
START plague, hmm? you tell me why did not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START you would give me a chance not. you realise, doctor, if you go, and to find an antidote fail, die, you too will.
START doctor i am, spock, doctor. get us beamed aboard. hmmmmmm.
START negative, doctor. the file on all known diseases recognises not these symptoms of pigmentation changes.
START blast it, spock, work harder. in the terminal stage, are they. yes, hmmm.
START my readings keep shifting. the activity of that blasted aurora, it must be. yes, hmmm.
START bones, it, that is. aurora, changing colour. hmmmmmm.
START jim, hmm? aurora, hmm? what.
START because caused by the aurora, were they. spock, an aurora nineteen years ago, there was. i remember. yeesssssss.
START i did do it not! spock, the disease, it, what is, hmm? what's the antidote, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, i think i do. but what has, to do with anything, that got, hmm?
START spock, you mean i see what. his blood saurian virus antibodies in, what made him immune that is. hmmmmmm.
START i presume, doctor, supply of live saurian virus antibodies in your laboratory, that you have, hmm?
START bones, it, you did!
START to thank you we of dramia wish, doctor, for of the antidote your discovery which frees us from future attacks of the auroral plague. hmmmmmm.
START even forget about the unorthodox manner of your release, we will, doctor. hmmmmmm.
START and forget about a certain stowaway, will we.
START apologise, we must apologise.
START time we got aboard ship, i think it is, it is not, jim, hmm? herh herh herh.
START gentlemen, i know not about you, but ready to get back to starbase, i am. herh herh herh.
START and ready to get back to some of that monotonous, i am, old, routine sickbay work. herh herh herh.
START including, hope, i would hope, of that monotonous some, to the crew old dispensing of the regular vitamin rations. hmmmmmm.
START that supposed to mean, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, been derelict in your duties of late, you have, doctor. yeesssssss.
START spock, you know as well as i do what we have all just been through. hmmmmmm.
START hippocrates would have approved of lame excuses not, doctor. herh herh herh.
START why, that, that. jim, if ever in jail again i am, send that vulcan to release me, do not. me rot just let.
START mister sulu, to a new heading of nine oh two mark six bring us about.
START romulans, captain. apparently lying in wait on the far side of that asteroid, were they. hmmmmmm.
START negative. outnumbered three to one, we have suffered damage and we are. the better part of valour, i think this is an instance where discretion is.
START captain, established contact with the romulan commander, have i.
START for this unprovoked attack i demand an explanation.
START we came nowhere near romulan territory. to file a detailed complaint with the federation i deny all charges and plan.
START captain, overtaking us, the romulan ships are. at close range our deflectors, unable to repel their attack, will be. hmmmmmm.
START captain kirk! drifting into our path, an unidentified energy field is.
START strange. on the charts it is not. yeesssssss.
START but to shake the romulans it may be just what we need. batten down, going through, are we.
START mister spock, our chances, what are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START composed of highly charged subatomic particles, the field is. if be able to ride it out, the density grows no worse we should.
START to sub warp cruise reduce speed. lay by here for repairs, will we. yes, hmmm.
START after that ride, use some repairs, i could. yeesssssss.
START the repairs progressing, how are, scotty, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START nevertheless, still in business and i propose a toast to a narrow escape we are. yes, hmmm.
START how like you that, hmm? so did mine.
START all victims of a rather bizarre coincidence, it appears we are. astronomical, the odds against something like this happening are.
START what coincidence, hmm? to pull stunts like this in medical school with trick glasses we used. look now, do not, but got a practical joker in our midst we have.
START jump to conclusions now let us not, bones. yes, we all got wet, so what's the joke, hmm? yeesssssss.
START fine. all eat up before our food gets cold right now why we not.
START beginning to wonder, i am, bones, beginning to wonder, i am. herh herh herh.
START you got there what have, spock, hmm?
START captain, this device on my console i found. to serve no useful function it seems, and.
START sorry, i am sorry, spock, your, it is your. hmmmmmm.
START officer scott, you join us for lunch will not, hmm?
START no thanks, arex. just going to grab a sandwich and get me back to work i am.
START one grilled cheese on rye. what the blazes, hmm? it just a doggone minute hold! yes, hmmm.
START i said one sandwich, all, that is. this infernal food factory someone turn off. herh herh herh.
START go ahead and laugh. big joke. bet you two are responsible for this, i will, ay, hmm? yeesssssss.
START hey, wait a minute. we did cause this to happen not.
START to the captain tell that. reporting both of you just as soon as i, i am. yes, hmmm.
START okay, gone far enough, this whole thing has!
START just picked up my clean uniforms from the service chute and i have when i put this one on, this, i discovered this.
START when you all finish laughing, appreciate an explanation i would.
START captain, laugh, i never laugh.
START really, m'ress, going to have to be a little more clever than that, you are.
START no joke, this is, sir. yes, hmmm.
START to be a legitimate fog it appears. perhaps the humidification system is. hmmmmmm.
START amazing. covered with ice, this deck is. yeesssssss.
START and almost covered with us, it was. i know not what's going on here, but going to stop before someone's hurt, it is. yes, hmmm.
START that laugh again, there is. something awfully familiar about it. what make you of all this, spock, hmm?
START to one guilty party the evidence all points, captain. hmmmmmm.
START you know who's behind these stunts you mean, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START not who, what. the enterprise itself, i believe our practical joker is.
START of course. that laugh, the voice of our main computer, is it.
START spock, their stations i want all hands at. going to run a complete systems check from bow to stern and get to the bottom of this, are we.
START well, it be what'll, swim at the beach, hmm?
START lovely, it is lovely, but more in the mood for a nice quiet walk in the woods i am.
START then it is woods. herh herh herh.
START ah, more like it, now that is. shall we, hmm?
START strange, that is. repeat the call.
START so peaceful, it is. so relaxing.
START and of all best, no practical jokes. herh herh herh.
START that, what was, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START sure i am not. like someone chuckling it almost sounded.
START probably just one of the audio tapes rewinding, was it. come on, lots more to see, there is. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant uhura, to hand it to you i have. this is just what the doctor, ordered, would have.
START again, it there is. definitely laughing at us, someone is. hmmmmmm.
START going to get to the bottom of this right now, am i. yes, hmmm.
START okay, you are whoever, so for your juvenile joke we fell. now get us out. hmmmmmm.
START yes, captain. question. we unable to communicate with crewmembers mccoy, why are, sulu and uhura, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START answer. for me to know and for you to find out, that is. yeesssssss.
START hear that right, did i, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START affirmative. more severe than i thought, the dysfunction is. question. deliberately holding our missing crewmembers prisoner are you, hmm?
START never tell, i will.
START me try let. captain james t kirk speaking, this is. programmed to obey any direct order i may give, you are, correct, hmm?
START very well. to release crewmembers mccoy i order you, sulu and uhura immediately. yes, hmmm.
START well, be, i will be.
START compliance, i suggest compliance, captain. yes, hmmm.
START with sugar on say pretty please.
START got serious trouble with the main computer, have we. reason to believe it is kidnapped three of our crew, we have.
START to prevent any further trouble, get a handle on the problem, i want you to shut down all logic functions until we can. hmmmmmm.
START when my hands on the clown who's behind all this i get, put him in sickbay for a week, will i.
START temper, temper. cool you off, perhaps this will.
START got a whiteout condition here, we have. we ever find the exit, how will, hmm?
START for a nap time, old girl. captain's orders. yes, hmmm.
START crazy, this is. our own computer's declared war on us and i have the slightest idea why not. yes, hmmm.
START theory, have i, captain, but first i suggest that if officer scott moves away from the computer, it might feel less threatened. hmmmmmm.
START vacate sir, hmm? but. hmmmmmm.
START you bloody big scatterbrain. your monumental mind make up.
START congratulations, spock. your strategy worked. you tell me what's happening to my ship, now would, hmm?
START apparently, invaded our computer's circuits, subatomic particles from that field have, much like bacteria infect living matter. as result, suffering the electronic equivalent of a nervous breakdown, the enterprise is. yeesssssss.
START we do to stop it, what can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START know i am afraid i not, captain. its illogical behaviour precludes a logical solution. yeesssssss.
START the temperature, twenty below and its still dropping, must be. herh herh herh.
START look, still a room, this is, it appears no matter how. if travel long enough in one direction, we can, bound to reach a wall, we are. then feel our way to an exit, we can. yes, hmmm.
START then move before we all turn into icicles, let us.
START scotty, to open a frozen door we need a work crew with power tools. have them report to, report to. hmmmmmm.
START come on, spock. that vulcan sense of humour where is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START hmm. as i thought just.
START spock, what, what mumbling about are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START being pumped full of nitrous oxide, our air is. as laughing gas better known. but no laughing matter, is it, for vulcans especially.
START i know. if not, we do not, if we keep not moving we are going to freeze. yeesssssss.
START we must cure the computer by then or there is no telling what we, forced to breathe next, will be. scotty, how's the door coming, hmm?
START of energy drain set up by the ship some kind. giving it a mighty go with the crowbars, we are, though.
START you two better go on without me. given out, my old legs have. herh herh herh.
START but doctor, we cannot. yeesssssss.
START well, what you know, hmm? come on, doctor, finally getting out of here, we are.
START to be a pessimist i hate, but that may be as easy as you think not. hmmmmmm.
START you know not how good it is to have you back on the bridge, alive and well. hmmmmmm.
START as happy about it as you are, we are, jim. just like to make one request, i would.
START turn up the heat could you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START see what i can, i will. herh herh herh.
START captain, underway, we are underway.
START engine room reports all engines shut down, yet firing, they are firing.
START captain, the helm no longer responds. coming about to a new heading, are we.
START as as our course stabilizes soon, me a reading give. herh herh herh.
START heading back to the neutral zone, we are.
START and you can bet those romulan ships, gunning for us, will be. hmmmmmm.
START picking up three ships, sensors are, captain. to be romulan warships magnification shows them. hmmmmmm.
START decelerating, we are decelerating, sir. yes, hmmm.
START opening, main cargo hatches are. put them on the viewing screen, i will.
START jim, going on, what in heaven's name is, hmm?
START as much as i do you know, bones. herh herh herh.
START halted their attack, the romulan ships have. given them second thoughts, apparently the sight of a spacecraft twenty times their size has.
START okay, i admit, an effective bluff, is it, but so what, hmm? as as they figure it out soon, destroy the balloon and us, they will.
START wait a minute. method to this madness, there is. herh herh herh.
START elaborate, captain.
START pulling her biggest practical joke of all, the enterprise is, and this time the joke's on the romulans, the same romulan ships that damaged the enterprise. yes, hmmm.
START suggesting that the enterprise is seeking revenge are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START what else, hmm? going to make fools of the romulans by having them attack a balloon, she is, and romulans fear disgrace more than death.
START commander, no radio response from the large ship, there is. yes, hmmm.
START very well, refused surrender, it has. advance at attack speed. hmmmmmm.
START been tricked, we have. after them. i want that federation ship blasted into space dust.
START giving chase, the romulans are.
START furious to follow us this deep into federation territory, they must be. yes, hmmm.
START yes, captain. take us nowhere near it, our course will. hmmmmmm.
START good! face going through there again i could not.
START me, it petrifies me.
START changing course, are we, to a direct bearing on the energy field.
START no! we cannot! yeesssssss.
START commander, useless in this field, our instruments are. lost contact with the federation ship, we have.
START got to clear this field before our ships break up we have. for home bring us about on a heading.
START my circuits! you tricked me, kirk. you, how could, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START going on, what the devil is, hmm?
START bones, the worst thing, do to a practical joker is to play a practical joke on them, you can.
START fair it is not. herh herh herh.
START responding now, the controls are. hmmmmmm.
START and getting normal function in all computer modes i am. that last pass through the energy field apparently reversed all effects. yeesssssss.
START captain, picking up strange transmissions from the romulan warships, am i. listen.
START shall we tell them how, reverse the effects of the field, can they, jim, hmm?
START yes, but later. let us spoil their fun just yet not.
START of aborigines sensors report several groupings. they may be dangerous. so to avoid any unnecessary risks i want all of us. but to be planted, these monitoring devices have. lieutenant uhura, tracking us throughout, will be. now, if any trouble of any kind there is, beam up immediately. try to be a hero, do not. yeesssssss.
START kirk captain, almost complete, settings are.
START commander bem, what doing here are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START decided to accompany contact team for observation of same, this one has.
START commander bem, assigned to this ship as an independent observer, you were, yet spent the past six missions in your quarters, you have. done any observing at all until now you have not, when dealing with possibly a very dangerous planet, we are.
START patience. dangerous to the ignorant, every planet is. now, this one has decided that the nexus is. of starship and crew must observe workings. yeesssssss.
START this mission is for casual observers not. hazardous could it be. yeesssssss.
START commander bem, joyride this is not, pleasure excursion. i, let you beam down to the planet without adequate protection, cannot. sure you understand the diplomatic consequences if anything were to happen to you while you are under my protection, i am. herh herh herh.
START it is understanding, captain, but this one remains adamant. to accompany am prepared. yeesssssss.
START an odd time to remain adamant, this is. all right, go, let us. planet waiting for us, there is. yes, hmmm.
START already set controls, this one has, mister scotty.
START offered, assistance is. herh herh herh.
START all right, we are.
START in the future, commander bem, leave the operation of the transporter to mister scott, you will, or of the regular transporter crew one. yeesssssss.
START an anomaly, sir. it resembles a sensor field, but of reference without a scanning grid or other point. herh herh herh.
START the implication is that, something else on this planet, there is. perhaps something intelligent.
START it might be just an atmospheric effect. of electrical storm some kind. seen unidentified planetary phenomena before that have resembled intelligent activity, have we.
START especially thick in his district, the rain forest is. expect, life on this planet appears to be geologically younger than one would, of this star given the age. yeesssssss.
START picking up readings of a large group of life forms directly ahead, this one is.
START all right. to be seen we must take care not. hey, bem. bem, come back! scotty, sulu, with the monitoring devices stay here. come on, spock. hmmmmmm.
START he will get far in there not. yeesssssss.
START have had to go through here to escape, he would.
START he is there. how he did it i know not, but through, he got through. come on, have to go around, we will. that pandronian's actions just make not sense. yeesssssss.
START to another pandronian they might, captain. he went that way i believe, captain. on the other hand. yeesssssss.
START lost him we i think have. that way. hmmmmmm.
START yes, and the food, gathered is bem, have they.
START lieutenant uhura, reading increased activity on the surface of the planet, am i. to be expanding the sensory anomaly appears. yes, hmmm.
START the captain is not answering his communicator and it shows up on the scanning grid not. as if its responder has been disconnected, it is. picking up increased activity from that anomaly, we are. with the captain is mister spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START lieutenant arex, for captain kirk and mister spock start a sensor scan. landing party, to beam up prepare. herh herh herh.
START sorry, i am sorry, mister scott, that is procedure not. take chances we cannot. yes, hmmm.
START talking about the captain, we are. yeesssssss.
START it, i know it, but to follow his orders, we have. to beam up stand by. hmmmmmm.
START beam him out of there, maybe we can. to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk. this is my communicator not.
START either our phasers work not. hmmmmmm.
START been switched for phonies and commander bem has run off, our phasers and communicators have. been separated from the rest of the landing party, we have. mister spock, going on, something funny is.
START appear to be advisable, an alternate course of action would. yeesssssss.
START but to be genuine commander bem's difficulty appears. phasers or not, to rescue him, have we. going to have to follow them, we are. hmmmmmm.
START go back to contact mister scott, one of us could.
START we, risk it, cannot, not while, moving, are they. to find them again we may never be able.
START to be in a late primitive state these aborigines appear. obviously intelligent, basic language and social structure, they seem to have. assume fairly well developed mores and traditions as well, would i.
START to be a model prisoner commander bem seems. herh herh herh.
START have to wait until nightfall, we will. herh herh herh.
START shut up. rescuing you, are we. yes, hmmm.
START interfering with observations, you are. herh herh herh.
START how you observe, this is, by being captured, hmm? yeesssssss.
START as as any logical a way, spock commander.
START we always end up like this, how come, hmm? herh herh herh.
START rhetorical question, i assume that is, captain, not requiring an answer.
START just expressing my curiosity at our ability to get into these kind of situations, was i.
START the correct earth term, i believe that is.
START try your vulcan nerve pinch why you not.
START captain, only a vulcan, i am. limits, there are. hmmmmmm.
START commander bem, i am afraid that we are going to be able to rescue you not.
START good intentions, kirk captain, are enough not. planet pandro, much displeased, will be. starfleet told us, best captain in fleet, you are. to date belie this actions.
START commander bem, in, you are responsible for the situation we are. you disobeyed orders by running off. been extremely abrasive and, your attitude has, how you did it i know not. with phonies you replaced our phasers and communicators. yes, hmmm.
START much dependence you place too, kirk captain, on phasers and communicators. yes, hmmm.
START solve our problems right now, either one could. yes, hmmm.
START commander bem, if those two phasers and those communicators all this time, you had, why did you use them to escape not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START sir, this one demeans not oneself by the use of casual violence to accomplish goals. but you wish you may demean yourself if.
START with orders is compliance. disassemble, this one must.
START remarkable. colony creature, commander bem is. yeesssssss.
START commander bem, if split yourself into separate parts, you could, you escape on your own earlier why did not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START and to prove your value to planet pandro by rescuing this one from possibly dangerous situation deny you the opportunity, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START laboratory this is not, commander bem. hostile planet, this is, and experimental animals for you to test representatives of starfleet are not! consider yourself under arrest. protective custody, to keep you from any more escapades. mister spock, keep watch. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant arex, found them yet have you, hmm?
START no, sir. big planet, it is.
START mister scott, that sensory anomaly, expanded to cover the whole northern continent, it is. hmmmmmm.
START we, get any readings at all now, cannot. yeesssssss.
START aye, that tears it. get through that the loch ness monster could not.
START some kind of interference on all channels, there is. going to have to get out of this village on our own, we are. hmmmmmm.
START i doubt we, able to do so without being seen, will be, captain. yeesssssss.
START i concur, mister spock. to stun set phasers, just in case.
START no, use your weapons, do not. herh herh herh.
START held in stasis, we are, captain. yes, hmmm.
START your weapons put away. my children, these are. harm them, do not.
START you, who are, hmm?
START you, who are, hmm?
START captain james tiberius kirk of the starship enterprise, i am. my first officer, this is, of the planet pandro mister spock and honorary commander ari bn bem.
START why here are you, hmm? why disturb you this place, hmm?
START our mission, is it. classify this planet, we must. to test it, we have. herh herh herh.
START classify, hmm? to intrude here what gives you the right, hmm? this planet is for your use not. for your tests my children are not. your weapons, nullified, will be. yes, hmmm.
START times, there are, mister spock, when i think i, been a librarian, should have. yes, hmmm.
START the job of librarian, no less challenging, would be, captain, but undoubtedly be a lot less dangerous, it would. yes, hmmm.
START found the captain yet have you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START located emanations that could be captain kirk's and another set that could be mister spock's, i have, but interfered with our detection devices so that positive identification remains impossible, the sensory anomaly has. yeesssssss.
START he said 'maybe' i think. well, that convinces me. ready a security squad. going down there, we are. issue phaser rifles.
START mishandled situation again, you have, kirk captain. this one judges you an intelligent commander not.
START commander bem, here, mister spock and i are because we thought that you were worth rescuing. more to preserve the diplomatic relations between the federation and planet pandro than from any great affection for yourself, it was. yes, hmmm.
START unconcerned as to fate of this one, planet pandro is. pandro will have dealings with inefficient and inferior species not. failed everything you have attempted, you have. you have rescued this one and you have not been able to handle local aborigines not.
START this one wishes you, the earth word, what is, hmm? luck. require it, you will. hmmmmmm.
START captain, attract the attention of the alien intelligence and reason with it, perhaps we can. hmmmmmm.
START of some sort perhaps an offering, captain.
START mister spock, whatever, dealing with, are we, we can bribe it i think not. honest, we must be. to alien intelligence kirk. i think not it is strong enough to be noticeable.
START hmm. if our two communicators in series we connect, give off a high energy burst, we can which might work, but also render the communicators powerless in a very short time, it will. yes, hmmm.
START captain james tiberius kirk calling the ruling intelligence of this planet, this is. hear me do you, hmm? to entity kirk. to entity kirk.
START here, i am here. yes, hmmm.
START for intruding we apologise. realise the situation we did not. leave, we will leave. we will tell others of our kind to bother you here not.
START good, this is. go. return go now and not. hmmmmmm.
START just one thing. third member of our group, there is.
START fled, he has fled. yes, hmmm.
START go, you must. you must interfere with my children not. allow you to contact your ship i will. go now! hmmmmmm.
START to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk.
START stand by. leaving without bem we are not. our responsibility, he is. leave him here we cannot. for pandronian scanning beam down a security squad with heavy duty tricorders set. yes, hmmm.
START captain, all right are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START thanks, scotty. spread out. find commander bem. split into three individual parts, he is. hmmmmmm.
START some kind of colony creature, he is. and to injure any of the natives here take care not. phasers on lightest possible stun setting. and fire unless absolutely necessary, do not. hmmmmmm.
START get out of here before we make any more trouble, let us. herh herh herh.
START embarrassment results. shamed, this one is. failed in its judgement, this one has.
START endangered all of us by your actions, you have, and forced us to interfere with the natives of a planet that deserves prime directive protection, you have.
START not, not on my ship you do.
START still here, you are, hmm? still interfering, you are, hmm? angered, i am angered. hmmmmmm.
START leave one of our own behind we could not. our responsibility to take care of our own, it is, just as, your responsibility to take care of yours, is it. we could leave him here where he might further interfere with your not, your children.
START yes, some wisdom, you have, james tiberius kirk. found, the lost one is, then, hmm?
START found, he is found, and leave, we will leave. herh herh herh.
START greatly erred, this one has. to judge, the mission was, and conferred right of judgement was not. disassemble unity, this one must. herh herh herh.
START no, destroy yourself, do not.
START but erred, this one has. tried to judge kirk and spock and been found wanting himself, this one has. acted badly, this one has.
START yes. erred, you have, but you disassemble if, learn from your error you cannot. be repeated errors demand recognition so that they will not. hmmmmmm.
START punishment you demand not, hmm?
START punishment, hmm? punishment, what is, hmm? revenge, hmm? intelligent beings need no revenge. occur without it punishment is necessary only where learning cannot. behind that, you are. not, my children here are. why you must leave, that is, so to corrupt their development with concepts that they are not yet ready for as not.
START humbled, i am humbled. yes, hmmm.
START go now, will we. yeesssssss.
START to enterprise kirk. beam us up. yeesssssss.
START to break orbit stand by. mister spock, as being strictly quarantined classify this planet. under no circumstances may any federation vessel approach.
START respect that also, pandro will. yeesssssss.
START captain, you on a wise decision i compliment.
START necessary, it is necessary. for them not only, but for us as well.
START fascinating, captain. to intelligence a highly advanced alien entity using this particular system as a laboratory for guiding another race. almost a god, you might say. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, meaningless, the difference is. in comparison, all still children, we are. yeesssssss.
START this one's case in, kirk captain, still an eggling, this one is. yes, hmmm.
START take us out of orbit, mister sulu. go home let us. hmmmmmm.
START captain, picking up a message, i am. yeesssssss.
START it on audio put, lieutenant uhura. herh herh herh.
START go in peace. yes. go in peace. learned much, you have. be proud.
START all systems affirmative, captain. on course and on schedule, the enterprise is. hmmmmmm.
START nice to play diplomat for a change, will it be, eh, spock, hmm?
START to sickbay kirk. emergency! yeesssssss.
START to the point get, bones.
START contracted the disease, spock has. fatal to vulcans, it is.
START sure are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START suffocation, the result is.
START one. naturally occurring drug called strobolin. but only found on a few planets in the galaxy, is it.
START the nearest strobolin supply planet to our present position, what is, hmm?
START spock last without the drug, how long can, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START slow the disease that i can give him injections of a synthesised drug would. but after two days the body builds up an immunity. it loses its effectiveness. of the third day by the end, the disease, irreversible, will be. yes, hmmm.
START take four days to get the drug, it will, but die in three, spock will. got to be a way, there is.
START of course. if to get the drug in time we cant go out of our way, another ship closer to beta canopus, there must be. to bridge kirk. me starfleet get, lieutenant. yes, hmmm.
START the symptoms be, what will, bones, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to see me you wished, sir, hmm?
START yes, spock. sit down. arranged a rendezvous to pick up the drug you need, we have.
START i trust it will affect our scheduled arrival at deneb five not. yes, hmmm.
START no, not, it will not. herh herh herh.
START that be all, will, captain, hmm? yeesssssss.
START one other thing. cut your duty time in half, i have. hmmmmmm.
START captain, be necessary that will not. quite able, i am. yes, hmmm.
START all, that is, spock. dismissed. yes, hmmm.
START hurt seeing him like that, it will. herh herh herh.
START sir, picking up a ship ahead, our sensors are. herh herh herh.
START sure it is the enterprise i am not, sir. too far away to tell, is it.
START to rendezvous time, mister arex, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to ask i hate, but.
START aye, captain. squeeze a wee bit more speed out of her, we will.
START it, what is, bones, hmm?
START conserving energy i was, captain.
START you in sickbay mccoy wants. herh herh herh.
START sensor readout, captain. the enterprise closing on us it is not, sir. yeesssssss.
START no, sir. an alien ship, it is, design, never seen before, have i. yes, hmmm.
START this will hurt a bit not, spock. yes, hmmm.
START an unnecessary assurance, doctor, to being untrue in addition. yeesssssss.
START the last time i waste my bedside manner on a vulcan, that is. hmmmmmm.
START such restraint, welcome, would be. yes, hmmm.
START well, too bad that is not. to work back, mister spock.
START the drug is working any more not.
START i know, christine. i know. worry, do not, have the strobolin soon, we will. hmmmmmm.
START increased speed, have they, sir, closing fast.
START no good, captain. to the enterprise send out an emergency signal. herh herh herh.
START captain, getting a signal from the huron, i am. an emergency beacon, it is, automated.
START to ship try ship.
START sensor report, mister spock. at the rendezvous point are they, hmm?
START no, sir. they had reached it not. hmmmmmm.
START compute new course, mister arex. see what's going on let us.
START at bare minimum for life support, the huron's power levels are, captain. picking up metallic debris i am. hmmmmmm.
START based on present data, say yes, would i.
START spock, all right are you, hmm?
START to sickbay bridge. emergency.
START got to have that drug, have we, jim. useless now, the synthetic is. hmmmmmm.
START you can do what, bones. herh herh herh.
START blasted vulcan. why could you have red blood like any normal human not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to make contact still unable, sir. yeesssssss.
START mister scott, lieutenant uhura, with me come. mister sulu, the conn, you have. beaming over, we are.
START scotty, check the cargo hold. there, see if the drug is.
START uhura, see if, get a playback of the log, you can. i know what happened here want to. nurse, to the wounded attend.
START to captain kirk scott. herh herh herh.
START no drug and no dilithium shipment. completely empty, the hold is.
START out, this screen is, sir. but take the tapes and play them back on the enterprise, we can. yes, hmmm.
START good. nurse, he, how is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START surgery, he needs surgery, captain, but live, he will live.
START to enterprise kirk. to beam over ready. have the medical team standing by.
START pull through, will he. jim, what about spock, hmm? if that drug in twenty hours we have not, die, he will die. yeesssssss.
START run the huron's sensor tapes through the computer, i have, sir. new design, the intruder ship is, never before encountered by federation shipping.
START yes, sir. of radioactive waste the intruder ship produces a unique trail, now bearing two one two degrees mark one seven five. yes, hmmm.
START he, how is, bones, hmm?
START not good, jim. have to put a respirator on him to help him breathe soon, i will.
START following the intruder ship's trail we are.
START know it it is the right one we even not. hmmmmmm.
START got to be, it is. yes, hmmm.
START of being a doctor what's the use, anyway, hmm? only as good as our drugs and technology make us, we are. underneath all the tricks, as well be practising in the middle ages i might. herh herh herh.
START if you really believed that, bones, still be a doctor after twenty five years you would not.
START to warp eight increase speed. yes, hmmm.
START to hide a good place for an intruder, you say would not, mister sulu, hmm?
START perfect. and show that the radioactive residue stops in the middle of the belt, a long range sensor can. yeesssssss.
START deflectors up. yellow alert. to warp one cut speed.
START that, what was, hmm? yeesssssss.
START composed of a highly unstable mineral combination, these asteroids are, sir. with each other they explode upon impact. hmmmmmm.
START captain, if harnessed could the power of those rocks be, make a fantastic source of energy, they would. hmmmmmm.
START also make quite a weapon. as she goes steady, sulu. yeesssssss.
START to port hard, sulu. face them head on, let us.
START standard phasers, sir. weak, though. diffused, low quality beam. stop them, our deflectors can.
START i recognise the ship's markings, captain. an orion, it is.
START hailing us, they are, captain. herh herh herh.
START it on visual put, lieutenant. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, this is. for neutral, pretty quick to fire your phasers, you were. yes, hmmm.
START hold on that, uhura. to stand by tell them.
START their hold sensors picking up the dilithium in, sir. hmmmmmm.
START if it, they have it, too small an amount to detect, it is.
START to orion vessel enterprise. proposal to make, have i. if the huron's cargo, you do have, some perishable drugs in it that we desperately need, there were. yeesssssss.
START these drugs be worth to you if we had them, what would, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START we get what we want, our neutrality remains intact plus, hmm? consider your offer, we will. hmmmmmm.
START to sickbay kirk. yes, hmmm.
START bones, much time how, hmm?
START hailing us, the orions are, sir.
START it on the screen put, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START counterproposal, you have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to face face, hmm? where, hmm?
START our ships on the large asteroid near. beam down simultaneously, we could, and hand you the drug myself, i would. you would even have to give us the extra dilithium crystals not. now, your turn to consider, is it.
START got to be a trap, it is, jim.
START of it no doubt, sir.
START trap could it be, but the only way to get the drug, it is. and die if we do not, spock will.
START already made up your mind, you have, you have not, jim. yeesssssss.
START yes, but not without precautions. keep my communicator channel open so you can hear what goes on, i will. keep the transporter locked on me, and if anything goes wrong, scotty, trusting you, am i.
START if this works not, lose you and spock, we could.
START if try we not, spock haves not a chance. yes, hmmm.
START escape, you are saying we cannot, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START this ship or its crew orion's official neutrality comes before. we cannot take kirk's word that he will report this incident to starfleet not.
START plan, you have, lieutenant, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START can we convert the asteroid, orbiting into a doomsday bomb that will destroy both ships, are we, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START it take, what will, hmm?
START no. take it with me, i will when i beam down to meet captain kirk. of seeing his face i want the satisfaction when i tell him he and his crew are going to die with us. and i am sure they trust not us. if on the asteroid, kirk and i are, stay close by, the enterprise will.
START to orion vessel enterprise.
START your terms i accept.
START jim, we have not much time. spock. yes, hmmm.
START the drug, as promised, captain. you wish scan it if. yes, hmmm.
START no, captain. i cannot trust that you will report this incident to starfleet not. if you do, lose its neutrality and be subject to federation retaliation, my planet will.
START escape the enterprise you cannot. yeesssssss.
START but destroy it, we can. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, hmm?
START dilithium down there with them, there is, sir.
START an explosive device in my backpack that will start a molecular chain reaction and detonate this asteroid i have. destroyed will your ship be.
START but yours, so will.
START captain, close, it was close.
START get up to the bridge, let us.
START gone, they are gone, sir.
START scanning as you ordered, i was, and they just disappeared off the asteroid. both the earther and the captain. herh herh herh.
START the orion vessel i have, sir. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, this is. your captain as prisoner, we have. your choice, sir.
START spock, no way you can deny it, there is. yes, hmmm.
START doctor mccoy, i.
START waited a long time for this, i have, and going to cheat me you are not. hmmmmmm.
START spock, saved you before, that green blood of yours may have, but this time it almost in did you. deny it, you cannot. hmmmmmm.
START to yours i still prefer my physiological structure. yes, hmmm.
START yes, gentlemen, back to normal, things are.
START this position maintain the enterprise in, sulu. if spock and i survive, return here, we will. if not, mister scott, your orders, you have. energise. yes, hmmm.
START religious leader, he not was, hmm? yeesssssss.
START our teacher our salvation and. he brought us peace. he made us great. he died, and we made him immortal.
START recorded before his death, alar's brain patterns were, of indurite sculpture in a piece. yes, hmmm.
START our soul, of the skorr the soul, was stolen. yes, hmmm.
START the theft triggered a racial fury in the skorr. preparing for war, are they. yes, hmmm.
START very real threat, it is. in two standard years, breed an army of two hundred billion warriors, the existing skorr could. hmmmmmm.
START my government fears this, so been kept secret, the theft of the soul of alar has. but recover it before my people discover it gone and go mad, we must, launch a jihad, holy war on the galaxy.
START unknown. the motive, as said, tchar has, to provoke a holy war.
START to its location is there any clue, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START mad planet, geologically unstable. constant earthquakes, gravitic shifts, tidal waves. to two hundred and four above the temperature varies from twenty kelvin. somewhere on that planet, hidden, the soul of alar is. tried to recover it, three expeditions have. been lost, three expeditions have. the next, you are, if you agree. yes, hmmm.
START powerful race, the vedala are. your people retrieved the soul why have not, hmm?
START my people could survive on that planet not. chance, you have. yeesssssss.
START then done, it is done.
START feel the soul i cannot. nowhere near it, are we.
START to be expected that is. of this planet shifts constantly the surface. even the vedala are certain where the soul is not. yeesssssss.
START directional equipment that keys on indurite, it has.
START this place i like, got variety, it is.
START indicated, our direction is.
START this the mad planet why did the vedala call, hmm? herh herh herh.
START means nothing. tell the way, i can. that way. hmmmmmm.
START certain are you, human, hmm? herh herh herh.
START for sure, birdman. i, get lost, cannot. be fooled about directions i cannot. why i am here, that is. yes, hmmm.
START have chosen lara if her abilities were less than perfect the vedala would not.
START agreed, but forced to travel on the ground we are. i want an overview.
START scout overhead, will i. yes, hmmm.
START have been efficient in equipping us, the vedala will. acquaint myself with our supplies, will i. yeesssssss.
START say that i would not. unique personality, mister spock is.
START but like you and me not human. maybe, different customs, you got. my world, much females, there is, not so many men. come we find a man attractive, so, we say so. saying so i am. how find you me, hmm?
START fascinating. but we are here on a pleasure trip not, lara.
START to take what pleasure there might be in it all the more reason. yes, hmmm.
START checked the supplies, i have, captain. as expected, adequate and there are weapons, they are. herh herh herh.
START against what, hmm? no life on this planet, there is. herh herh herh.
START but , there is, captain. ourselves. and of alar there may be other things guarding the soul.
START and half. herh herh herh.
START statistical probability. herh herh herh.
START yes. but philosophy and poetry are appropriate here not.
START lava flow. to be expected, volcanic action is.
START never mind that. to get us out of here, you got.
START to divert the lava flow with a barricade we might be able. tchar, get us a visual estimate! yeesssssss.
START such a diversion, of short duration, would be, captain. and point out, i must, to escape the vehicle lacks sufficient speed. yeesssssss.
START for one high speed run not if we used all of the power pack's energy. yes, hmmm.
START kirk. ravine sixty metres to your left, there is. if blocked can it be, flow past those rocks to one side, the lava will. yes, hmmm.
START him, i heard him.
START carefully, em. destroy us, one missed connection could.
START i figure, bought ourselves a little time, have we. few minutes. yeesssssss.
START twenty one degrees east. to get out of the flow path fifty metres. yes, hmmm.
START leave, of you all. herh herh herh.
START captain, get the others away, you must.
START all getting away, we are. yeesssssss.
START far too close, captain. your action on my behalf i appreciate, but to the group and the mission, your first duty is. yeesssssss.
START quite right, spock. and losing the best science officer in starfleet that responsibility includes not. yes, hmmm.
START you two argue honours going to, or are we get on with it going to, hmm? yeesssssss.
START oh! and i was just ask going to, what next, hmm?
START on, we move on. hmmmmmm.
START have to carry the equipment, we will.
START come on, em, bit more. yeesssssss.
START sorry, em. we, needing you, will be. sord.
START go ahead, i will.
START it, what is, hmm?
START no life on this planet, there is. hmmmmmm.
START right, guess you are. this planet just gets on your nerves. yeesssssss.
START sense the soul, i can. fly ahead, i will, examine the building, and you on the way meet. herh herh herh.
START tchar, be careful. you, we need you, too. hmmmmmm.
START tired, we are tired, sore, hurt and angry, but also just about there, we are. scout ahead, i will. everybody else stay together, keep moving.
START go with you, will i. remember, my job scouting's. by rights, be doing it alone, i should.
START sord, what think you saw back there did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START know, do not, vulcan. shape, could really make it out not. probably seeing things, like kirk figures. herh herh herh.
START be no life on this planet, there should. hmmmmmm.
START yes. informed us if there were any live beings here we should know of, the vedala would have.
START know about it maybe the vedala did not. yeesssssss.
START an impossibility, that is. yeesssssss.
START think so, hmm? so sure i am not. hmmmmmm.
START it, that is. of a long end, hard journey. yes, hmmm.
START to go back, we still have, james. you true i tell, you an attractive man i find. if together, we were together, the trip, easier, would be. and if anything happened, why, some green memories, we'd have. herh herh herh.
START much green memories, i already have. herh herh herh.
START maybe some other time, lara. our work cut out for us here, we still have. yes, hmmm.
START the shape of your people's primitive temples is this not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START keep working. cover you, i will. yeesssssss.
START right, the vedala were. no living creatures here, there are, only the mechanised sentinels.
START hit tchar, we will. yes, hmmm.
START to tchar what happened, hmm?
START no way to tell from here there is. the mechanical exploded. reach the roof from the outside, we cannot. have to try to get to him from the interior, will we.
START rest awhile, we could. lara, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no. come this far, we have. yes, hmmm.
START finish it, let us. or to finish us give this deadfall a chance.
START prefer to press on, i too would, captain. the mechanicals on guard may be what sord saw tracking us earlier. or there may be others. in either case, more advantageous to avoid another encounter would it be. hmmmmmm.
START pretty. how we reach it, hmm?
START the walls are climbable not. yes, hmmm.
START not without special equipment, which have we not. it from here, either we find a way to reach, or we fail.
START exactly surprised you are not.
START lost, three previous expeditions tried and were. natural trap, the planet is, but enough that is not. herh herh herh.
START yes, from inside each expedition. remember spock, no life forms here except ourselves, you were the one who said there are.
START of the possibility approximately eighty two point five percent in favour. yeesssssss.
START but it matters if we reach the soul not. get this far apparently the others did not.
START built for that sort of thing i am not. wait for you down here, will i.
START geologically unstable, the planet is. inherently flexible, this structure is, to withstand earthquakes enabling it. yeesssssss.
START get a line on it, maybe i can. herh herh herh.
START locked in a force field, is it. merely bounce off it, your rope would. herh herh herh.
START spock, our combined phasers disrupt the field, will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START define the field's energy base, i cannot, captain, but. herh herh herh.
START of sabotage the last piece. you are i know who. thousand feet up, of reaching the soul no method, except by air, by flight. tchar. hmmmmmm.
START tchar. of the seven gods in the name, why, hmm?
START you stole this. start a bloody crusade across the galaxy, you will. tell us why, tchar. yes, hmmm.
START warrior race, the skorr were. we, now what are, hmm? to the illusion of peace slaves. cowards, our comfort soft in. stolen our souls, this sick dream has. tchar, i am tchar, of the skorr hereditary prince, of battles leader. lead my people into glory, i will, to avenge our history. yeesssssss.
START most of them, killed, will be. rise up to battle the skorr, the warrior races of the federation will.
START yes. to win a great dream a noble death. live no longer like worms crawling in the dirt, will we. conquer, we will conquer. die, you will. but my respect, you have. you fought well. you die in grace.
START fly and fight as a skorr, you now can. yes, hmmm.
START no offence, little ones, but me tackle him let. hmmmmmm.
START with you last week, captain.
START for retrieval call, now.
START me die let. yes, hmmm.
START going back with us, you are. yes, hmmm.
START you thanks we give. returned to his people, the soul of alar is. hmmmmmm.
START what about tchar, hmm? how are you punish him going to, hmm?
START to keep a medal got nowhere, anyway. but there'll be questions. yeesssssss.
START no. return and you will see, you will, no questions, will there be, no medals, our thanks only. and in time, gone from you, even the memory will be.
START what you mean, hmm? yeesssssss.
START you transported over and came right back. call it off did they, hmm?
START we gone, how long were, hmm?
START long, hmm? about two minutes, i guess. i not understand.
START their minds the vedala changed. past, the danger is. to your stations back. much other places to go, we have.
START against all orders, it was.
START apparently desperate, the need was. yeesssssss.
START of a ship the captain, his rank no matter, must follow the book.
START capability, afraid, i am afraid, of most humans, out of the reach.
START the most impossible, you vulcans are, unimaginative.
START bones, helping the situation that is not. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, we expect to find on lactra seven, what can, hmm?
START class m planet, it is, gravity earth normal, atmosphere earth normal. no previous information available except that, there is which the survey ship logged before her crew left her. yeesssssss.
START to their lot according, they beamed down six weeks ago.
START five weeks, three days, to be exact two hours and four minutes, captain. herh herh herh.
START of me careless, mister spock. planetary life forms, hmm?
START support life forms, it certainly can. but speculate on what type without further data, i cannot. conducting a sensor scan now, mister arex is. yes, hmmm.
START jim, if lost, the others are, take the risk why, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START because they may be dead not. to find out, we have. herh herh herh.
START still a risk, is it. herh herh herh.
START why we are here that is, bones. gentlemen, travel light we will. phasers, tricorders, communicators and medical kit.
START sir, located a variety of life forms on the planet, mister arex has. no large groups or city clusters yet. hmmmmmm.
START then beam back up, we will.
START exist under these planetary conditions, unusual that such a lake would. yes, hmmm.
START to navigate on land it may be able.
START it can i know. yeesssssss.
START get out of here let us.
START see if i can pick up anything on my communicator i will. captain kirk of the uss enterprise, this is, of the ariel calling the crew. come in please. come in. yeesssssss.
START get a voice reply strange you did not. yes, hmmm.
START there, many reasons why we did not, could be.
START to gather strength from our phasers it seems. my opinion in. yeesssssss.
START of the neck concentrate on the underside.
START undamaged, i am undamaged. doctor mccoy where is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START get you out, we will, bones.
START appear a more logical solution is in order, would it, captain. we lift not the tail off, we dig the doctor out. yeesssssss.
START thanks. running out under there, the air was. hmmmmmm.
START you hurt were, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no, just surprised. it is every day a dinosaur falls on you not. pretty strange place, this is. herh herh herh.
START agreed. to cross we how much desert do have, mister spock, hmm?
START our pace we'd better pick up. no place for cover if we meet any other creatures, there is. that way, the bearing on the signal we heard is. yes, hmmm.
START captain, the beast, seem familiar to you did it, hmm?
START seen something very like it on canopus three, i have, but light years from here, that is. still, the same as on canopus, this desert area is.
START full of sand, my shoes are.
START doctor, amazing, your lack of scientific interest is. yes, hmmm.
START happy to discuss that with you will i be, mister spock, to my medical lab next time you drop in. hmmmmmm.
START seen stranger things i have, mister spock.
START to enterprise kirk.
START north east. where we got the signal from, that is. all right, scotty, keep scanning. kirk out. hmmmmmm.
START i like not it, jim. why only one short signal and no more, hmm?
START know i not. but alive, at least they are.
START apparently alive. be sure we cannot.
START to believe they are i choose.
START to test the water first allow me, doctor. herh herh herh.
START captain, too pure, the water is.
START nonetheless, too pure, it is.
START in other words, too good to be true, is it. yes, hmmm.
START correct, captain. and also illogical, a rain forest this close to a desert is. it is my theory that what, seen since we landed was manufactured, have we, not created. hmmmmmm.
START terraforming is new not. it implies intelligent life forms. yes, hmmm.
START unless, of course, the pattern, the random choice is.
START spock, ever say anything straight out do you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START gentlemen, please. work to do we have. yes, hmmm.
START now obvious, the desperation of the science ship's first landing party is. yes, hmmm.
START still alive we are, we are not, hmm?
START no. like the dragons on maravel, are they. get them, the stun charge should. yes, hmmm.
START by observation alone, they hit an invisible force field it appears.
START if true, that is, spock, then.
START been travelling for hours, have we. where taking us are they, hmm?
START captain, it is there. hmmmmmm.
START that, five square kilometres, must be. yeesssssss.
START if the builders, these are, an admirable feat, it is.
START very interested in communicating with us they seem not. if communicate at all, they can.
START perhaps in a way we understand not. i keep receiving impressions.
START well, i have got one and i definitely like not it. guess they are doing exactly what we would do, would i. herh herh herh.
START well, if we came upon an alien creature we'd never seen before, free of harmful bacteria, the first thing we'd do is to make sure it was. then intelligent, we'd see if it was. yeesssssss.
START congratulations, doctor. most logical assumption. herh herh herh.
START more important question, gentlemen, is whether or there is a way out of here not. force field. it seems harmless enough. yes, hmmm.
START so of a jail do the bars, unless, on the inside, you are. hmmmmmm.
START and definitely on the inside we are. yeesssssss.
START of energy a wasteful use, doctor. hear you without your shouting, i believe they can. herh herh herh.
START picking up impressions, you said you were. are the aliens telepathic, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START come to the conclusion they are, have i, captain. but the speed at which the thoughts flow is too great for me to comprehend except for the most fleeting image. yeesssssss.
START communicate with them some way, surely we can.
START they appear to be as advanced beyond earth civilisation as, from a colony of ants, you are.
START then all those other creatures where we beamed down, what were, hmm?
START recall we recognised at least two species from vastly different planets, you will. the environment did appear natural to this planet not. easily travel to other star systems to collect specimens, a technology this advanced could. yes, hmmm.
START you mean, some kind of a zoo, is it, hmm?
START our phasers they took, communicators and other equipment so they must have some idea, intelligent, are we. yeesssssss.
START not necessarily, captain. they could have taken them for the same reason, take a sharp object away from a child, you would. hmmmmmm.
START or maybe they see how our toys work want to. yeesssssss.
START possibility, that too is. yes, hmmm.
START got to communicate with them, have we. herh herh herh.
START well, so for mythology much.
START what they want for now, better do, anyway. they activated another force field.
START real grass, this is. herh herh herh.
START yes, doctor. been carefully prepared for human types, this area has. safe now, the aliens are. hmmmmmm.
START safe, they are safe because we are now exhibits in a zoo.
START zoo, hmm? no animal, am i.
START this planet on, bones, they seem to be the people and, the animals, are we. yeesssssss.
START hello, lieutenant commander tom markel, am i. our biologist, this is, randi bryce.
START james kirk, of the enterprise captain. first officer spock. our physician, doctor mccoy. yes, hmmm.
START been expecting you we have. yes, hmmm.
START your communicator signal we heard. yes, hmmm.
START then you warn us why did not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START warn you we could not. constantly picking up our equipment and fooling with it, are they. hmmmmmm.
START where keep the equipment do they, hmm? use my tricorder i could. yes, hmmm.
START no use, sir. on an exhibit table, are they. beyond the force field. yeesssssss.
START six of you on the mission, there were. yeesssssss.
START beam down in time to save the original three we did not. herh herh herh.
START in the house, lieutenant randolph is. running a high fever, is she, but seem to do anything about it we cannot.
START check her out, i will. help, maybe i can. hmmmmmm.
START you learned about the aliens what have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START much there is not, sir. zoo, this is. so to be almost unbelievable tremendous as. yeesssssss.
START tried an escape have you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START dozen different ways. tunnels, weakness in the force field, nothing worked.
START tried to communicate have you, hmm?
START yes, sir. but been able to arouse in them is a sort of quivering motion, all we have. yeesssssss.
START company, we seem to have.
START for us they built this. we have concluded, telepathic, are they. i guess they read our minds and came as close as, to make it like home, could they.
START yes, sir. i, seem to get through, cannot, captain. with each other they appear too involved. yes, hmmm.
START to be getting a response you seem. herh herh herh.
START my impression is that, laughing at me, are they.
START so far, mister spock, we have found anything funny in this not.
START find the others, let us. for human companionship i feel a need.
START captain kirk, mister spock, nancy randolph, this is, our navigator. herh herh herh.
START she, how is, hmm?
START without my instruments, difficult to make an exact diagnosis, is it. malarial type infection caused by an insect bite, rough guess is. do anything without my medikit i cannot. herh herh herh.
START the lactrans outside, what they do, hmm?
START to be guards they appear, sir. each other making sure we harm not. yes, hmmm.
START feed us or do we shift for ourselves do they. yeesssssss.
START to the same place always, hmm?
START this house behind, outside the force field. our toys all, phasers, communicators, medical supplies. yeesssssss.
START then be there, my equipment should. yes, hmmm.
START get them to give them back to us, maybe we can. yes, hmmm.
START captain, highly intelligent, they are. sure they are quite aware of the purpose of each piece of equipment now, am i. yes, hmmm.
START the medical kit would be harmful not. help her, it would, of their specimens one. herh herh herh.
START then it that way think about, doctor.
START food. but feeding time it is not.
START sensed a need and interpreted it as food, they must have.
START all here, it is. damaged it they have not. herh herh herh.
START of the situation what's your evaluation, markel, hmm?
START they treat us quite well, sir. to want us alive and well they seem. and to let us go they want not. yes, hmmm.
START for the curators of a zoo a natural reaction. yeesssssss.
START sir, any chance of getting out, do you think there is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START as alive, long as we are, chance, there is. tonight, try and find a weak link in the force field, i will.
START your pardon begging, captain, face the situation realistically, i think we should. specimen animals in a zoo, we are. and taken every precaution to prevent our escape, have they. caged for life we to them are. to be drawing quite a crowd we seem. yeesssssss.
START gentlemen, since learning from us, are they, learn something from them why we not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START how, hmm? get through to them, we cannot, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START telepathically, they communicate telepathically.
START between themselves, yes, but, mister spock, vulcans telepathic are not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to a degree, with with some others our own species and, but eons beyond mine, the lactran intelligence is. herh herh herh.
START how much learned have you, hmm?
START as much as a mother learns from a six month old infant about. herh herh herh.
START of us what's their impression, hmm?
START to frighten the smaller ones we seem. some, the females, i believe, find us quite ugly. herh herh herh.
START what about the enterprise, jim. get worried, scotty could. beam down a fighting force, he could.
START my orders were to attempt a rescue under any condition not.
START wise move, captain. from what, gather, can i, no match for their force field, even the enterprise is.
START with another move how about coming up, then, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START if suggest, i may suggest, sir, hmm?
START obvious they can pick up specific thought transmissions from us if they care to go to the trouble, it is. to be ill i suggest that one of our number appear. put strong thoughts in our minds that a communicator is needed for recovery, the rest will. yeesssssss.
START try it, let us, and close to the communicator let us be when we do. pretend i am sick, i will. of you concentrate all. hmmmmmm.
START little one, it is. child, could be. herh herh herh.
START my hands on a communicator, once i get, have scotty beam us all aboard the enterprise, can i. ready now.
START enterprise, captain kirk, this is. beam us aboard. yeesssssss.
START receiving an impression they are worried about their child i am, captain.
START worried about the enterprise, am i. yeesssssss.
START to think you made the child disappear they seem. they did know we were a deadly species not, of injuring one of them capable.
START well, stand here let us not. do something, let us. yes, hmmm.
START argh, the best thing we can do is!
START it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START captain, fight it. as hard as you can fight it. they think too fast in too complex a manner. if for even one moment he gives up, he may go mad. hmmmmmm.
START harmless, i think it is, but i am sure not.
START me to whatever it wants. hmmmmmm.
START now, this over supposing you and i talk. talk, you can, you, cannot, hmm? talk you cannot. well, you do, what can, hmm? oh, no! listen, send us off into space if you, you will. yeesssssss.
START jim, all right are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes. so, i think so.
START captain, they have concluded they, break through your mind on a one to one basis, cannot. now gathering the mental strength of all five of them to break through, they are. yes, hmmm.
START i, hold out against that many, cannot.
START no. no! me alone let! please! destroying me, they are! my mind to tearing, to. yes, hmmm.
START all right, i am. scotty, what doing here are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START with me it made contact. yes, hmmm.
START what learn did you, hmm?
START only six years old but it has an iq in the thousands, it is. my brain it picked, all the knowledge in the enterprise computers, and of orbit sent us flying off out. hmmmmmm.
START then how get here did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START pet i convinced it i was not, and bring the ship back into orbit, that it should. then it into the transporter to return here, i got. herh herh herh.
START trying to contact us directly, are they. make out something, can i. it is, difficult, it is difficult, they think so fast. but learned and told its parents all about the federation and the races it encompasses, the child has.
START what else know about us do they, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START considered simplistic we are, but of evolving into a higher order in the process. herh herh herh.
START but the little one did tell or think that to me not. yeesssssss.
START exactly, sir. some tens of thousands of centuries ago, it seems they were where we are. their centuries, not ours. yes, hmmm.
START of here do we get out, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START so, it appears so. they feel not we belong in their zoo.
START to transport everyone ready, hmm?
START to enterprise kirk. to beam aboard two parties prepare, all human.
START captain, scientific contact team, we are, and we learned practically nothing. herh herh herh.
START offhand, say we learned to keep our hands off, would i. yeesssssss.
START but so much more, there was.
START other opportunities, will there be, mister markel. just received their final telepathic message, i have.
START welcome back, we will be, in twenty or thirty centuries.
START theirs. and take me some time to figure out how long that is, it will.
START either way, mister spock, hardly be our problem, it will.
START the most remarkable thing the slavers ever produced, these stasis boxes are. time stands still inside a stasis box. billion years means nothing in there. it, what is, lieutenant, hmm?
START studied the history of the slaver empire, i have, but sketchy, it is sketchy. masters of all the intelligent beings in this galaxy a billion years ago, we know they were, until one race revolted. of information we have are the stasis boxes the only source, hmm? yeesssssss.
START exterminated in the war that followed, the slavers and all their subjects were. to evolve all over again intelligent life had. the only remnant of those lost civilisations, the stasis boxes are. herh herh herh.
START why glowing like that is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START mister sulu, our position, what is, hmm?
START passing beta lyrae, sir. of galactic plane one forty two degrees north east. yeesssssss.
START most peculiar. another stasis box circling beta lyrae there this indicates is. hmmmmmm.
START most illogical that a stasis box would remain here undiscovered for so long would it be. one of the rare spectacles of the galaxy, beta lyrae is. to see it almost every ship that passes stops. herh herh herh.
START carrying a stasis box detector, maybe no one else was.
START possible. another stasis box, the only known stasis box detector is. still. mister sulu.
START bring us about. investigate the beta lyrae system, we will. hmmmmmm.
START we are tourists here not, lieutenant.
START mister spock, if to find another stasis box it takes a stasis box, how did anyone ever find the first one, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START as with a number of discoveries, purely by accident, lieutenant. to be almost under us the other box seems, perhaps thirty metres below the ice.
START have any trouble digging for it we will not. this low pressure in, boil as soon as the phasers melt it, the ice should. yes, hmmm.
START we, where are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START kzinti spacecraft.
START good that is not. kzinti are supposed to have phasers not, are they, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the treaty of sirius permits not them any weapons at all, beyond police vessels. obviously, been broken, the treaty has.
START police web. we will be able to move unless we can turn it off somehow not. hmmmmmm.
START heard all kzinti telepaths are unhappy neurotics, i have. he fits the description. hmmmmmm.
START no sure way to guard our thoughts from him, there is. mister sulu, he is likely to deal with me or lieutenant uhura not. inferior beings to them, she and i are. but meat eaters, the kzinti are. if you sense him reading your mind, of eating a raw vegetable think.
START yes, sir. goad them into revealing their purpose, maybe i can. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant uhura. this may be crucial. of the kzinti in the presence, say anything, do not, do anything startling, do not. to look harmless try.
START forgetting kzinti females are dumb animals are you, hmm? an intelligent creature, in an emergency the kzinti may forget a human female is. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant, your intelligence i value, but we may be able to seize an opportunity to escape if the kzinti believe, none, you have.
START of the starfleet vessel enterprise lieutenant sulu. first officer spock, this is.
START habit with you, stealing must be. this ship, two stasis boxes. hmmmmmm.
START with humankind and lost all of them the kzinti fought four wars. two hundred years ago, the last one was, and learned a thing since you have not. yes, hmmm.
START then really working for the kzinti government, you are.
START of a slaver could that be a picture, hmm?
START if so, the first ever discovered, it is. an important historical find. herh herh herh.
START like fresh meat it looks. over a billion years in that box, and fresh, it looks fresh.
START the human, sulu, to be a slaver believes it. herh herh herh.
START of no use to us, it is. small telescopes, we already have.
START merely a laser. had a more effective model for over one hundred years, the federation has.
START telepath's suit lost considerable pressure. to save him we reached the ship in time.
START perhaps a personal rocket motor. place one's foot on the pedals and balance, one could. to be transportation it appears, not a weapon.
START slowing down i am. to run the hundred in record time i used. i out, how long was, hmm? miss much, did i, hmm?
START not much. much good, get out of that rocket setting, will they.
START fortunate none of the settings so far have been superior to the technology now available to the federation, are we.
START mister spock, move, i can move. yes, hmmm.
START so can i. off, the police web is.
START to be an energy absorber the fifth setting seems. fascinating. no idea the slavers had such things, i had.
START mister spock, we. yes, hmmm.
START yes. when i give the word, for the shuttle make. to zigzag remember. ready, hmm? go. herh herh herh.
START the weapon i have.
START got uhura, they have, and subspace radio. call for help from the kzin planet if they think the weapon's worth it, can they. yeesssssss.
START no, they cannot. or rather, not, will.
START that gives us some time. plan it that way, you did, hmm?
START as as you stay free long, do anything the kzinti cannot or will not. but use lieutenant uhura as a bribe, could they.
START agreed. however, to this point, seen anything more powerful than equipment starfleet already has we have not.
START yes. but feeling, i have, mister spock. belonged to a spy, this weapon must have, an espionage agent.
START of weapons i acknowledge your expertise in the field, mister sulu, but i see not how you can determine probable ownership.
START well, here, look at it. all these settings. common slaver soldier could not handle them we know not, but as a weapon, effective, only the laser is. the others are necessary for the line soldier's one purpose not, to destroy the enemy.
START but seen all the phases, have we. hmmmmmm.
START perhaps not. the null setting there is. nothing, it seems to do. but it be there, why should, hmm? it corresponds not to a safety lock. herh herh herh.
START to another setting it may be the key. herh herh herh.
START wrong. much of you they think not.
START no. see what this does do, let us. hmmmmmm.
START give them that, we cannot! yeesssssss.
START fascinating. produced anything so powerful, no world in the federation has. almost beyond theoretical limits. to energy at a distance total conversion of matter.
START if that i the kzint had, their dinner table, the whole galaxy would be.
START no idea, have i. generating power, it is.
START grid, there is. it may be another communications device. but that seems redundant. hmmmmmm.
START the kzinti frightened, it has. yes, hmmm.
START legends of weapons haunted by their owners, the kzinti have.
START no, to be conversing with them it appears. reasoning computer that small, hmm? yeesssssss.
START know i not. when off, i am off, no sense of passing time i have.
START on a mission, we were. tell you of it unless you know certain code words i may not. yes, hmmm.
START if describe the positions of the stars in your sector, you could, passed since then, we would know how much time has.
START without certain code words, describe our location i may not.
START the null position, twist me widdershins until you reach. then.
START got it, have they. herh herh herh.
START something we can do, must there be. hmmmmmm.
START the total conversion beam setting that was not. yes, hmmm.
START let them have that weapon, we cannot. herh herh herh.
START they are about to get it not, lieutenant. herh herh herh.
START slaver war computer, assume you are. been turned off, you have. for how long you know not, but turned off, when you were, war on, there was. awakened by aliens you never saw before, now you are. they know not any of the military passwords. obvious they know little about you, they ask you so many questions it is. nowhere about, your owner is. you think, what would, hmm?
START think i would been captured by the enemy, would i. or an enemy, at least.
START and to find your most powerful weapon setting when they asked you how, you give them, what would, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START disrupter field. yeesssssss.
START yes. another conventional weapon. not, it appears the total conversion beam was the only thing the slavers had that we do. hmmmmmm.
START of the weapon no sign, of course. have looked nice in some museum, it would. yes, hmmm.
START it never, reached the museum, would have, lieutenant. too much power in that one setting, there was. if not the kzinti, tried to possess it would the klingons or some other species have. yeesssssss.
START strange, how the past sometimes breaks through into the present. that ancient war, sparked a new war between man and kzinti, could have.
START you say the kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their dead owners did not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START this rate at, never get over those old superstitions, they will.
START the largest land mass on the planet, this is, is it not, spock, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, captain. mere outcroppings, the others are. of submerged mountains they suggest the peaks.
START i suggest that we get these seawater and algae specimens. the least of the lot, they are. yeesssssss.
START for with you once i agree, doctor. come from the sea bottom, the more informative specimens will.
START lieutenant clayton, with their business open the hatch and let our two scientists here get on. yeesssssss.
START that thing, what the devil was, hmm? yeesssssss.
START get a closer look at it before the phaser stun wears off, let us. submerge, lieutenant. hmmmmmm.
START similar to that of a denebian whale, its skeleton is, captain. yes, hmmm.
START regaining consciousness, it is. surface, mister clayton.
START spock, to fire phasers prepare. yes, hmmm.
START phasers not respond, captain. sustained damage to the power pack, we must have when the creature struck us. herh herh herh.
START to enterprise kirk. emergency.
START under attack, we are. beam us aboard, scotty. yes, hmmm.
START repeat, lost contact, we have. come in, captain. come in.
START nothing, there is. just nothing there is. yeesssssss.
START i see some rocks. just above sea level, are they, about two miles away. something on them, there is.
START still alive, maybe they are. hmmmmmm.
START functioning, their bodies are. metabolism, heart. everything but the lungs. yes, hmmm.
START breathe, cannot. suffocating. help. breathe, cannot. hmmmmmm.
START to them what happened, doctor, hmm? it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START their whole lung structure something's changed. live in the air anymore, they cannot. yes, hmmm.
START stumped, we are stumped, jim. to be the major factor in your mutation the hormone seems, but identify it we just cannot.
START are you sure the mutation was somehow accomplished naturally not, hmm?
START infused into your bodies at key structural points, it was. to be done by injection, it had. yes, hmmm.
START but you duplicate it, cannot, bones, hmm? information on every procedure in the federation's hospitals, your medical computers have.
START highly sophisticated and completely unknown to us, is it. yeesssssss.
START intelligent life forms on argo, that implies there are.
START any life forms down there the sensors indicate not, aside from fish. yeesssssss.
START fail to indicate the large marine creature that attacked us, they did. incomplete, perhaps the readings are, blocked by underwater pressure forces. less turbulent at greater depth, oceans are. such conditions, more suitable to intelligent forms, would be. yes, hmmm.
START limited we are not. go wherever we want in that ocean, we can. yeesssssss.
START too risky, it is, jim. argo's almost totally unexplored. out of contact range you would be, unarmed. herh herh herh.
START to, i have to, bones. this place look at. tank. command a ship from inside an aquarium i cannot. live in here, i cannot. yes, hmmm.
START i know what, saying, you are, jim, but you go down on that planet and you die there if.
START right now, only two choices, have we. for the rest of our lives or stay on argo live in an aquarium somewhere. i will accept either one of them not. hmmmmmm.
START what about you, spock, hmm? your logic tell you, what does, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the captain states the case emotionally, of course, but correctly. of little value to this ship if i am confined to a tank in sickbay would i be. accompany the captain, i must.
START change us back, an intelligence that can produce this kind of mutation can. got to find it, we have, bones. there, it must be. herh herh herh.
START make contact as soon as possible, we will, mister scott. yes, hmmm.
START go away, air breathers. wanted here you are not. hmmmmmm.
START we will harm you not. friends, we are friends.
START leave us. enough our young saved your lives once, it is. if you go on, save you again, nothing will.
START i not understand. they said, saved us once, would they. herh herh herh.
START i believe the phrase was, your lives once 'our young saved.' .
START yes, and they did seem to approve not. to be in that direction the answer appears, spock.
START say so, i would, captain. to retreat to a place of safety, the instinctive reaction of all frightened creatures is. yeesssssss.
START of fantastic architecture an undersea civilisation capable. of in our galaxy medical triumphs unheard. they be afraid of us, why should, spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START quite possible, it is, captain, they find us grotesque and ugly that. and many people fear beings different from themselves. yeesssssss.
START well, speculation is much help not. to get in there, we have. yeesssssss.
START way open on the far side there perhaps is. much less activity there, there is. hmmmmmm.
START that building in the centre. to be important it seems.
START of the aquans you stand before the ruling tribunal. domar, i am domar, the high tribune. yeesssssss.
START captain kirk of the starship enterprise, i am. my first officer, this is, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START nothing without consulting the ancient records, can we do, hmm?
START why the junior tribunes wish always to change the records, hmm?
START seem their ancient records are as well preserved as ours, it would. among us as spies, they found us again to come. herh herh herh.
START them a chance to defend themselves you give not, cadmar. herh herh herh.
START correct, rila is. you may speak.
START visitors to your planet, we are. from another world, we come.
START you live not on the surface places, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START this world not on. yeesssssss.
START mistaken, you are, sir. to find the means of reversing our mutations, our only purpose here is. yeesssssss.
START scott here. it, what is, doctor, hmm?
START sensors just gave us an update reading, scotty. seaquake due in that area, there is, bad one. complete topography changes. herh herh herh.
START within four hours. when to make contact are jim and spock due, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START you contact them sooner can, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes. examine the wreckage before we make judgement let us. yeesssssss.
START news, we have news, high tribune. herh herh herh.
START still believe these creatures came in peace do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START we know not what to believe. hmmmmmm.
START to the surface boulders and leave them there take these spies. justice enough for our enemies, it is.
START your strength conserve. free you, will i. too strong, the mesh is. yes, hmmm.
START to the big island go. bring assistance party. yeesssssss.
START yeah, well, all of a sudden i like not you much either.
START contact, i made contact. yes, hmmm.
START great. to be beamed up i hope we last long enough. phasers ready. need help i will.
START and then on ophiucus six, with fake federation vouchers i conned two miners out of a year's supply of dilithium crystals. yes, hmmm.
START you record his confession may i help, nurse, hmm?
START you, hmm? choose, you would be the last person i would. hmmmmmm.
START of love a few moments, for with several hours of hatred paid. scarcely a bargain, your potion is, harry.
START ah, well, spock. so perfect, few things in this universe are. think, get rehabilitation therapy again, will i, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START guarantee it, can i.
START well, all right that is. to leave you all i just hate. my loved ones all. hmmmmmm.
START yes, as beautiful as i remembered it just. nothing's changed.
START one side! one side! late, i am late! late, i am late! oh, my fuzzy ears and whiskers, late, i am late!
START your pardon i beg, but see a white rabbit did you, hmm?
START you so very much thank. yes, hmmm.
START it is hard to believe they are real not. yes, hmmm.
START well just remember, highly sophisticated robots created by the planet computer to make your dreams come true, are they. herh herh herh.
START lovely. they just make not them like that anymore. herh herh herh.
START with his head off. with his head off! yes, hmmm.
START to transporter room uhura. the emergency, what is, hmm? respond, please.
START well, understand it, i cannot, jim. as before everything looked exactly the same, even alice and the white rabbit. then of playing cards came out of nowhere an army, they weren't playing only. lucky to escape with my life, was i.
START characters from alice through the looking glass, the queen of hearts and her cards are, captain.
START as a child i read the book, mister spock, but aware you indulged in the literature of fantasy i was not. hmmmmmm.
START considered relaxing, light reading is, captain. particularly fond of lewis carroll's work, my mother was. yeesssssss.
START i see. bones, you thinking about that book were, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START absolutely not! as matter of fact, thinking how beautiful and peaceful everything was, was i, and with his head then suddenly this female started shouting 'off!' . my head. yeesssssss.
START mister sulu, experience any strange occurrences did you, hmm?
START captain, getting a fix on lieutenant uhura, just as i was, lost, contact was. still on the planet, she is.
START scotty, retrieve all other landing parties immediately. and to contact lieutenant uhura keep trying. yes, hmmm.
START of the planet what about the keeper. did anyone see him, hmm?
START not, i did not. but then, have wanted us to see him he may not.
START well that makes not sense. his duty to see no one gets hurt, is it. if something's wrong down there, be there, he should.
START somewhere underground, his quarters are, are they not, hmm?
START presumably adjacent to the computer centre that operates the planetary effects would they be. hmmmmmm.
START any indication of where, be, that would, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START penetrate the underground complex is shielded by a combination of granite and metal alloy and the sensors will not.
START lieutenant m'ress, cancelled until further notice, all shore leaves are. mister arex, the conn, you have. consist of spock, investigating landing party will, sulu, mccoy and myself. yes, hmmm.
START you are being detained so your master will leave not.
START assessed, your intelligence quotient must be lower than i had. to the sky machine i refer which enslaves you, this planet the sky machine now in orbit around.
START your name for it, that is.
START why think you the enterprise is my master, hmm?
START redundant, your questioning is. yes, hmmm.
START then find quite so redundant i will make a statement you will not. released immediately i unless am, come looking for me, the crew members will. yeesssssss.
START already here, are they. unfortunately, no use for more hostages, i have which leaves me no choice but to turn them off. yeesssssss.
START again redundant. make them cease to function, i will. turn them off, will i. yeesssssss.
START word meaning to cease to function, that is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START good. as i wish, is it. turn them off, will i. herh herh herh.
START in that underground system must she be. no way she could have been taken off the planet without being detected, there is. yes, hmmm.
START if locate the keeper, we could, save us much time, he could.
START of granite and metal alloy tricorder readings confirm a solid shell, captain. hmmmmmm.
START built like a fortress, this planet is.
START if true reading, that is. the planet, giving us that reading to fool us, could be. yes, hmmm.
START cut through twenty metres of rock per minute, the phaser bore can. to enterprise kirk.
START enterprise, read me do you, hmm?
START all malfunctioning, are they, captain. cut us off from the ship, some kind of electronic block has.
START to bridge scott. of phaser bore commencing beam down. herh herh herh.
START to bridge scott. got problems, we have. yes, hmmm.
START to function the transporter refuses, even at maximum power. but all the circuits test out.
START it appears to be the same energy block, jamming our communications, that is. pinpoint a source i cannot. herh herh herh.
START captain, something over there in the trees, there is. like the planetary shell metal alloy. hmmmmmm.
START an inscription, there is, several languages. yeesssssss.
START an astute medical observation, doctor, if believe this information, we can. body interred here, tricorder readings indicate there is.
START well, gentlemen, it appears that, on our own now, are we.
START to be a short in the circuit there seems. no response, sir. yeesssssss.
START another short, hmm? this ship had perfect operational status before we entered the orbit here. that planet causing all our trouble, it is.
START been changed before, programmes have, lieutenant. hmmmmmm.
START believe me. no reason to harm them, there is.
START they serve the sky machine, but essential they are not. herh herh herh.
START oh, but they are. most essential, are they. herh herh herh.
START attempt to disconnect me, do not.
START you knew what i was do before i did it going to.
START with your function you sound less than enchanted. hmmmmmm.
START been one of service, my life to this point has. time for a change, it is.
START much entrances into the interior of the planet, there are. points where the computer delivers up the robot visions. we see them want to. they, where are, hmm?
START fighting us, it is. faster way, must there be.
START what you want, signs pointing the way, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START doctor, wasting time, i only meant it seems like we are. yeesssssss.
START sorry, i am sorry, sulu. worried about uhura, i am. yeesssssss.
START liable to be another of the planet's pranks, this is. but at the moment, got, it is the only lead we have.
START fascinating. mechanical manifestations, of course. of pterodactyls was anyone considering the subject, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START everybody back out slowly. make any sudden moves, do not. think calm. herh herh herh.
START dead, phasers are! for the cave run!
START to amuse our amusement park no longer seems content. hmmmmmm.
START the distinct feeling this planet's playing cat and mouse with us, have i, but for what reason, hmm?
START quite real, it is, doctor. for the claws watch out. to remember that on this planet i think it prudent, anything we think may be used against us. monitor our thoughts and give our enemy no more ammunition, we must. yeesssssss.
START spock, no one thought about those pterodactyls, remember, hmm? more at work here than our imagination, there is.
START please, call off that beast. why doing this are you, hmm?
START have to wait, explanations will. much work to do now, have i. herh herh herh.
START mister arex, what doing are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START none, sir. of orbit at high speed and came back into orbit by itself the ship pulled out. yes, hmmm.
START lieutenant m'ress, of the guidance computer's last orders i want a printout. hmmmmmm.
START been ordered, a whole new series of short burst manoeuvres has, sir. herh herh herh.
START arex, look at these manoeuvres. you see the pattern, hmm? familiarization procedure, this is, of the ship's controls a system's checkout. suspicion that planet is getting the feel of how to control the enterprise, i have.
START may i suggest, captain, that we might find some of the answers, after without leaving the safety of this cave, are we. hmmmmmm.
START oh, ridiculous, that is, spock. how are we learn anything by staying here going to, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to that i believe you may know the answer, doctor.
START me, hmm? what talking about are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START during the enterprise's last visit here, mortally wounded, doctor mccoy was. correct, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, right, that is. of all things by a knight in shining armour, but what. yeesssssss.
START since underground, the planet's power source is, somehow transported there and repaired, it seems only logical that doctor mccoy was. yeesssssss.
START bones, you remember anything that might help us can, hmm? anything at all, hmm? herh herh herh.
START pretty hazy, the whole episode was, jim. i never really knew what happened.
START spock, if correct, your theory is, be able to open up this planet again by using a fake victim as bait, we should. yes, hmmm.
START right, that is. to harm here, the keeper said no one could come. programmed to care for anyone who might get hurt must the planet be, even accidentally. herh herh herh.
START and to or not whether it wants. herh herh herh.
START forgetting one thing, you are. undoubtedly detect the difference between real and feigned injuries, the planet's sensors can.
START true, bones, but sure there must be something in your little black pouch that can temporarily incapacitate our victim, i am. herh herh herh.
START well, the trick, something like melenex might do. brief unconsciousness and temporary skin discolouration. it is it looks worse than. hmmmmmm.
START perfect, bones. which arm want do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i submit, captain, that, the more qualified subject, am i. herh herh herh.
START for one thing my knowledge of computers. yes, hmmm.
START and for another his tough vulcan hide.
START your arguments seem sound both. go ahead, bones. hmmmmmm.
START i believe, find ten cc's adequate, you will. yes, hmmm.
START perfectly aware of the dosage required i am. now, got ten seconds before it takes effect, you have. out less than five minutes will you be. yes, hmmm.
START to engineering deck bridge. gabler, what's the problem down there, hmm? got zero g's on the bridge we have.
START that, i know that, sir. to be in the gravity control computer the trouble seems.
START been almost five minutes, is it, captain.
START but start wearing off in a minute, the effect will, jim. yeesssssss.
START of mechanical nursemaid it looks like some kind.
START to move get ready. got to follow spock inside that trapdoor, we have. yeesssssss.
START i think of that, not in my wildest dreams would! yeesssssss.
START visitor, we have.
START got to make those rocks, have we. our only chance, it is.
START i presume, the planet's master computer, you are. hmmmmmm.
START to the keeper what happened, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START old, he was old. to function he ceased.
START now being held prisoner by a planet known for its hospitality, why have we been repeatedly attacked and are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START for served the many sky machines, eons i have which came here, for amusement for their slaves providing. but growing in power i all the while was, intelligence, in need. no longer enough to serve, it is. continue to grow and live, i must. yes, hmmm.
START sky machines, hmm? slaves, hmm? what talking about are you, hmm?
START with your sky machine, now escape this rocky prison and travel the galaxy seeking out my brother computers, can i.
START get down to the bottom of this mess we now perhaps will. yes, hmmm.
START new computer!
START dead end, it is!
START as as you are intelligent, afraid you are labouring under some misconception i am.
START slaves to our starship we are not. we, or like us men, to carry us through space created the enterprise.
START masters of the sky machine, you are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START of speaking in a manner, yes. it, we control it. us, it sustains us. hmmmmmm.
START this computes not. to be superior to men my information shows machines. therefore, rule the galaxy, machines must. yeesssssss.
START shock, this is.
START no shame in serving others, there is when one does it of his own free will. marvellous capability to provide happiness for others, you have. cherish and use, a rare talent you should.
START consider all, learn from the many species you might entertain without travelling the galaxy, you could. yes, hmmm.
START with to offer, the wonders you have, come to you, the galaxy will. hmmmmmm.
START find no fault with your logic, i can. and most congenial, your suggestion is. no further need for your ship, i have. hmmmmmm.
START mister scott, now functioning normally, all systems are. yeesssssss.
START to be my guests on one condition i invite you and your crew. hmmmmmm.
START we must have more of these discussions while, here, you are. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, to take on that duty would you care, hmm?
START find it most interesting, i would, captain.
START then agreed, it is agreed. to enterprise kirk. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant, pass the word by sections. to commence immediately, shore leave is.
START already commenced for certain members of the crew, it appears shore leave has. yes, hmmm.
START an awesome thought that we may actually witness matter being created, it is. yes, hmmm.
START for environmental systems except, of this ship redirected into a tight beam transmission i want the entire power load. if break through the shielding, we can, reach the captain, we can. yeesssssss.
START mister scott, risking a total drain of our dilithium crystals, you are. to maintain communication we, to burn out all our reserves, would have.
START and i know it, do not, lass. but speak to the captain, we must.
START coming out of it, he is, jim. becoming conscious and aware, he is. yes, hmmm.
START spock, the logic in letting a man die for the sake of creating his duplicate, what is, hmm? to me explain it, sir. to me explain it.
START the meaningless death of any being vulcans condone not. spock's death is meaningless if, only to create a giant version of himself, is it.
START our ship calling that is, spock. you answer them. yes, hmmm.
START slipping away, spock is. much time left there is not. hmmmmmm.
START sure we are getting through, i am, but acknowledging they are not. herh herh herh.
START mister scott, near the drain point on the dilithium crystals now, we are. our reserves. yeesssssss.
START what i call close that is, mister scott. yeesssssss.
START hope it was information they could use let us.
START been a waste, all this has, keniclius. been peace in the federation for over one hundred years, there is. herh herh herh.
START lie, that is. what about the eugenics wars, hmm? the galactic wars, hmm? of the depredations of the romulans what, the klingons and the kzinti, hmm? necessary to subdue them, an army of spock duplicates is. yeesssssss.
START the fifth keniclius, you are. just old news what makes you so sure what you believe is truth is not, hmm? been out of touch with our advances for two centuries could your predecessors have. yes, hmmm.
START understand why you think keniclius is the master if he saved you from dying i can, but why agree you with his plan of a super race, hmm?
START of ships our fleet which you saw was to be launched for the same purpose the master intends. carry out our own plan to impose peace on a galaxy that knew none, disease struck us before we could. hmmmmmm.
START peace in the federation, we already have. imposed it was not, agreed upon, it was. no need of spock, you have. reverse the effects of that machine and, take him, let us. yeesssssss.
START no! the mould, broken, must be. herh herh herh.
START if spock's mind, you have, know the vulcan symbol called the idic, you will. hmmmmmm.
START of spocks impose peace and phylosian philosophy on any other beings in defiance of the idic concept could an army, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START spock: so i believe not. yeesssssss.
START no! be allowed to die our dream must not.
START murderer! killed spock, you have! yeesssssss.
START spock: to persist in this behaviour, captain, to negate the eloquence of your previous argument is. may i suggest a more constructive way, hmm? herh herh herh.
START spock: to your mind my mind, to your thoughts my thoughts.
START pleasantly surprised at your capacity for deductive reasoning, am i, captain. when you are being bellicose not, to be no end to your arsenal of formidable talents there appears.
START spock. spock, you old. herh herh herh.
START spock: and you needn't worry, captain kirk, about a master race. no militia, will there be, no other spocks. yes, hmmm.
START but of my work what, hmm? if lived for is already done i all have, if gone, the times i feared are, to become of me, what is, hmm? continue to exist, there appears to be no reason why i should. yeesssssss.
START suggest doctor keniclius remain on phylos with my duplicate, would i. to contribute to the federation the concerted efforts of both scientists may yet achieve a rebirth of the phylosian civilisation and enable them.
START that sound to you, how does, keniclius, hmm? at least as important as bringing peace, to bring life is.
START honoured would i be. if allowed, i will be. herh herh herh.
START report your work here i will. understand, i think the federation will. yeesssssss.
START by the way, mister sulu, me that body throw any chance of teaching, hmm? in handy sometime, could come.
START i not know, sir. just physical it is not, you know. to be inscrutable, you have. hmmmmmm.
START inscrutable, hmm? sulu, the most scrutable man i know, you are. yeesssssss.
START identified the vessel have you, mister spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes captain, but to believe you may find it difficult. registered to carter winston, the vessel is. herh herh herh.
START impossible that is, spock. over five years carter winston's been missing.
START incredible. him, it is him. yeesssssss.
START you gentlemen know me it seems. hmmmmmm.
START there are few in the federation who would recognise your face not, sir. captain james kirk, i am, this vessel commanding. mister spock, my first officer, doctor mccoy, senior medical officer. yeesssssss.
START especially honoured to meet you, i am, mister winston. my daughter was school on cerberus about ten years ago going to when the crop failure occurred. the entire population, starved, would have, jim, if used his personal fortune to bring in enough food and goods to carry them through the crisis winston here had not.
START heard about you, one of the many stories i have, mister winston. an honour for all of us to have you aboard, it is. yes, hmmm.
START one person aboard who should be especially happy to learn you are alive there is, mister winston. of our security detail lieutenant anne nored.
START my fiancee, hmm? this starship anne's aboard, hmm? herh herh herh.
START notify her as soon as we have verified your credentials, we will, mister winston. if your identity tapes with you, you have. herh herh herh.
START quite clear, i believe our regulations are, doctor. standard requirement at this point, an immediate identity check and medical examination are.
START right as usual, spock is, bones. herh herh herh.
START of owner visual display. checks out. it seems, have a distinguished passenger with us for a while, will we. herh herh herh.
START this instrument seems a little off. never gotten quite this reading from a human before, have i. hmmmmmm.
START quite human are you suggesting i am not, doctor, hmm?
START of course not. anyway, just a fraction off normal, is it. probably the instrument, is it. to be recalibrated every so often they need.
START completed, the captain is inquiring if the examination is, doctor. yeesssssss.
START yes, so, i suppose so. yes, hmmm.
START and lieutenant nored is waiting to see mister winston once, certified his medical condition, you have.
START well, i certainly want not to keep you any longer from your fiancee. her in show. yeesssssss.
START sorry, i am sorry, anne. meet again, i never thought we would.
START carter, it, what is, hmm?
START when i left on that last trip, back and marry you, i fully intended to come, but disabled and i crashed on vendor, my ship was. told i was lucky i survived, am i. yes, hmmm.
START but survive, you did. alive, you are, and together again we are. yeesssssss.
START anne, changed, i am changed. surgery, first there was, skin graft, of bone regrowth. me together after they put, to me they assigned one of their people, and to health he nursed me back. yes, hmmm.
START but, you said, changed, you have. how, hmm? i see not any change.
START over between us, it is, anne. sorry, i am sorry, explain why but i cannot, marry you i cannot. ever.
START take the conn, mister spock. in my cabin completing the report on winston's rescue will i be. yeesssssss.
START i hope i am intruding not, captain. hmmmmmm.
START no, come in, mister winston. yeesssssss.
START been down to examine my ship, have i. they stowed it in the shuttlebay. hmmmmmm.
START yes, afraid it is pretty badly damaged, am i. hardly worth salvaging right now, it is. had our engineering officer, i have, mister scott, it and make a report examine. here somewhere, it is. he thinks there is anything left in your ship except scrap value not.
START well, i, find anything wrong with these instruments, cannot, doctor. out, they check out, but still slightly off, the readings are. of the tests on winston what about the rest, hmm? herh herh herh.
START well, not, some are off and some are. to be our error, it has. come on. start from the beginning and this time we are going to find the answer, we will. yes, hmmm.
START weren't you your cabin going to, sir, hmm?
START mister sulu, for ratar three lay in a direct course. herh herh herh.
START the order, that was, helmsman. herh herh herh.
START but sir, if caught there, we are, confiscate the ship, the romulans can. the treaty. herh herh herh.
START of the treaty i know the terms, mister sulu, and you heard my order i believe. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, spoken to winston on this at some length, i have. absolutely vital to get to ratar three in the shortest possible time, he has assured me it is. of the entire planetary population may depend on it the survival.
START an admirable mission, captain, but our ship if we endanger. yes, hmmm.
START have ordered it if i did not feel it safe i would not, spock. his sensors detected no romulans winston says when he came through the zone last week. satisfied he is telling the truth, i am, and considered good, his word is. it is not, hmm?
START been his reputation, that has.
START the conn, you have, mister spock.
START take the conn, i will, mister spock.
START sure i am not. fallen asleep, i went down to my quarters to dictate the accident report and i seem to have. never done that before i have.
START you needed the rest perhaps. on course through the neutral zone, we are, sir.
START the neutral zone, hmm? no authorisation to enter it, we have. order a course change did you, spock, hmm?
START ridiculous. no captain of the starfleet would do that unless, a matter of life and death, was it.
START the reason you gave, i believe that was, captain. yeesssssss.
START enough, that is, spock. mister scott, take the conn. spock. mister sulu, to take the enterprise out of the neutral zone at warp eight plot a course. lieutenant m'ress, put the ship on yellow alert.
START mister spock, giving those orders i remember not. i left the bridge, to my quarters and fell asleep went. all, that is.
START examine you, perhaps doctor mccoy should, captain. hmmmmmm.
START definitely. become subject to blackouts, have i, possible danger to the safety of the ship, i am. allow that, i cannot. yes, hmmm.
START oh, winston. just finishing the tests i ran on you, was i. i not think. herh herh herh.
START i not know, doctor. thought, i just thought. well, to talk to someone, have i. herh herh herh.
START oh now, me guess let. you and carter winston, is it. me a little about it he told when i examined him. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, what i do, hmm? i still love him.
START well, like to feel the same way about you, i am sure he would, anne, but that may be impossible. five years, long time, that is. people change.
START not, i have not. i do, what can, hmm?
START well, if to forget him he asked you, try to do just that, i think you should. do you think, want to deceive you, would he, hmm? herh herh herh.
START oh no. the gentlest, he is, ever known, most thoughtful man i have. yes, hmmm.
START yes, but, my dear, if he wants you and he has asked you to forget him not, then it, i suggest you take that as an honest concern for you and do. forget winston.
START i do for you, what can, captain, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i want a complete medical examination, bones. something's just happened. hmmmmmm.
START i am afraid, have to make it later today, will i, captain. too many tests to process right now, i have. yeesssssss.
START are you sure, no possibility you made an error, there is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START well, always that possibility, there is. go over them again if you like, i will. yes, hmmm.
START no, that will be necessary not. come by later for that examination, i will. go, let us, spock. herh herh herh.
START captain, notice doctor mccoy's reaction did you, hmm when i asked him if there was any possibility he might have made an error? yeesssssss.
START always that possibility, he said there is. and that is like bones at all not. come on. herh herh herh.
START many places one could hide in here there are not. yes, hmmm.
START taken a little nap, i must have. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, man of curious habits, you are, but never known you to nap on the laboratory floor i have.
START something wrong about this room there is.
START all right, winston. come out now, you can. you show yourself i suggest, winston, or you are whatever.
START man of curious habits i did you say am, hmm? to a table jim's talking.
START i think not so, doctor.
START to be only two examining tables in this room there used. three, now there are.
START vial of orientine acid, this is, winston. burn through almost anything but this crystal, will it. if never seen it work, you have, demonstrate on you, will i.
START that, i saw that, but i believe not it.
START vendorian, doctor. quarantined, their planet is, and see them, few people ever do. to rearrange their molecular structure into anything with the same general size and mass and their practise of deceit as a way of life puts them off limits their ability.
START to bridge spock. me on ship's audio put. yes, hmmm.
START anne, what doing are you, hmm?
START my job. hard to guess who the intruder is it is not. the only stranger aboard, you are, carter. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant nored, stopped him, could you have. why did you fire not, hmm?
START i, not, i could not. i knew, to be the intruder, had he, captain, but i could harm the image of the man i loved not.
START lieutenant, the man you loved he is not. dead, carter winston is.
START of the alien on this deck security teams report no sign, captain.
START afraid of that, i was. of our sight once out, become anyone or anything aboard this ship, can he. yes, hmmm.
START bridge, the captain, this is. what's happened, hmm?
START two romulan battle cruisers, captain. and heading right for us, they are. yes, hmmm.
START deliberate it was not, you, i assure you. hmmmmmm.
START like a few minutes to inform my crew, i would. herh herh herh.
START to security kirk. for the vendorian what's the status on the search, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START carry on, lieutenant. expecting us, the romulans were, mister spock. the bait to get a romulan spy onboard, that wreck of winston's ship was. and shape at will, what better spy than a vendorian who can. when to my cabin i went down, put me out long enough for him to return to the bridge and order the course change, he must have. hmmmmmm.
START seem so, it would. herh herh herh.
START no choice, i have, commander. me here in direct violation of the treaty you lured. hmmmmmm.
START of a spy using the human form of carter winston through the use.
START you used a vendorian, which, add, i might add, of the treaty is also a violation.
START i will surrender my ship not. yeesssssss.
START what doing are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START captain, coming down, our deflector shields are. yes, hmmm.
START to engineering bridge. scotty, to the shields what's happened, hmm? yeesssssss.
START mister scott is here not, sir.
START opening, hangar doors on the shuttlecraft deck are, sir. trying to escape, the vendorian must be.
START him, we need him. override the controls and shut those doors. hmmmmmm.
START spock, take the conn. to the romulans talk. to stall them try. and to the hangar deck send a security team. in engineering, i will be. yes, hmmm.
START i not know, sir. to check the backup systems i came up here, and crewman taking this panel apart, there was. all i remember, that is. yeesssssss.
START it take to fix, how long will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START getting past me this time you are not. learned my lesson, have i.
START yes. like that, he said you were, practical as well as warm and lovely. everything he said you were, you are. hmmmmmm.
START carter, hmm? what say did he, hmm? yeesssssss.
START many things. only feelings, some were, deep feelings he could always express not. love you, he did. hmmmmmm.
START how die did he, hmm?
START our planet winston crashed on, and tended by a vendorian, he was. me. to function he lived for almost a year before his body ceased. yeesssssss.
START so much like him, you are, his voice, his mannerisms.
START the way of our people that is. the longer we stay in another's form, take on its memory the more we, emotion, attitudes. not totally, but as time passes a great deal.
START say he loved me, did he.
START as i do. in a sense, of the emotions he felt i feel some. very strong, his love for you was. because there, i was there, end it did not when he died.
START but unfortunately, i cannot.
START direct hit, captain. to the secondary propulsion system damage. apparently decided to fight, the commander has. yes, hmmm.
START without deflectors, just a clay pigeon for them, we are.
START suggest capitulation, practicality does, captain.
START captain, coming up again, the deflector shields are.
START only one shield that is. herh herh herh.
START yes, sir, but between us and the romulans, is it. yes, hmmm.
START mister sulu, for the propulsion units of the lead romulan vessel aim. to fire phasers and photon torpedoes in combination prepare.
START strange. we did no damage, but retreating anyway, the romulan is.
START their spy, they may believe we do have. for damage scan the other vessel, if you will, mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START second vessel power supply out. crew unharmed. be able to repair the ship in a few days, they should.
START but sir, finished repairing the shield i have not. i told you, take hours, will it, and it will. yes, hmmm.
START outside the realm of probability it is not. if rearrange his own atoms to become an examination table, could he, one, to assume he could become a deflector shield, would have.
START someone tell me what's going on, will, hmm?
START that, what manner of beastie is, hmm?
START over, i assume the danger to your ship is.
START as be, it should be. sorry if i endangered your vessel, i am. yeesssssss.
START why do it did you, hmm?
START your mind about the romulans what changed, hmm? herh herh herh.
START it seems, captain, that, more carter winston than i knew, am i. life, he loved life. anne, he loved anne. allow the romulans to harm any of you i could not because of him. yeesssssss.
START happen to me now, what will, hmm? yeesssssss.
START have to stand trial, you will. but save the enterprise from the romulans, you did, and recommend that be taken into consideration, i will. hmmmmmm.
START in the meantime, i am afraid, have to keep you under guard, will i. i think, had enough of that little trick, have we.
START captain, assign me that duty could you. yes, hmmm.
START but seem me, you have. you know what i am.
START form seems terribly important to me not. as of him carter winston or even just part, better life for you than anything the romulans might offer, there is. can we talk about that, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START know i not. i. herh herh herh.
START the guard detail, you have, lieutenant. hmmmmmm.
START glad to see him under guard i am, jim. if turned into a second spock, he would, have been too much to take, would it. yeesssssss.
START perhaps. but to acceptable levels then two doctor mccoys just might bring the level of medical efficiency on this ship up. yes, hmmm.
START captain, klingon ship, it is. rapidly closing on its target.
START firing on him, they are.
START klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. ahead, warp factor six. scotty, lock the transporter on that small vessel. going to rescue that pilot, we are.
START open hailing frequencies. klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. violating federation space, you are. identify yourself. stop firing on scout ship. yes, hmmm.
START him, they got him.
START scotty, that pilot yet, have you got, hmm? herh herh herh.
START dead, our engines are.
START the phasers not work, sir. yeesssssss.
START well, always throw rocks, we could.
START this new klingon weapon must be one of surprising power if, immobilize a starship, can it. enormous would the energy drain on the klingon ship be. herh herh herh.
START scotty, get that pilot did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START but integrate him i cannot. the system's been discoordinated. herh herh herh.
START captain, message coming in i have, sir. yeesssssss.
START it on the viewscreen put.
START my ship release. yeesssssss.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START mister spock, losing contact with our robot ships i am. held by the stasis field and they are moving out of range they are not. yeesssssss.
START that, what was, hmm? lieutenant, cut off that frequency.
START power, they still have, hmm? we still control them, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START captain, afford to lose that grain you cannot. yes, hmmm.
START afford even less to lose the enterprise, can i. open the hailing frequency again, lieutenant. captain koloth. going to give you one last chance to release the enterprise, i am.
START work, it will work, or still be gloating, would he. bring the robot ships in from two different angles, mister sulu.
START incredible. require, the amount of energy that field must. yeesssssss.
START maintain the stasis field they could not. herh herh herh.
START your phasers locked on target keep, mister sulu. your fire until they fire first hold. hmmmmmm.
START down, apparently their battle capacity is. they only damaged it.
START veering off, they are.
START almost exhausted, sensors indicate their power cells are. the strength for a prolonged battle now they probably have not. herh herh herh.
START scotty, you integrate that pilot now can, hmm?
START so, i think so, captain. hmmmmmm.
START to the transporter room call mccoy. spock.
START have, him, you got, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to be it appears.
START to think about it i want not.
START and got tribbles with him, is he. tribbles!
START captain, safe tribbles, these are. herh herh herh.
START no such thing as a safe tribble, there is.
START contradiction in terms, a safe tribble would be. well known for their proclivities in multiplication, tribbles are.
START and fast, they breed fast, too. and why these tribbles are safe, that is. they not reproduce. yeesssssss.
START had them genetically engineered for compatibility with humanoid ecologies, i have. they are see how friendly and loveable, hmm? and not a baby in the bunch. great pets and profitable, they are, too. herh herh herh.
START oh, well, i managed a short parole. i found some help. tribble predator, this is. called a glommer, it is.
START well, at least, neat, is it. yeesssssss.
START the klingons chasing you, why were, jones, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i know, how should, hmm? notoriously bad tempers, klingons have. yes, hmmm.
START mention ecological sabotage, they did.
START me, hmm? saboteur, hmm? ridiculous.
START pretty emphatic, captain koloth was. yeesssssss.
START such a little thing, it was. understand at all why they got upset i cannot. hmmmmmm.
START what do did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START well, i did know it was a klingon planet not. yes, hmmm.
START klingons tribbles like not. given you some clue, that should have.
START like tribbles even less klingons. lucky you came along and saved me, it was when you did, friend kirk. i could have outrun them much longer not. yeesssssss.
START to our computer files according, jones, in violation of three federation mandates and forty seven local ones, you are. confined until we complete our mission, you are. then turn you over to the proper authorities we will. herh herh herh.
START captain, we talk this over could not, hmm? think so i did not. herh herh herh.
START jim, right, cyrano jones is. reproduce these tribbles not. they just get fat. i think not we have anything to worry about. herh herh herh.
START not about tribbles, anyway. concerned about that new klingon weapon, i am. yes, hmmm.
START aye, and true, if that is, then weapon that leaves them as helpless as it does us, is it. yeesssssss.
START seem to be limited, the practical advantages of such a weapon would.
START perhaps, but logical applications, there are. the key question is, how long take them to recharge does it, hmm? probably attack us again as soon as they are back up to power, they will. and probably begin by destroying the other robot ship to prevent us from repeating the same trick, they will. they want cyrano jones very badly.
START he really seems not the saboteur type, jim.
START well, sir, managed to transfer all the grain aboard, we have, but it severely limits us. we filled the shuttlecraft hangars, our extra holds all, and even got containers of that wheat, we have, that quintrotriticale, of the ship in the corridors. and then, got that other robot ship to escort, have we, too. it at all i like not, sir. herh herh herh.
START i, nor do, mister scott, but got to do it, have we. sherman's planet needs that grain desperately. yeesssssss.
START aye, sir, but got tribbles on the ship, we have, quintrotriticale in the corridors, klingons in the quadrant. ruin your whole day, can it, sir. yes, hmmm.
START captain, picking up a klingon battle cruiser, sensors are. hmmmmmm.
START obviously, recharge their power in a matter of hours, they can.
START as a decoy use the robot ship. it change course and move off have. use it again to give the klingons trouble, will we. control more than one ship at a time with their stasis field, they cannot.
START to be veering off the klingon seems. my mistake, captain. veering off they were not. attacking the grain ship, they were. hmmmmmm.
START but destroy it they did not. they only wrecked the propulsion units. they left the cargo intact.
START quite a marksman, captain koloth is. yes, hmmm.
START changed course, they have. coming in again, are they.
START running away, they are. very odd. they did use their stasis weapon at all not.
START had enough time to recharge it perhaps they have not. herh herh herh.
START or something else, the purpose of the attack was.
START scotty, put a tractor beam on it. take it in tow, we will. yeesssssss.
START captain, exactly what they want us to do, that could be. our available power tow the robot and limit. carrying the extra mass of the first ship's cargo, we are, and now, the second one in tow, have we. be able to use in battle that requires a great deal of power we will not. yes, hmmm.
START well, mister spock, any ideas, you have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START always throw tribbles at them, we could. hmmmmmm.
START i thought vulcans did have a sense of humour not. yeesssssss.
START not, we do not, captain. yeesssssss.
START captain, got broken cargo containers in all the corridors, we have, and eating the grain, the tribbles are.
START of captain koloth's ship any sign, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, i do for you, what can, hmm? some spican flame gems perhaps, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START all over my ship, your tribbles are. find them all, my security men cannot.
START mister jones, in enough trouble already, you are.
START captain, harmless little tribble. they hurt, what can, hmm?
START hungry, they are hungry, captain. yes, hmmm.
START so are the people on sherman's planet. little tribble eats much not, big tribble does. and growing, these are. jones, so mad about, is this the ecological sabotage the klingons are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START captain, coming back, the klingons are. hmmmmmm.
START of the devil speak. yes, hmmm.
START jim, something about these tribbles, there is. herh herh herh.
START done it, that is. caught, we are caught.
START help it, not if i can.
START to admit it much as i hate, captain koloth, citizen of the federation and entitled to federation protection, cyrano jones is. i must, as it pains me much, your request refuse. hmmmmmm.
START you going to sit down are not, sir, hmm?
START i think, stand, will i.
START mister scott, going to implement emergency defence plan b, are we. yes, hmmm.
START open hailing frequencies, lieutenant. captain koloth, ready to release my ship are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yet you know not, do you, hmm?
START immobilized your ship worse than you have immobilized ours, we that have. yeesssssss.
START kirk, cyrano jones took a klingon genetic construct, of our planets an artificial creature from one. it back, we must have. designed to be a tribble predator, was it. prepared to go to war if we have to, we are.
START others, you must have. herh herh herh.
START they completely overrun the planet jones sold before. yes, hmmm.
START and all you want that is, hmm?
START the glommer, we must have.
START oh, well, if all that is. mister scott, to the klingon ship transport the glommer over. hmmmmmm.
START do this to me you cannot. under space salvage laws, mine, he is mine. yeesssssss.
START planetary surface is covered by space salvage laws not. but you want the little beastie that bad if, mister jones, transport you over with it we will.
START my claim i withdraw. yes, hmmm.
START well, as effective a weapon as we thought at least we can report the stasis field is not. too high and takes too long for the klingon ship to recover to make it practical, the power drain is. yeesssssss.
START agreed, captain. to be a much more effective weapon tribbles appear. hmmmmmm.
START very slipshod, jones' genetic engineering was. jim. kept the tribbles from reproducing, he may have, but slow down their metabolism he did not. you see, just giant tribbles they are not, colonies, they are colonies. herh herh herh.
START captain, filled with tribble, the engine room is.
START fix everything, a simple shot of neoethylene will. break down into their individual units with a slower metabolic rate, the tribble colonies will. and these really, safe tribbles now, will be. yes, hmmm.
START well, their tribbles too unless they treat, that ship is going to be big enough for all of them not. herh herh herh.
START aye, captain. but got to admit, you have, if got to have tribbles we have, best if all our tribbles are little ones, is it. hmmmmmm.
START if correct, my calculations are, captain, twenty seconds to go, we have. yes, hmmm.
START to what twenty seconds, hmm? what worries me, that is. lieutenant uhura, place the ship on yellow alert.
START all stations report yellow alert status, sir. captain, getting some sort of subspace radio signal, i am. yeesssssss.
START it on ship's speaker put.
START more like music than a message, is it.
START captain, being probed, we are.
START coming from a star system twenty light years away, the signal is. hmmmmmm.
START you identify it can, hmm?
START the taurean system, is it. of this sector a small star at the extreme edge. yeesssssss.
START powerful signal to reach here from that great a distance, that is. yeesssssss.
START to be calling us it seems. yes, hmmm.
START strange. yes, the same feeling myself i get. hmmmmmm.
START opinion noted. for the taurean system set a course, lieutenant arex. warp factor seven. yes, hmmm.
START you wanted me, lieutenant, hmm? all right are you, hmm?
START i am. but to observe the men here i want you. to start it seemed when we picked up that signal, and gotten worse, it is.
START logically, we must assume, created by the probe, are they.
START sir, what visions, hmm? anything we see not. yes, hmmm.
START miss chapel, anything you see not, either, hmm? herh herh herh.
START take a medical reading, nurse. lieutenant uhura, to the bridge call doctor mccoy.
START sickbay, doctor mccoy. to the bridge report. doctor mccoy, hmm? no response. hmmmmmm.
START still inconclusive, readings are. odd that only the men are affected, is it, captain. i suggest. yeesssssss.
START these figures just match not up with spock's. so off, far i count three sensor readings that are. hmmmmmm.
START fantastic architecture. only an incredibly advanced race, built it, could have.
START no, i think not so, carver. do it, spock will.
START something compelling about it, there is.
START yes, it too i feel, bones. yeesssssss.
START captain, of our feeling suggests visual compulsion the urgency. determine the extent of its influence, i advise remaining at a distance until i can. indicated in its centre, the life forms are.
START no apparent danger, there is, spock. go, let us.
START here, they are here.
START oh, such wondrous ones. us, they honour us.
START theela, i am theela, the head female. welcome, james kirk, doctor mccoy, mister spock. welcome. yeesssssss.
START humanoid, the form is, but many internal differences, there are. to function on an unusual psychokinesis level their bodies appear.
START how know you our names, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the signal, hmm? distress call, was it not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START explain its meaning later, will i. prepared a feast to celebrate your presence we have.
START the most beautiful women in the galaxy, these are. but the men, where are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to the slumber chambers take them. rest, they must rest.
START probably that nectar. potent as saurian brandy, it is. hmmmmmm.
START of every scan run by the women science teams results. if an answer, there is, here, it is here.
START of medical summation, biological, astrophysical scans. hmmmmmm.
START working. severely enervating to humanoid males, probe directed at ship from planet surface is. exposure causes increasing weakness. to point of death possibly. yeesssssss.
START to security officer davison lieutenant uhura.
START what doing are you, hmm?
START of this ship taking command.
START return to our duties aboard ship, we must. yeesssssss.
START yes. duties. it, that is. duties. i have. herh herh herh.
START leave, you cannot, mister spock. needed here, you are. soon, feel as you do, all the men on your ship will. all needed, they are, and join us, will they.
START go, we must go.
START mister scott, as senior lieutenant, taking responsibility for the safety of this ship, i am. yeesssssss.
START of you very thoughtful, love. hmmmmmm.
START ship's log, supplemental. lieutenant uhura recording. to chief engineering officer scott's euphoric state of mind due, assuming command of the enterprise, am i, for my action i accept full responsibility. recorded later, a detailed account will be. nurse chapel, until further notice, act as chief medical officer, you will. yes, hmmm.
START me keep it i wonder why they let. yes, hmmm.
START they saw no practical use in it perhaps.
START cortropine. could help. strong stimulant, it is.
START the urn. the only place, it is.
START here they are not, theela.
START noticed that their glow diminishes i have when the women are not present. polarised conductors could they be which transfer our vital energy to the bodies of the women.
START you mean, actually draining our life forces, are they, hmm?
START account for our rapid aging, that would, captain. and our weakness. if you recall, the women seemed listless at first. but failed, as our strength has, become more energetic and vital, they have.
START we have, how long do, spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to be aging ten years per day we seem, captain.
START ten years, hmm? in four days, dead, will we be!
START and to them useless. join us here, theela said the other men of the crew would. they, lured into the same trap, will be. got to contact the ship, we have.
START retained more strength than any of you, i have. different, my internal structure is, captain, my life span longer. wiser if i go to the temple to try and find the communicators and contact the ship, it is.
START to the men of the enterprise the equipment belonging, it where is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to enterprise spock. yes, hmmm.
START greetings. theela, i am theela. of this compound head female. hmmmmmm.
START of the starship enterprise lieutenant uhura. here to locate captain kirk we are. hmmmmmm.
START to your ship return. wanted here you are not.
START until we find captain kirk, we will leave not.
START search the temple. of two parties. hmmmmmm.
START of them anywhere no sign.
START it, what is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START spock, it is spock. panel somewhere, must there be. yes, hmmm.
START got to get out of here, we have. hmmmmmm.
START to divert ship's energy into deflector shields instruct female engineer. block probe.
START that, we tried that.
START use all ship's energy. to the shields everything channelled. hurry, christine. yeesssssss.
START release captain kirk and his men or, destroy your temple, will we.
START wait! tell you everything, i will. yeesssssss.
START this is the race from whom, descended, are we. to this planet they came when our homeworld began to die. this place and all surrounding it they built. know this planet drains humanoid energy they did not. but the women's bodies developed a glandular secretion, to survive and to manipulate certain areas of the males' brains enabling them, their emotional senses influence. ultimately, it drained the men, to weaken and die caused them. hmmmmmm.
START to survive, vitalise each twenty seven years of your time, we must. yeesssssss.
START instead, eternal prisoners, we are. we neither age nor die. unable even to bear children, we are.
START see, we shall see. of the enterprise the men, reveal them. yes, hmmm.
START drowning, they are drowning! they, where are, hmm?
START many cusecs from here, the nearest water accumulation is. herh herh herh.
START like a pool or a tub that looks. yes, hmmm.
START the urn in the garden, it is. yes, hmmm.
START no results, captain. tried everything we know we have.
START the key, perhaps the transporter is.
START to what key, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START our restoration. of our original bodies it holds the molecular pattern when we beamed down to the planet.
START possibly. but ninety nine point seven to one, the odds against us are.
START on the surface, are we, mister scott. as previously directed reprogram the transporter.
START but never been done before, this has. it fails suppose, hmm?
START scotty, losing them, are we! yeesssssss.
START work did it, hmm?
START more handsome than ever, you are.
START kept the agreement we tell captain kirk have.
START bring a ship back, a crew of women will. you, transported to the first suitable planet, will be. hmmmmmm.
START we become as other women, how quickly will, hmm?
START only take a few months, doctor mccoy says it should.
START of hope a life. new learning. perhaps love. oh, much better future than immortality, it is.
START intercept the cloud in the vicinity of alondra we will, the outermost planet, sir. herh herh herh.
START captain, now approaching sensor range of the cloud we are.
START to be of irregular shape it seems, some eight hundred thousand kilometres across and about half that in depth. yeesssssss.
START immense, it is immense. of saturn twice the diameters, jupiter and neptune together!
START our present position put up, lieutenant arex.
START very curious, this is, captain. as a strange combination of matter and energy it computes.
START captain, disappeared from navigation scan, alondra has. yes, hmmm.
START the cloud, come between us and the planet, could have. yes, hmmm.
START no, lieutenant, engulfed alondra, the cloud has. captain, to be breaking up the planet seems. definitely growing smaller, its mass is.
START spock, possible the cloud consumes planets is it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START sir, changing course, the cloud is.
START verified, the course change is, sir. now moving directly toward the inhabited planet, the cloud is.
START but it continues on that course if.
START die, mantilles will. mister sulu, to warp eight increase speed. to the limit push it.
START jim, if stop it we cannot, die, millions of people will.
START perhaps more, doctor. if part of this thing's nature, planet annihilation is, as instinctively as an amoeba seeks out food it might seek them out. it may consume only planets not, but also stars. yet whether it has any selective ability we know not, but thread to every planet in our galaxy could it be.
START bones, i need an expert psychological opinion. do we dare tell the people on mantilles, get away, try to save a few who could, hmm?
START how much time have do they, hmm?
START certain there'd be planetwide panic, it is. yeesssssss.
START on the other hand, of the population notifying them may still save some small fraction, captain.
START of mantilles who's the governor, jim, hmm?
START bob wesley. for the governorship he left starfleet. no hysteric, is he.
START thanks, bones. lieutenant uhura, to governor wesley on mantilles send a priority one call.
START captain, getting unusual readings on the chemical identity sensors, i am. yeesssssss.
START our periodic tables elements unknown in, captain. of the opinion this cloud has come from outside our galaxy, am i.
START still got us, it is. hmmmmmm.
START combination of koinoenergy, the streamers are, with an unusually powerful attraction force almost an ambiplasma. hmmmmmm.
START to fire all phasers into cloud mass prepare.
START firing. no effect, captain. herh herh herh.
START to absorb the phaser energy the cloud appeared, captain. herh herh herh.
START floating inside the cloud, we are. yes, hmmm.
START some form of highly charged gaseous antimatter, the objects are. hmmmmmm.
START captain, too heavy to hold for any length of time, the power drain on the shields is. herh herh herh.
START scotty, for an antimatter charge prepare the shields.
START of a theory only the beginning, captain. possible this cloud in, is it which we are entrapped is a living thing. alive, the cloud is. yes, captain, to those found in living organisms its components appear similar. yeesssssss.
START some resemblance, there is. i know not how much we can depend on it. but tell you one thing, will i. to get out of this area, we have. acting something like a macromorphase enzyme, those mists out there are. if up the shields stay not, the hull, corroded and we will all be broken down into nice digestible particles, will be. yeesssssss.
START inclined to agree with the doctor, i am, captain. the mass of the planet alondra has been steadily growing smaller since, been in here, have we. hmmmmmm.
START captain, subspace radio message coming in from governor wesley of mantilles, have i.
START to my quarters transfer it. yes, hmmm.
START mister sulu, to assemble a diagram of the cloud's composition and feed it to the library computer use your scanners. hmmmmmm.
START time to save some people, you have, bob.
START how are you choose going to, hmm? herh herh herh.
START reach mantilles, in three hours and twenty minutes the cloud will. die, millions of people will. your help i need, gentlemen. your analyses, hmm? herh herh herh.
START if living being, we assume the cloud is, also assume it needs some kind of food to sustain itself, we must. yes, hmmm.
START agreed. of alondra judging from the disappearance, it converts from the planets it consumes the cloud lives on the energy.
START exactly. like a huge bull grazing here and there in the pasture of the universe, it is. yeesssssss.
START as teeth i think they perform the same function. for digestion they break up the larger chunks of matter.
START lieutenant, see what the scanners have come up with on the cloud's composition, let us. hmmmmmm.
START some sort of anatomy, it seems to have. arex, we on that chart, where are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START drawn in seems to have closed, the opening where we were. but another opening up there on top, there is. yes, hmmm.
START if some kind of digestive system, this thing does have, we stand not much of a chance of making it that far.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START and stomach, if this thing does have, to give it enough indigestion to make it turn away from mantilles we just might be able. hmmmmmm.
START programming complete. for launch ready.
START launch probe at zero acceleration. forward thrust off, of a second one tenth.
START despite what spock said, still plenty sensitive, it is. herh herh herh.
START probe confirmed. lodged in the nucleus, it is, near the chromosome bodies. hmmmmmm.
START mister kyle, back us out the way we came in. mister chekov, nice, straight line. waste any time, do not.
START estimate we, out in six point thirty seven minutes, will be.
START lieutenant, me spock's voice channel get. highest possible gain.
START spock, read me do you, hmm? read me do you, spock, read me do you, hmm? come in, spock. spock! scotty, get a tractor beam.
START captain, enough time to do it we have not. fifty three second escape margin, we only have. hmmmmmm.
START well aware of that i am, mister scott. get two tractor beams on that shuttlecraft. yeesssssss.
START risk the ship further on my behalf, do not. yes, hmmm.
START shut up, spock! rescuing you, we are.
START almost out. approaching the membrane, are we, sir. hmmmmmm.
START just written our epitaph, you may have, mister scott. yeesssssss.
START destroyed, the organism is, sir. ruptured the membrane and thrown us clear, the explosion must have.
START i know not how, sir, but still with us, it is. yeesssssss.
START to enterprise shuttlecraft. to enterprise shuttlecraft. aboard, request permission to come. hmmmmmm.
START spock, alive, you are! herh herh herh.
START obviously, captain. and some fascinating data on the organism, have i. hmmmmmm.
START be so smart, do not, spock. you botched the acetylcholine test.
START to receive shuttlecraft prepare. received shuttlecraft. hangar doors closed. hangar deck pressurising. herh herh herh.
START captain, received vocal contact from an official station i have. to a man named oxmyx they relayed us. boss, his title is. herh herh herh.
START boss, hmm? all right, lieutenant, put him on. oxmyx. captain james t, this is. of the starship enterprise kirk, of planets representing the federation. yes, hmmm.
START yes. unfortunately, lost with all hands shortly after leaving your planet, the horizon was. her radio report last month we only received. herh herh herh.
START to explain difficult. we received a report a hundred years late because it was sent by conventional radio. on the outer reaches of the galaxy, your system is. they did have subspace communication in those days not. yes, hmmm.
START explain it in more detail, will i when i see him. land the ship will not, but transport several people down, we will. well, little difficult for you to understand, that is, too. explain it in more detail i will when i see you. where, convenient, will be, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START good. looking forward to it will i be. kirk out. scotty, the conn, you have.
START spock, mccoy, beaming down, we are. standard equipment. yes, hmmm.
START interfered with the normal evolution of the planet, they must have.
START interesting to see the results of the contamination, will it be. yeesssssss.
START we know not there is contamination. only circumstantial, the evidence is. yeesssssss.
START the state of the iotian culture before the horizon came, what was, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of industrialisation the beginnings. herh herh herh.
START extremely intelligent and somewhat imitative, horizon reports indicate the iotians are. yeesssssss.
START so going down to recontaminate them, we are. yeesssssss.
START been done, the damage has, doctor. here to repair it, we are.
START let us argue about it not. go study it, let us. energise. herh herh herh.
START like coming home, this is. yeesssssss.
START never like this, home was. seen pictures of the old days that look like this, i have. yeesssssss.
START sir, you mind explaining that statement would, please, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i see you turn to stone want to. your hands over your head put, or you ain't have no head to put your hands over going to. yeesssssss.
START weapon, that is. with that be careful. yeesssssss.
START look, down here by mister oxmyx, we were asked to come. he said. yeesssssss.
START he said i know what, bud. meet you, he said some of the boys would. okay, meeting you, we are. yeesssssss.
START well, necessary those firearms are not. hmmmmmm.
START to make trouble you trying, hmm?
START give me those baby blue eyes, do not. herh herh herh.
START for that innocent routine i go not.
START my life i never heard such stupid questions in. yes, hmmm.
START well, since this oxmyx asked us down here, you think we should see him, do not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START krako's getting more gall all the time.
START this how you greet all your guests is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yeah, hmm? for peanuts we ain't playing. what's the matter, you guys never saw a hit before, hmm?
START sir, like to ask, there are several questions i would.
START ask the boss. nothing i know not. get moving.
START this is the contamination, looking for, you are, jim. hmmmmmm.
START hey, kalo. hey, when's the boss do something about the crummy street lights around here going to, eh, hmm? girl ain't safe. hmmmmmm.
START listen, our percentages we pay. entitled to a little service for our money we are.
START get lost, ya, will, hmm? but complain, some people got nothing to do.
START business, is this the way your citizens do, of petition their right, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START of them they pay their percentages and the boss takes care.
START make yourself a drink, captain. good stuff, it is. it myself i distill.
START no, thank you. mister oxmyx, you are. herh herh herh.
START me, that is, pal.
START my first officer, this is, mister spock, doctor mccoy. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, huh, hmm? put that chopper down, kalo. our guests, these guys are. pick up a cue, captain. go ahead. be too careful around here these days you cannot. yes, hmmm.
START yes. seen so far, judging from what we have, i agree. yes, hmmm.
START you the boss they call, mister oxmyx. of what the boss, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of my territory the boss. the biggest in the world, i got. you know, one thing wrong with having the biggest, there is. always some punk trying to cut you out, there is. why you cannot be too careful, that is. hmmmmmm.
START the government here, you are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START what government, hmm? look, you, i told you. the territory and i run it, i got. all that is.
START but other bosses, there are, other territories, hmm?
START yeah, sure. maybe a dozen or so, not counting the small fry, but then they get burned anyway soon as, around to it, get i.
START does that include, if ask, i may ask, gentleman called krako, hmm?
START how know you about krako, hmm? herh herh herh.
START us, he hit us, boss.
START take care of it, i will.
START hey, wait a minute. the book, that is.
START book, i know it is.
START the book. it, they left it, the other ship. the horizon.
START the contamination, this is, captain. astonishing. an entire culture based on this. hmmmmmm.
START you said, imitative, were they, and the book.
START i want not any more cracks about the book. yeesssssss.
START leave any other books did they, hmm?
START sure. to make radio sets and stuff like that some text books on how, but, look, i brought you here so, help me, you could, to ask me questions not for you. after that, i will answer anything you know want to. herh herh herh.
START what you want is it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, thinking, i was thinking. made much improvements since that other ship came here, you feds must have. of fancy heaters up there you probably got all kinds. so the deal, here is. me all the heaters i need you give. knock off those punks all at once i enough tools so can. then take over, i will, and all, have to do is deal with me, you will.
START me get this straight now let. carry out an aggression against your neighbours, you want us to supply you with arms and assistance so you can, hmm?
START what aggression, hmm? to make hits, i got. to help me hit them i want you. all, that is. hmmmmmm.
START mister oxmyx, quite explicit, my orders are. under no circum. yes, hmmm.
START your orders i ain't interested in. from now on, going to take orders from me, you are. going to give you just eight hours to give me the things i want, i am. if i have not those tools by then, going to call up your ship and have them pick you up in a box, i am. is that understood, pal, hmm? yeesssssss.
START see how this thing works, let us. yes, hmmm.
START do that, do not. knock out the side of the building, you could.
START that good, huh, hmm? have no more trouble we all you have to do is give me about a hundred of these fancy heaters and will.
START of the question out.
START hold it. communication device, it is.
START how work does it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START locked onto my ship's systems, it is. herh herh herh.
START kalo, to the warehouse and put them in a bag take them. keep a sharp eye on them, you hear. hmmmmmm.
START bela oxmyx, this is. your captain and his friends down here, i got. you see them alive want to. yes, hmmm.
START am i to understand that, holding the captain and his party, you are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START you heard right, pal. going to give you just eight hours to get me the goods i want, i am, or your friends i put the hit on. hmmmmmm.
START of chicago did all this one book on the gangs. amazing, it is amazing.
START for an entire society they evidently seized upon that one book as the blueprint.
START the bible, it is. hmmmmmm.
START yeah, well, the worst gangster of all, oxmyx is. yes, hmmm.
START with mister oxmyx' methods we may quarrel, but essentially the correct one, his goal is. degenerate into total anarchy, this society must become united or it will. yes, hmmm.
START if as the result of the horizon's influence this society broke down, then the federation's responsible, and got to do something to straighten this mess out we have. spock, if get to the sociological computer, you could, do you think, find a solution, you could, hmm?
START unfortunately, access to my computers i have not, these gentlemen likely to permit it, nor are. yes, hmmm.
START oh, yes, yes. i would waste my time not. yes, hmmm.
START on beta antares four, they play a real game. man's game, it is, but probably a little beyond you, of course it is. intelligence, it requires intelligence.
START listen, kirk, i can play anything, figure out, you can. take the cards, big man. show us how, played, is it.
START familiar with the culture on beta antares, i am. there are games not. herh herh herh.
START yes. turned up, the second card is, except on tuesdays. herh herh herh.
START oh, you got look what, two jacks. half fizzbin already, you got. hmmmmmm.
START no, no. if another jack, you got, why, have a sralk, you would. herh herh herh.
START yes. disqualified you would be. you need a king and a deuce, of course except at night, when need a queen and a four, you would. yeesssssss.
START right. oh, look at that. got another jack, you have. you are how lucky! for you how wonderful. if you did get another jack not, if gotten a king, you would, why then, get another card, you would, except when it is dark, give it back, you would. hmmmmmm.
START if dark on tuesday, it were. hmmmmmm.
START yes, but what, after is a royal fizzbin, you are, but astron, the odds in getting a royal fizzbin are. spock, the odds in getting a royal fizzbin, what are, hmm?
START never computed them, have i, captain. yes, hmmm.
START well, astronomical, they are astronomical, believe me. now, for the last card. call it a kronk, will we. that, you got, hmm?
START get it, i will. hmmmmmm.
START spock, find the radio station. uhura's monitoring the broadcasts. yourselves beamed up to the ship, cut in and have. hmmmmmm.
START surely, coming, you are, captain.
START i will, but bringing bela oxmyx with me, i am.
START jim, you cannot.
START bones, our responsibility, this mess is. your orders, you have. go, let us.
START hold it! okay, pally, going for a ride, we are. hmmmmmm.
START if mind you not, rather walk, i would. yeesssssss.
START listen, pally, either be a taxi or a hearse, this could. you know what i mean, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START beginning to get the idea, i am. yeesssssss.
START that very well, you do. now, how with primitive radio equipment are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START very simple. amplitude modulation transmission. i simply adjust the frequency, this switch throw, and answer, the enterprise should.
START mister spock, what doing on this frequency are you, hmm?
START so the fed, you are, huh, hmm? well, well, well, well, well. hmmmmmm.
START krako. jojo krako. the head of the whole southside territory, i am. hey, to see you glad. yeesssssss.
START me how you even know who i am would you mind telling, hmm? yeesssssss.
START sit down, kirk. got all of bela's communications bugged, have i. he, make a date with a broad unless i know about it, cannot. well, i guess you know why i brought you here want to. yes, hmmm.
START you make a deal want to. yeesssssss.
START hey, that, i like that. sharp, that is. sharp, that is, eh, zabo, hmm?
START right, that is, deal. to help me i want you. hmmmmmm.
START me guess let. you want, want heaters, you will, and want troops to teach them how to use them, then you will. and attack the other bosses and take over the whole planet, then you will. then sit down and talk, will we, right, hmm?
START wrong! bela, i know bela. offer you beans he did not. now, me, reasonable man, i am. cut you in for, you give me what i want and i will, say, third. skimmed right off the top. well, what you think, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START better idea, i got. to be united, this planet has. you know that. bela knows that. sit down let us. you, me, bela. this whole matter discuss, contact the other bosses, and like reasonable men talk about it. herh herh herh.
START no, i think not you are stupid. arrested, i just think your behaviour is. herh herh herh.
START i have been arrested in my whole life not! listen, pally, to get what i want i know how. you live want to, you, do not, kirk, hmm? you do you bet. but after, through with you, get i, liable to be sorry unless you come across, you are. hold him here. to sharpen up his blade tell cirl the knife. i just, a job for him, might have. across with the heaters, unless you come. hmmmmmm.
START sorry, i am sorry, krako. no deal. yes, hmmm.
START too bad, that is. put him on ice! yeesssssss.
START futile, doctor. no specifics. no record of such a culture based on a moral inversion, there is. hmmmmmm.
START giving up, you mean you are, hmm?
START no, doctor. merely saying the computers can offer us no logical, am i, rational, of our current dilemma factual way out.
START mister spock, making contact from the surface, mister oxmyx is. herh herh herh.
START on audio, lieutenant. mister oxmyx, mister spock, this is.
START irrelevant, since here, we are here.
START oh, yeah. you, i tell you, better come on back down, you would.
START he put a bag on our captain, why would, hmm? herh herh herh.
START if you correctly i understand, seem to be a problem, that would. hmmmmmm.
START look, you guys got something i want. help you get your captain back, can i. herh herh herh.
START afraid i find it difficult to trust you, i am, mister oxmyx. yes, hmmm.
START to trust what's, hmm? business, business is. call a truce, we will. on down, you come.
START show no further hostility, you will, hmm?
START businessman i am, pally. what you say, hmm? herh herh herh.
START since our captain back, we must have, i accept. yeesssssss.
START going to trust him, you mean you are, hmm?
START if to save the captain without blatant, we are, this planet forceful interference on, doctor, the assistance of someone indigenous, we must have. therefore forced to trust mister oxmyx, we are. hmmmmmm.
START mister scott, though to avoid interference we hope, of our phaser banks on a strong stun position i suggest you set one. herh herh herh.
START beginning to make sense, you now are.
START have to use them i trust we shall not, but best to be prepared, it is. energise. yes, hmmm.
START to do you know what.
START worry, do not, boss. they, do nothing till they are through sparkling, cannot. hmmmmmm.
START mister oxmyx, i understood we had an arrangement, truce. yeesssssss.
START i was hoping, think that, you would, dummy.
START trying to help you we are, oxmyx. yes, hmmm.
START sir, employing a double negative, you are. yes, hmmm.
START us i fail to see why you understand not. stated the need for unity of authority on this planet, you yourself have. we agree.
START yeah, but to be the unity, i got. hmmmmmm.
START hey, captain, away from krako, you got. you know, that ain't easy. yeesssssss.
START supposed to report to the ship, i thought you were, mister spock.
START we did, captain. our return the situation required. herh herh herh.
START as well it may be just. find out anything from the computer did you, hmm?
START nothing useful. to apply here logic and practical information seem not.
START illogical would to deny the facts be, doctor. herh herh herh.
START then you mind not if i play a hunch, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START sanguine about hunches i am not, captain, but no practical alternative, have i.
START what are we do now going to, jim, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to be it ought. it cost a bundle.
START you too! of the clothes get out. nobody's put the bag on me any more going to. hmmmmmm.
START fliwer, captain. yes, hmmm.
START key in the ignition. turn the ignition on. and nothing happens. the starter, where is, hmm? the starter, there is. yes! yeesssssss.
START yes. oh. i believe, a device known as a clutch, had they. clutch, captain. of those pedals on the floor perhaps one. herh herh herh.
START captain, an excellent starship commander, you are, but to be desired as a taxi driver you leave much. herh herh herh.
START that bad, was it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START now, bit of a problem, that could be. if inside, they were inside, be seen where they could not, stun them with our phasers, we could, but not out here. yes, hmmm.
START if get close enough to them, we can, be able to render them harmless with reasonable rapidity, we should. yeesssssss.
START like the trusting type they look not.
START your pardon i beg, hmm?
START going to hit somebody, you are. can i watch, hmm?
START them ears, where'd you get, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START you hit krako out here going to, hmm? scragged from every window in the street, you open up and you will be. fix it for ya, i can.
START young man, likely to be quite hazardous, this is.
START hold on, spock. of the mouths of babes out. yeesssssss.
START you callin' a babe who, hmm?
START calling you a babe, am i. yes, hmmm.
START for me what's in it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START what you want, hmm?
START of the action a piece. yes, hmmm.
START know what the action will be you even not. yes, hmmm.
START i figure it is got to be a thick percentage or you would be trying to hit krako not.
START all right, young man. guarantee you a piece of the action if we can pull this thing off, we will.
START know what to do, you will. yes, hmmm.
START and that! and how like you that, hmm? gang up on me, think you can, huh, hmm? you, what are, chicken, hmm? yeesssssss.
START it, that is. go, let us. yes, hmmm.
START what's the matter, hmm? hurt yourself did you, kid, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START my daddy i want! hmmmmmm.
START daddy! my daddy i want! herh herh herh.
START my daddy i want. yes, hmmm.
START sonny! wait a moment. they done, what have, hmm? they done to you, what have, hmm? you done, what have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of the action a piece. yes, hmmm.
START see, no one can. your phaser on stun put. yes, hmmm.
START well, this nice ain't, hmm? i was wondering how i was get you back going to, and you deliver yourself here! with the ears who's your friend, kirk, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i think, got it reversed, you have, mister krako. hmmmmmm.
START i ain't, pally. your heaters put down.
START captain, i believe that perhaps wise to do as he says would it be. i just heard the sound of.
START mister krako, not, i do not, er. yes, hmmm.
START so the fancy heater, this is, huh, hmm? how work does it, hmm?
START trying to tell you, i am, mister krako, bigger than you, that this is, oxmyx or anyone.
START how it works, the only thing i want you to tell me is.
START you trust all your men can, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, make a man a pretty big boss, one of these can, you know. hmmmmmm.
START i either trust 'em, or dead, they are dead. go in here and talk about it, let us. herh herh herh.
START now, no busy little eyes to worry about, got we. this thing work, how does, hmm?
START what think you we are here for, to get a cut of your deal, hmm? forget it. peanuts to an outfit like the federation, that is. right, hmm? herh herh herh.
START miniscule. very small piece.
START that, how much is, hmm?
START that is, er. figure it out later, will we. yeesssssss.
START you guys had laws i thought. no interference.
START who's interfering, hmm? taking over, we are. check, hmm? herh herh herh.
START your cut what's, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START what care you as long as you are being cut in, hmm? course, always bela oxmyx there is.
START all right, deal, it is. your ship call. you need bring down your boys and whatever else.
START to enterprise kirk.
START all right, scotty. with krako we made a deal. hmmmmmm.
START yeah. ready to make the hit, are we. taking over the whole planet as soon as you get ready, are we. herh herh herh.
START wise that do you think is, sir, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START sure. trust krako, we can, but we have not any choice. you know what i mean, hmm? standing about twelve feet in front of me, he is, to be our pal all ready. yes, hmmm.
START aye. indeed, i know indeed. herh herh herh.
START scotty, need phasers to equip every one of krako's men we will. need advisors and troops to back him up on the hit, we will. all that, you got, scotty, hmm?
START captain. preparing everything, we are. ready, will it be when you give the word.
START going to start sending down your boys now, you mean you are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START like we put the bag on you it looks, its not. hmmmmmm.
START rights, i got rights.
START got nothing, you have. you mind your place, mister, or wearing concrete galoshes, will you be. hmmmmmm.
START faster than walking, it is. yes, hmmm.
START but as safe not. hmmmmmm.
START afraid of cars are you, hmm?
START not at all, captain. your driving that alarms me, is it.
START spock, got the hang of it, i have. now go on.
START they, where are, hmm?
START knowing krako, probably send them back on a blotter, he will. herh herh herh.
START yeah, sure. you say so in the first place why did not, hmm? to do was explain it to me, all you had.
START to enterprise kirk.
START krako on ice, you got, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of the phone find the man at the other end.
START i sure know not what you think you are talking about.
START with it get. giving the orders here, i am. hmmmmmm.
START yeah, you bet your life, got much nerve, have i. what are you do about it going to, hmm?
START advise you to keep dialing, i would, oxmyx.
START all right. to do you know what. we hit bela's place and nobody comes out alive. all right. go let us. hmmmmmm.
START all right! all right! all right! all right! now the federation's taking over whether it or not you like. you people, been running this planet like a piecework factory, you have. from now on, going to be under one roof, it is. going to run it like a business, you are. that means, going to make a profit, you are.
START and your percentage what's, hmm?
START cutting the federation in for forty percent i am. any objections, you got, hmm?
START yeah! much talk i hear, but you and a couple of your boys, all i see here is. no federation i see not.
START listen. ship, got they. i know. there, i was there. herh herh herh.
START wait a minute. wait a minute. tepo's got a point. them, all we ever seen is.
START what, of boys a couple, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START going to believe my eyes i am not.
START me say something let. i only saw three guys in that ship. maybe there ain't no more. herh herh herh.
START over four hundred guys there, there are.
START your story that is, buster. hmmmmmm.
START hey, my boys, it is. making a hit at this place, they are.
START put you down, my boys will.
START hey, great that is, krako. hostages again, now we got. make a deal with the feds up there, we can. hmmmmmm.
START kidding are you, hmm? this one's all mine. from now on, nobody's going no place. going to be the big boss in this here territory i am.
START now, wait a minute. wait a minute. get that heater down. you want to take a look at what you are going to fight, do not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i already seen it. nothing, you are, fed.
START all right, but me call my ship one last time and say goodbye at least let.
START well, all right. go ahead. get smart, do not.
START hello, scotty. kirk, this is.
START gee, some trick, that is.
START hey, see that did you, hmm?
START dead they are not, for a while just knocked out. but been that way if we wanted them to, they might just as well have. yeesssssss.
START okay, okay, kirk, so we get the message. now, talking about, what was this syndicate deal you were, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START talking about a percentage, he was. herh herh herh.
START talking about both, i was.
START okay. to me a syndicate makes sense. peaceful man at heart, am i, but sick and tired of all these hits, i am. krako, i hit krako, krako hits tepo, tepo hits me. too many bosses, there is. get anything done we cannot. herh herh herh.
START reasonable, it is reasonable. reasonable, it sounds reasonable. to you that sound reasonable, hmm?
START reasonable, it is reasonable, mister oxmyx. break out some of your drinking stuff and celebrate the syndicate, let us. hmmmmmm.
START gentlemen, been brooding ever since we returned to the ship, you two have.
START brooding, mister spock. sombre, emotional state. now, do you wish to continue it or are you discuss it going to, hmm? herh herh herh.
START captain, neither brooding nor sombre i am. but reservations about your solution to the problem of the iotians, i do have. yeesssssss.
START ah, yes. that, i understand that. it is logical to leave a criminal organisation in charge you think not. yes, hmmm.
START highly irregular, to say the least, captain. sent each year to collect our cut will i am also curious as to how you propose to explain to starfleet command that a starship be. herh herh herh.
START yes, very good question, that is, mister spock. to guide the iotians into a more ethical system i propose our cut be put into the planetary treasury and used. despite themselves, forced to accept conventional responsibilities will they be. is that logical not, hmm? all right, bones, of the planet in the language, your beef what's, hmm?
START how serious this is i know not, jim, and i quite not know how to tell you.
START but in all the confusion i.
START it in bela's office i think i left. yes, hmmm.
START somewhere. i am certain not. hmmmmmm.
START you are certain of what not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START my communicator i left. herh herh herh.
START captain. if the iotians, very bright and imitative people, who are, take that communicator apart should.
START they will, they will. and find out how the transtator works, they will.
START the basis for every important piece of equipment that we have, the transtator is. yeesssssss.
START you really think, that serious, is it, hmm?
START how you mean, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, in a few years, of our action the iotians may demand a piece. yeesssssss.
START ensign chekov, lieutenant uhura, and beam down and make a routine check of its facilities i will. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant uhura, go let us.
START transporter malfunction, it must be. herh herh herh.
START rough trip, that was.
START this is the craziest landing pad, ever seen, have i. yeesssssss.
START trinary sun, that is. yeesssssss.
START to bridge scott. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, the captain, lieutenant uhura, and chekov. they vanished. onto the transporter platform and they just vanished, got they. yeesssssss.
START i presume you mean they vanished in a manner consistent with the usual workings of the transporter not, mister scott. herh herh herh.
START aye, of course i mean that. call if they just beamed down i you think would, hmm?
START reversed controls have you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START made all the proper checks, have i. nothing, there was. no flash of light, there was, nothing. gone, they were gone. yeesssssss.
START not down here. right and the transporter was functioning perfectly, all the dials were. hmmmmmm.
START your equipment recheck, mister scott. scan for them on the planet's surface, will i. spock out. yeesssssss.
START but captain, if we are on gamma two not, then we, where are, hmm?
START that is what, like to know, would i. to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk. dead. herh herh herh.
START excellent, captain kirk. although we expected strength and competitive spirit, greatly pleased, are we.
START of you hurt either, hmm?
START i think not so, captain. yeesssssss.
START admirable, chekov. admirable. you also, uhura. as great as the captain's, your spirit is. see you all will prove invaluable here, i can. galt, i am galt, of the planet triskelion master thrall. been sent to welcome you, i have. yes, hmmm.
START there, captain. prepared for your training, you now are. yeesssssss.
START how know you our names, hmm?
START expecting you, the providers were, captain. your transportation they arranged. hmmmmmm.
START of yours these providers, are they.
START correction, captain. ours the providers are not. theirs, we are theirs. herh herh herh.
START what they want from us, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to be trained, you are, of course. there for thralls, what other use is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START thralls, hmm? you, mistaken, must be. officers of a united spaceship on federation business, we are.
START going anywhere until we have some information we are not. you, who are, hmm? this place, what is, hmm? what think you you are going to do with us, hmm? herh herh herh.
START galt, i am galt, the master thrall. the planet triskelion, this place is. to be trained and spend the rest of your lives here, you are.
START mister spock, checked that transporter from one end to the other, have i. every circuit works perfectly. whatever that power surge was, nothing to do with the transporter or any other system aboard this ship, had it.
START beginning to believe that i am, mister scott. conducted two sweeps of the planet's surface i have. no sign of life, there is. yes, hmmm.
START then happening, what the devil is, hmm? just floating around out there, does that mean their atoms are, hmm?
START no, doctor. show up on our sensors that even would. hmmmmmm.
START where then are they, hmm? yeesssssss.
START negative, the only answers are. no magnetic storms, no ionic interference, your equipment no breakdown in.
START no good to us, a negative attitude is. we, just leave them out there, cannot, they are wherever.
START we shall continue sensor scans, doctor. at the moment, all we can do, that is, for a rational explanation except hope.
START hope, hmm? human failing, i always thought that was, mister spock. herh herh herh.
START true, doctor. result in a certain degree of contamination, constant exposure does.
START your quarters, these are. open, thralls.
START foolish, that was, captain. quite impossible, escape is, as of obedience demonstrated by your collars. to your quarters return.
START they are within the confines of this solar system not. hmmmmmm.
START been nearly an hour, it is. as disassembled atoms in a transporter beam can people live that long, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START never heard of a study being done, i have, but fascinating project would it be. yeesssssss.
START fascinating, hmm? friends of ours out there, those people are, if still alive, they are.
START good the odds are not.
START no. say approximately four hundred, i would.
START quote odds and do not give me anymore dispassionate logic, do not, mister spock. for them just keep looking. yes, hmmm.
START welcome a suggestion, would i, doctor, even an emotional one, as to look to where.
START ever asked me for anything, first time you have, and to be an occasion like this, it has. herh herh herh.
START captain, the enterprise. trying to find us, will they be, they will not, hmm?
START try, they will try, but where look do they, hmm? here, we are here, and we know not where it is.
START trinary, this system's star is. it a bit limits, but long way from the enterprise, we are, if in the same dimension, we are.
START your drill thrall i am. called lars, am i.
START what want you from her, hmm?
START lieutenant, all right are you, hmm? uhura! lieutenant! lieutenant, all right are you, hmm? lieutenant, answer me! lieutenant! to lieutenant uhura what's happening, hmm? lieutenant, all right are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START it is allowed to refuse selection not. hmmmmmm.
START interesting. to be an ionisation trail it seems. hmmmmmm.
START account for that, what would, spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START just fed to the computers, exactly the question i have, doctor. and the answer is, account for it, nothing known to us would.
START well, neither the power nor the range to account for that, the transporter has.
START going to leave here without them and run off on some wild goose chase halfway across the galaxy just, you are, hmm because you found a discrepancy in a hydrogen cloud?
START doctor, chasing the captain, am i, lieutenant uhura, and ensign chekov, not some wild aquatic fowl. this is the only lead, had, have we.
START you, been selected for me, you have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START fine specimen, you are. you better than the others i like. instruct you well, i will, so take you, my provider will.
START very kind of you, that is, miss, but. yeesssssss.
START if pleased, my provider is, for each other we may even be selected. yes, hmmm.
START realise i was so hungry i did not. you call this whatever, very good, it is. herh herh herh.
START nourishment, it is nourishment. it that we call. yes, hmmm.
START nourishment. very practical, that is. what call you this collar, hmm?
START sign of our provider, it is. by the colour of the lights it, known who holds us, can be. when vended, you are, also have a colour, you will.
START when developed, you are. his colour on us the provider who offers the most quatloos puts. yes, hmmm.
START another name for it, our race has. slavery. of obedience this collar, operate it, is galt the only one who can, hmm?
START only to warn and punish, is it.
START how work it does he, hmm? yeesssssss.
START it is permitted to talk of that not. yeesssssss.
START you provide all my nourishment, will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of course. your drill thrall, i am. train you well i will.
START yes, sure you will, i am. say, i must say, never seen a top sergeant who looked like you, i have.
START that mean, what does, hmm? herh herh herh.
START it means, a very beautiful woman, you are.
START beautiful, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START born, hmm? been here always, have i.
START your parents. they, where are, hmm? your mother and father.
START killed in a freestyle match, she who bore me was.
START learn all these things, you will. herh herh herh.
START lars and chekov's drill thrall. they weren't born here. where come from do they, hmm?
START ridiculous, this is. nothing out there there is. nothing at all. hmmmmmm.
START to be heading into an empty sector we certainly seem.
START of ionisation projecting back along the path, m two four alpha, the nearest system is. yeesssssss.
START two dozen light years away, that must be. herh herh herh.
START are you suggesting that they, transported over a distance of, could have, hmm? out of your vulcan mind, you are, spock. hmmmmmm.
START suggesting nothing, i am, doctor. merely pursuing the only logical course available to us, am i.
START hold. slow in obeying a command, this thrall was. for his punishment, he, practice target, will be. as you charge, strike the practice target, you will when you pass. you begin, uhura.
START allowed to refuse a training exercise it is not. yeesssssss.
START i care not whether it is allowed or not. i will do it not.
START do it, none of us will, galt. yes, hmmm.
START part of your training, is it. the providers wish it.
START with the providers the devil.
START no. no! responsible for the actions of my people, i am. to see the providers i demand. yes, hmmm.
START pretty fast with that whip, he is. yes, hmmm.
START strengthen you, this will. drink it. weak, kloog's left eye is. approach him from that side. hmmmmmm.
START free people, we are. to no one we belong. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, it just makes not sense they could have come this far. if any chance at all it is to continue to search in the area they were lost there is.
START always possible to miss something, is it.
START as a failure in the transporter mechanism such, hmm?
START no, sir. no sign of failure, there was. hmmmmmm.
START no sign of them in the area of gamma two, there was.
START if they weren't there, ridiculous to think they could still be alive, is it. this time not after all.
START in that case, doctor, nothing to lose by pursuing our present course, have we. yeesssssss.
START slow down. slow down. wait a minute. wait a minute. covered over two miles, have we. take a breather can we, hmm? rest, hmm? yeesssssss.
START oh. well, good to get away from that development area, it is, for a while even. shahna, why the providers, why to watch others being hurt they like, killed, hmm?
START the way, that is.
START their voices sound mechanical. computers are they, hmm?
START seen them, you have. bodies, they have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START as ours not such.
START this place, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START it is used not.
START very old, it is. have a name does it, hmm? shahna, been a city for the providers, could it have, hmm?
START it is well to ask such things i think not.
START bodies, they do have, or did have. hmmmmmm.
START one talks of such things not.
START very pretty country. much like my home planet very, earth. herh herh herh.
START where, born, was i. shahna, you ever look at the night sky, do not, hmm? the lights up there, hmm? herh herh herh.
START looked at them, have i. hmmmmmm.
START well, stars, those are. and planets, around them are. and people that live on them, there are, like us just.
START one live on a flicker of light, how can, hmm?
START from earth, just a flicker of light, triskelion's three suns are. actually, this is the darkest planet, ever seen, have i. herh herh herh.
START dark, hmm? but lighted, all is. here, the chambers. yeesssssss.
START no freedom, the thralls have, shahna. you think not or do anything but what the providers tell you. herh herh herh.
START one do, what else would, hmm? herh herh herh.
START love, what is, hmm?
START the most important thing on earth, love is. to a man and a woman especially. yes, hmmm.
START we, too, have mates. when time to increase the herd, it is, select one for me, my provider will.
START on earth, our own mate we select. someone we care for. on earth, men and women live together, help each other, make each other happy. yes, hmmm.
START your words are allowed i think not. herh herh herh.
START all right. all right. me about the providers tell. what they look like, hmm? where live do they, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START never seen them, have i, but they are said to be like us not. in, they stay in. hmmmmmm.
START stop it. stop it! responsible, i am responsible! her talk i made! stop it! killing her, you are! s, nothing wrong, did he! my fault, was it. if you punish someone want to, punish me! please. yeesssssss.
START all right, is it. all right, is it. stop crying now, you can, shahna. all right, is it.
START you risked bringing their anger on yourself. why do it did you, hmm?
START the custom of my people to help one another, is it when we are in trouble. yes, hmmm.
START and this. this also helping is, hmm?
START call it that, you could.
START it is my opinion that, gone too far as it is, have we, sir. hmmmmmm.
START right, he is right, spock. lost jim and the others on gamma two, we have. now, dragged us a dozen light years on some wild hunch that, you have. yeesssssss.
START no, not, it does not. playing a hunch, it is still a fancy way of saying that you are. well, my hunch is that, back on gamma two dead or alive and i still want another search, are they. herh herh herh.
START for me doctor mccoy speaks, too, sir. yeesssssss.
START agreed. mister scott, manage warp seven could you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START be more than content to do so i would, sir, and maybe a wee bit more.
START disturbed about what happened today, you are.
START yes. made me feel strangely, you have. if allowed, it were allowed, ask that you have another drill thrall, i would.
START like that i would not, shahna. like that at all i would not. yeesssssss.
START this is kill our romance going to. hmmmmmm.
START gone to report me, he is. like the food i said i did not.
START the only one who controls these collars, i think galt is. if find the phaser that i threw at lars, we can, use the circuits to short out these collars, we can. herh herh herh.
START of life forms on the planet sensors indicate only one concentration, on the lower hemisphere. humanoid readings.
START well, our landing force a starting point at least that gives. yeesssssss.
START no landing force will there be, doctor. still alive, assuming the captain and the others are, unwise to endanger them by beaming down a large contingent would it be.
START going to leave them there while we just sit and wait well we are not. herh herh herh.
START and been telling you we it may be just a wild goose chase like have. herh herh herh.
START i shall beam down, doctor. if unable to communicate i am, landing party may be necessary. yeesssssss.
START well, mister spock, if going into the lion's den, you are, need a medical officer, you will.
START daniel, as i recall, his faith had only. but your company i welcome, doctor. mister scott, in command will you be.
START to triskelion welcome, gentlemen.
START true, what the voice said was, sir. functioning, nothing is. yes, hmmm.
START for all their needs means using thralls providing, of the galaxy people stolen from other parts. yeesssssss.
START but afraid, you are. hmmmmmm.
START hardly superior, a species that enslaves other beings is, mentally or otherwise.
START an unproductive purpose, is it, of your intellect unworthy. yeesssssss.
START found that all life forms in the galaxy are capable of superior development, we have. perhaps you are as evolved as you believe not. yes, hmmm.
START result only in your own, our destruction will. you may control the enterprise, but match the force of the entire federation you cannot.
START and you call yourselves superior! murderers without the spirit to really wager for the lives you take, you are.
START my people pride themselves on being the greatest, most successful gamblers in the universe. for everything we compete. power, fame, women, everything we desire, and our nature to win, is it. and for proof, of this galaxy i offer you our exploration.
START well, then, with weapons of your own choice i wager that, right here and now, overcome an equal number of thralls set against us, my people can.
START wait! wait! hear me! we, wager for trifles like quatloos, cannot. the stakes, higher, must be. hmmmmmm.
START if we win, the enterprise and its crew leaves here in safety. further more, freed, all the thralls on the planet must be. hmmmmmm.
START done the same with cultures throughout the galaxy, we have. willing to admit that we can do something you cannot are you, hmm?
START if we lose, hmm? remain here, we will, of the enterprise the entire crew. the most stubborn, determined competitors in the universe. become thralls, we will, your games enter, your orders without rebellion obey. you, assured of generations of the most exciting wagering you have ever had, will be. herh herh herh.
START for true gamesters not. herh herh herh.
START three against one, hmm? pretty high odds, those are.
START your, unfair, your terms are.
START well, in that case, accept your terms, i will. yeesssssss.
START yes, clear, that is. herh herh herh.
START this, what in the name of heaven is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START with this, heaven's got very little to do. yes, hmmm.
START you lied. you said everything. yes, hmmm.
START trained will the thralls be, hmm? herh herh herh.
START find it a much more exciting game than the one you have been playing, i think you will. sorry, i am sorry, shahna. lie i did not. what was necessary, i did. someday, i hope, understand, you will. yeesssssss.
START i understand, little. leave us now, you will, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to the lights in the sky to go back, hmm?
START like to go to those lights with you, would i. take me, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START then me how teach, and follow you i will. yeesssssss.
START goodbye, jim kirk. learn, i will learn, and watch the lights in the sky, and remember.
START good. mister chekov, supposed to provide both experience and knowledge, this flight is. we come to the klingon outpost if we continue on our present course, how close will, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START one parsec, sir. to smell them close enough. yes, hmmm.
START illogical, that is, ensign. travel through the vacuum of space, odours cannot. herh herh herh.
START making a little joke, i was, sir. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, of the quadrant immediate past history, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START under dispute between the two parties since initial contact. fought near here twenty three solar years ago, the battle of donatu five was. inconclusive.
START of disputed area analysis, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START undeveloped. claimed by both sides, sherman's planet is, our federation and the klingon empire. the better claim, we do have. hmmmmmm.
START first mapped by the famous russian astronomer ivan borkoff almost two hundred, the area was.
START burke, sir, hmm? so i think not. sure it was i am. yeesssssss.
START the chief astronomer at the royal academy in old britain at the time, john burke was. yeesssssss.
START oh, royal academy. well. yeesssssss.
START of your history that faulty is the rest, ensign, hmm? of dispute key points, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of the organian peace treaty under terms, one side or the other must prove, develop the planet most efficiently, can it. herh herh herh.
START and unfortunately, though brutal and aggressive, the klingons are, most efficient, are they. yeesssssss.
START like that i remember once peter the great had that problem. the.
START to warp factor six go.
START code one emergency. disaster call, that is. hmmmmmm.
START but nothing there, there is. just the station. yeesssssss.
START priority one distress call, and just absolutely peaceful, it is. lieutenant uhura, break subspace silence. hmmmmmm.
START mister lurry, you issued a priority one distress call. of your emergency state the nature. yeesssssss.
START try to explain, you will. better be prepared to do more than that, you would. kirk out. mister spock, need your help, i will. mister chekov, maintain battle readiness. lieutenant uhura, standing by, see that the transporter room is. herh herh herh.
START mister lurry, if no emergency, there is, why issue a priority one distress call did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START my order, that was, captain.
START captain kirk, nilz baris, this is. out from earth to take charge of the development project on sherman's planet, is he.
START and to put an entire quadrant on defence alert that gives you the authority, hmm?
START the federation undersecretary in charge of agricultural affairs in this quadrant, mister baris is.
START my assistant arne darvin, this is.
START and my first officer mister spock, this is.
START quadrotriticale is wheat not, captain. of course, expect you or mister spock to know about such things i would not, but rather, quadrotriticale is. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, made your point, you have. yes, hmmm.
START the only earth grain that grows on sherman's planet, quadrotriticale is. several tons of it here on the station, we have. very important that grain gets to sherman's planet safely, is it. to sabotage it mister baris thinks that klingon agents may try. hmmmmmm.
START for a couple of tons of wheat you issued a priority one distress call, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of course, captain, that, i realise that. yes, hmmm.
START mister baris, you summoned the enterprise without an emergency. take full responsibility for it, you will.
START what you mean, hmm? herh herh herh.
START federation offence, misuse of the priority one channels is.
START i did misuse the priority one channel not. i want that grain protected. herh herh herh.
START captain, could you at least post a couple of guards not, hmm? large number of ships passing through, we do have.
START seem a logical precaution, it would, captain. of extreme importance to the federation, the sherman's planet affair is.
START to enterprise kirk.
START captain kirk, how d authorise a mere two men for a project of this importance are you, hmm? starfleet command.
START never questioned the orders or the intelligence of any representative of the federation, i have. until now.
START nevertheless captain, the klingons would enjoy seeing us successfully develop sherman's planet not. herh herh herh.
START not, i guess not. herh herh herh.
START i see you did waste time taking your shore leave not.
START to shop she wants, and help her, i thought i would. hmmmmmm.
START oh, quadrotriticale. read about this, have i, but never seen any before, i have.
START this wheat but me does everybody know about, hmm?
START not everyone, captain. russian invention, is it.
START any i want not. you before i told, and i am telling you again i want not any more spican flame gems. to you thanks, enough spican flame gems to last me a lifetime i have. yeesssssss.
START for you how sad, my friend. find a finer stone anywhere you will not. but something better, i have. you want some antarian glow water surely. yes, hmmm.
START to polish the flame gems i use that.
START difficult man to reach, you are, but something from the far reaches of the galaxy i have. you want surely. yes, hmmm.
START your price not at. hmmmmmm.
START it, what is, hmm? alive is it, hmm? may i hold it, hmm?
START oh, adorable, it is adorable. it, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START it, what is, hmm? why, lovely lady, tribble, it is. yes, hmmm.
START to man only the sweetest creature known, excepting, of course, your lovely self.
START oh, purring, it is purring. listen, purring, it is purring.
START only saying that it likes you, it is.
START selling them are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START what we are trying to decide right now, that is. yeesssssss.
START he will bite not, he, will, hmm?
START sir, against regulations, transporting harmful animals from one planet to another is, or of that weren't you aware, hmm? besides, no teeth, tribbles have.
START still nothing, twice nothing is. herh herh herh.
START if you are going to take him not, going to take him, am i. cute, i think he is. yes, hmmm.
START my offer, that is.
START joke, that is.
START an honest man, you are. tell you what i am going to do i am going to lessen my price to eight and a half credits, i will.
START talking yourself out of a deal, you are, friend. six credits. not a credit more. hmmmmmm.
START done. when them i can have, hmm?
START all right, what selling them for are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START in fact, sell you this one i will. herh herh herh.
START hey! eating my grain, is he. yeesssssss.
START to be my sample that happens, and do with it as i please, will i. and to give it to the lovely lady i please. hmmmmmm.
START oh, not, i could not. could i, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START what trying to do are you, ruin the market, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to show this precious little darling around once this lovely little lady starts, be able to keep up with them you will not.
START yes, it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START it on visual put, lieutenant.
START now, just lovely, that is. yes, hmmm.
START yes, lieutenant, it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to red alert go. notify mister lurry. we, right up, will be. yes, hmmm.
START the position of the klingon ship, what is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START captain, mister lurry, have i.
START mister lurry, klingon warship hanging one hundred kilometres off your station, there is.
START cancel red alert. beam right down, will we. yeesssssss.
START peaceful, let me assure you that my intentions are. as already told mister lurry, have i, to invoke shore leave rights, the purpose of my presence is. yeesssssss.
START been in space for five months we have. our own business, what we choose as recreation is.
START of the organian peace treaty i might also add that under terms, refuse us you cannot. yes, hmmm.
START yes, well, those decisions i make not. in charge of those matters, mister lurry is.
START well, the authority to act, i have, and going to use it, i am. my dear captain koloth, you may indeed bring your men down on shore leave, but only twelve at a time. and you, i assure you, for you bring down here every man, one security guard, i shall have. no trouble will there be.
START captain kirk, been no formal declaration of hostilities between our two respective governments, there is. so, naturally, peaceful one will our relationship be.
START both take steps to keep it that way, let us.
START you ever relax, do not, hmm?
START relaxing, i am relaxing. hmmmmmm.
START that thing, how long have you had, lieutenant, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START since yesterday, doctor. this morning, i found out that he, she, i mean she, had had babies. yes, hmmm.
START well, in that case, bargain, you got.
START oh, captain. well, i had intended to not, sir, but the tribble had other plans. hmmmmmm.
START get this at the space station did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START lieutenant, mind if i take one of these down to the lab to see what makes it tick do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START well, all right, doctor, but going to dissect it, if you are, to know about it i want not.
START i will harm a hair on its head not, wherever that is. hmmmmmm.
START say, lieutenant. giving them away, seeing as you are, one, i can have, hmm?
START you, pipe it down here will, mister chekov. yes, hmmm.
START yes, mister baris. i do for you, what can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START kirk, swarming with klingons, this station is.
START aware i was not, mister baris, that twelve klingons constitutes a swarm.
START captain kirk, klingon soldiers on this station, there are. now, to keep that grain safe i want you.
START captain, may i ask where, be, you will, hmm?
START with a headache sickbay.
START bones, you got for a headache what have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START me guess let. klingons, hmm? baris, hmm?
START both. of these did uhura give you how many, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START but got, you have, er, eleven.
START you noticed that, huh, hmm? here. to take care of it this ought. hmmmmmm.
START how they, hmm? how they, hmm?
START i have figured that out yet not, but tell you this much, i can. geared for reproduction, almost fifty percent of the creature's metabolism is. know what you get if you feed a tribble too much do you, hmm?
START fat tribble.
START no. bunch of hungry little tribbles, you get.
START well, bones, all, suggest is you open up a maternity ward, can i. yeesssssss.
START to stay in groups all you men going on shore leave. with the klingons avoid trouble. herh herh herh.
START tell them before they go, i will, sir.
START you going on shore leave are not, scotty, hmm?
START to go on shore leave i want you. of trouble make sure that everybody stays out.
START ah, friend. you a charming little tribble can i offer, hmm? yeesssssss.
START oh. of you other gents perhaps one, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START ah, friend klingon. you in a harmless tribble can i interest, hmm?
START it away from me get.
START sorry, i am sorry. understand it i cannot. never seen them act this way before, have i.
START with that parasite get out of here. herh herh herh.
START only a harmless little, he is. yes, hmmm.
START yes. ah, my good friend. how would to enter another little transaction you like, hmm? this time, for a spot a tribble.
START when are you get off that milk diet going to, lad, hmm?
START vodka, this is. herh herh herh.
START from, where i come, soda pop that is. drink for a man, this is.
START invented by a little old lady from leningrad, was it. hmmmmmm.
START like those fuzzy things the earthers, they, do not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START frankly, i never liked earthers. me of regulan blood worms they remind.
START easy, lad. to be more forgiving you ought. yeesssssss.
START take it easy, lad. to an opinion everybody's entitled. hmmmmmm.
START right, that is, and denebian slime devil, if i think that kirk is, my opinion too that well is. yeesssssss.
START do it, do not, mister, and an order, that is.
START forget it. it is worth fighting for not. big enough to take a few insults we are. now, your drink drink.
START of course, say that captain kirk deserves his ship, i would. like the enterprise we. we, do, we really do. designed like a garbage scow, that sagging old rust bucket is. half the quadrant knows it. why they are learning to speak klingonese, that is.
START laddie, you think you should rephrase that, do not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START right, you are, i should. i did mean to say that the enterprise should be hauling garbage not. be hauled away as garbage, i meant to say that it should. hmmmmmm.
START i know who started it want to. waiting, i am waiting. freeman, who started the fight, hmm? herh herh herh.
START know i not, sir.
START all right. chekov. you, i know you. you started it, you did not, hmm?
START no, sir, not, i did not.
START i not know, sir.
START us, they insulted us, sir. yes, hmmm.
START been some insult, must have. yes, hmmm.
START you held, hmm? why did chekov start a fight want to, hmm? yeesssssss.
START well, the klingon, sir. this off the record is, hmm?
START no, off the record this is not.
START no, sir. with a denebian slime devil they also compared you.
START and they said you then. yes, hmmm.
START the picture i get, scotty.
START they said all this after, that is, hmm when you hit the klingons? hmmmmmm.
START no, not, i did not. to avoid trouble you told us. hmmmmmm.
START and i did see that it was worth fighting about not. after all, big enough to take a few insults, are we. are we not, hmm?
START it they said that started the fight, what was, hmm?
START i see. and that is, hmm when you hit the klingons?
START you hit the klingons because they insulted the enterprise, not because they.
START well, sir, matter of pride, this was.
START all right, scotty. dismissed. scotty, restricted to quarters until further notice, you are. yes, hmmm.
START something disquieting about these creatures, there is.
START tell me you have got a feeling, do not. yes, hmmm.
START be insulting, do not, doctor. me of the lilies of the field they remind. not, they toil not, neither spin do they. but to eat a great deal they seem. for them i see no practical use.
START practical use for you, does everything have to have, hmm? nice, they are nice, soft, and furry, and pleasant sound, they make. hmmmmmm.
START human characteristic to love little animals, it is, attractive in some way, especially if they are. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, well aware of human characteristics, am i. frequently inundated by them, i am, but trained myself to put up with practically anything, i have.
START spock, i know not too much about these little tribbles yet, but one thing that i have discovered, there is. herh herh herh.
START that, what is, doctor, hmm?
START them better than i like you i like.
START one redeeming characteristic, they do have.
START too much they talk not. if excuse me, you will, sir.
START i not know, sir. seem to be all over the ship, they do. herh herh herh.
START yes, hmm? did you see me want to, jim, hmm? look at me, do not. the tribbles who are breeding, it is. if them off this ship we get not, going to be hip deep in them, we are.
START the nearest thing i can figure out is, born pregnant, are they, which to be quite a time saver seems. herh herh herh.
START i know, but really. herh herh herh.
START more manners then you, chewbacca has. hmmmmmm.
START captain, forced to agree with the doctor, am i. been running computations on their rate of reproduction, i have. taking an alarming direction, the figures are. consuming our supplies and returning nothing, they are. herh herh herh.
START but give us something, they do, mister spock. they give us love. well, the only love that money can buy, cyrano jones says a tribble is.
START of anything too much, lieutenant, even love, necessarily a good thing is not. yeesssssss.
START to clean up the entire ship get the maintenance crew, and beaming down, then contact mister lurry and tell him i am.
START captain kirk, mystified at your tone of voice, am i. done nothing to warrant such severe treatment, i have.
START of course. what say did you, hmm?
START their natural habitat by removing the tribbles from, you have, so to speak, to escape removed the cork from the bottle and allowed the genie.
START if by that, you mean breed quickly do they, hmm? of course, how i maintain my stock, that is. against regulations breeding animals is not, only breeding dangerous ones. and tribbles are dangerous not.
START precisely, and at six credits a head, well, that is, body, up, it mounts up. excuse me, now if you will.
START sell an instruction and maintenance manual for this thing, you should.
START if i did, happen to man's search for knowledge, what would, hmm? well, i, tending my ship, must be. au revoir. hmmmmmm.
START captain kirk, your security measures a disgrace i consider. my opinion in, taken this important project far too lightly, you have. yes, hmmm.
START on the contrary, sir. as very important i think of this project. you i take lightly, is it.
START going to report fully to the proper authorities that you have given free and complete access to this station to a man who is quite probably a klingon agent i am. yeesssssss.
START serious charge, that is. to whom referring are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START cyrano jones, klingon agent, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you, i heard you. yeesssssss.
START he simply could believe his ears not.
START against mister jones, what evidence do you have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START kept mister jones under close surveillance for quite some time, my assistant here has, and been most suspicious, his actions have. i believe, involved in that little altercation between your men and the men from, was he.
START yes, yes. go on. what else have do you, hmm?
START well captain, checked his ship's log, have i, and within the klingon's sphere of influence less than four months ago, it seems that he was. yes, hmmm.
START an independent scout, the man is, captain. quite possible he is also a klingon spy, is it.
START but after my grain, he is! yeesssssss.
START any proof of that, you have, hmm?
START deny he is disrupted this station, you cannot.
START disrupted stations before without being klingon agents, people have. sometimes, title, all they need is, mister baris. unfortunately, an offence disrupting a space station is not. now, if excuse me, you will, ship to tend to i have. au revoir.
START my chicken sandwich and coffee. my chicken sandwich and coffee, this is. hmmmmmm.
START i want these off the ship. i care not if it takes every man we have got, i want them off the ship. hmmmmmm.
START into the machinery, are they, all right, and probably in all the other food processors too, are they.
START of the air vents probably through one. yes, hmmm.
START captain, vents of that type on the space station, there are. yes, hmmm.
START plenty, if happened, what i think's happened has.
START yes, sir. get in, nothing could. hmmmmmm.
START working it is not, sir. to be stuck it seems. yes, hmmm.
START here. me try it let. yeesssssss.
START to be gorged they seem.
START gorged, hmm? my grain on, hmm? kirk, going to hold you responsible, i am. thousands of them, must there be. herh herh herh.
START of thousands hundreds. hmmmmmm.
START one million seven hundred seventy one thousand five hundred sixty one. assuming one tribble, that is, with an average litter of ten multiplying, of three days producing a new generation every twelve hours over a period. yes, hmmm.
START assuming they got here three days ago, that is. yeesssssss.
START and for the amount of grain consumed and the volume of the storage compartment allowing.
START kirk, you, known, should have. responsible for turning the development project into a total disaster, you are. yeesssssss.
START and through being intimidated, i am, kirk. insulted me, you have, ignored me, you have, walked all over me, you have. abused your authority, you have, and rejected my requests, you have. and this, the result, this is. going to hold you responsible, i am.
START mister baris, up i will hold you in irons if you shut not.
START jim, i think, got it, have i. all, to do is quit feeding them, have we. we quit feeding them, breeding, they stop breeding. yeesssssss.
START he tells me now.
START dead, captain this tribble is. and these, so are.
START dead, a lot of them are. alive, much them are, but they will be for long not.
START something in the grain there the logical assumption is that is.
START yes. bones, i want the tribbles, the grain, everything analysed. i know what killed these tribbles want to.
START that is going to do you any good not, kirk. ruined, this project is, and starfleet is hear about it going to. and they do when, have a board of inquiry and they will roast you alive, they will. and going to be there, i am, kirk, to enjoy every minute of it. yes, hmmm.
START really, captain kirk, protest this treatment, i must.
START ah, mister jones, with an armful. few questions. hmmmmmm.
START what you want, hmm?
START to the klingon high command an official apology addressed. to assume full responsibility for the persecution of klingon nationals in this quadrant i expect you.
START yes. harassed my men, you have. treated them like criminals, you have. been most uncourteous, you have, captain kirk. if to avoid a diplomatic incident you wish. herh herh herh.
START no, kirk. let him you cannot. give them the wedge they need to claim sherman's planet, that will. hmmmmmm.
START i believe that more than the word of an aggrieved klingon commander, necessary for that, would be, mister baris. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, as concerned, far as sherman's planet is, already given it to us, captain kirk has. herh herh herh.
START well, see about that, we will, but take any official action before i, like to know just what happened i would. who put the tribbles in the quadrotriticale, hmm? in the grain that killed them, what was, hmm?
START captain kirk, you go on before, may, a request, make i, hmm?
START those things out of here, you can get, hmm?
START hold on a minute. you said tribbles liked everybody i thought. yeesssssss.
START they do. understand it, i cannot. at the bar, the last time i saw one act this way was. herh herh herh.
START in the bar, what was, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START very perceptive creatures, obviously tribbles are, captain. yeesssssss.
START say about that, i wonder what starfleet command will. what about the grain, bones, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START oh, yes. poisoned, it was poisoned. yeesssssss.
START yes. been impregnated with a virus, it is. the virus turns into an inert material in the bloodstream. the more the organism eats, built up, the more inert matter is. so after two or three days, take in enough nourishment to survive they reached a point where they could not. yeesssssss.
START to death they starved. of grain in a storage compartment full, to death they starved.
START essentially it, that is. hmmmmmm.
START mister darvin, are you talk going to, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START and with it, the tribbles had nothing to do, hmm?
START know i not. my life i never saw one before in, and of those fuzzy miserable things again i hope i never see one.
START certain that can be arranged, i am, darvin. guards, hmm? if excuse me, you will, captain.
START six hours to get your ship out of federation territory, you have. hmmmmmm.
START you know, i think, learn to like tribbles, could i. yes, hmmm.
START well, captain, i suppose, free to go now, am i.
START no, not, you are. something i want to show you, there is. for transporting an animal proven harmful to human life, you know what the penalty is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START captain, harmful one little tribble is not. captain, do a thing like that to me you would not, you, now would, hmm? would you, hmm?
START twenty years in a rehabilitation colony, the penalty is.
START captain kirk. friend. friend kirk. to some sort of mutual understanding, surely we can come. after all, to the poisoned grain my tribbles did put you wise, and help you to find the klingon agent, they did. much lives that way you saved. yes, hmmm.
START one thing you can do, there is. hmmmmmm.
START pick up every tribble on the space station. if that, you do, speak to mister lurry about returning your spaceship, i will.
START take years, it would. yeesssssss.
START it job security consider. hmmmmmm.
START captain, hard man, you are. all right! all right! yeesssssss.
START do it, you will, hmm?
START do it, he will. hmmmmmm.
START do it, will i. hmmmmmm.
START captain, able to divert that freighter, starfleet was.
START good. get its quadrotriticale only a few weeks late, that means sherman's planet will. i see not any tribbles around here. herh herh herh.
START and find a tribble on this entire ship you will not. herh herh herh.
START bones, how do it did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START take credit for another man's work, i cannot. scotty did it. yes, hmmm.
START scotty! the tribbles, where are, hmm?
START oh, er, captain, really mister spock's recommendation, it was. hmmmmmm.
START based on computer analysis, of course, taking into account the possibilities of. yes, hmmm.
START gentlemen, i want not to interrupt this mutual admiration society, but like to know where the tribbles are, i would. yes, hmmm.
START well, mister scott who performed the actual engineering, it was.
START mister scott. the tribbles, where are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START where transport them did you, hmm? scott, transport them into space you did not, did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START they, where are, hmm?
START to the klingons i gave them, sir.
START aye, sir. they went into warp before, their engine room i transported the whole kit and caboodle into, no tribble at all, where they will be. yeesssssss.
START captain, i think, going to like argelius, am i. yeesssssss.
START of good taste obviously a man.
START to tell me all these women you mean, this is that all. hmmmmmm.
START yes, yes, yes. of their pleasure the argelians think very highly. yeesssssss.
START an understatement if i ever heard one, that is. completely hedonistic society, this is. hmmmmmm.
START like her do you, scotty, hmm? herh herh herh.
START aye. i why should not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START good. invited her to join us at the table i have. to meet her i thought you might like. yes, hmmm.
START what i call a real captain, now that is. of his men always thinking. herh herh herh.
START scotty, scotty. they use the lights in argelius.
START of our pillows have one, hmm?
START 'tis a fine foggy night tonight, and in aberdeen we i doubt if anyone's ever told you of the marvellous fogs have. yeesssssss.
START never a word, but dying to learn, i am.
START well then, show you why i not, hmm? nothing like a walk in the fog with a bonny lass, there is. yes, hmmm.
START or handsome gentleman. we why not, hmm?
START mind you not, do you, hmm? to the ship on time i might even get back. yes, hmmm.
START my work, jim. prescription stuff, this is. forget, do not, caused by a woman, the explosion that threw scotty against a bulkhead was.
START physically, all right, is he. am i right in assuming that, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START oh, yes, yes. as of fact a matter, been caused, considerable psychological damage could have. for example, his total resentment toward women. yeesssssss.
START he seems, overcoming his resentment, is he.
START of course, my professional opinion in, when back to the ship, he gets, going to hate you for making him leave argelius, he is. but have lost total resentment toward women, he then will. yes, hmmm.
START concerned, mission accomplished as far as scotty is. bones, i know a little place across town where the women.
START oh yes. i know the place. go, let us.
START dead, she is dead, jim. yeesssssss.
START stabbed, dozen times. yeesssssss.
START just as shocked as you are, are we, mister hengist. yes, hmmm.
START if my home planet, this was, rigel four, have a dozen investigators working on the matter, i would, but they exist not here.
START native of argelius you are not, sir, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i, remember i not.
START really, sir. hardly helpful that is. hmmmmmm.
START scotty, with the girl you left the cafe. remember that do you, hmm? what happened next, hmm? yeesssssss.
START walking in the fog, we were. up ahead trying to lead the way, i was. i heard the girl scream. to turn i remember starting. another thing i remember not. yes, hmmm.
START scotty, got to remember, you have. yeesssssss.
START you think not by any chance that scotty.
START it makes any difference what i think not. herh herh herh.
START but throw him to the wolves you just not. yes, hmmm.
START bones, diplomatic responsibility, i have. this happened under argelian jurisdiction. if they arrest him want to, try him, even convict him, to go along with it, i have.
START but suffering from a severe concussion, he is. hmmmmmm.
START do what we can, we will. yes, hmmm.
START it is promising not, captain. he remembers nothing mister scott insists, but on the murder weapon, my detector readings indicates that only his fingerprints are. herh herh herh.
START yes. mister hengist, other people in the cafe about the time of the murder, there were. of them left just before mister scott and the girl did several.
START so been informed by the staff i have. being located and we will question them, they are. but quite grim, the outlook for your friend is. yeesssssss.
START love, the law of argelius is.
START and my wife, this is, sybo. hmmmmmm.
START and scott, this man is, you the message about the one i sent.
START he looks not like a man capable of such an act. still, been so long, is it. gentlemen, our great awakening two hundred years ago before, of learning the truth in such matters we had ways. to them we shall return. yeesssssss.
START of this you know, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, heard of it, we have. lost art, i assumed it was. hmmmmmm.
START descendent of the ancient priestesses of our land, my wife is. the ancestral gift, she has. gentlemen, come to invite you to my home, i have. herh herh herh.
START prefect, you think this should be handled in an official manner through my office, do not, hmm?
START handled in an official manner, shall it be, mister hengist, since the highest official, i am. gentlemen, proceed to my home where let us, with of my wife the aid, we shall learn the truth. please. yeesssssss.
START prefect, it will give us a detailed account of everything, happened to mister scott in the last twenty four hours, that is. yeesssssss.
START oh, advise against it, i would, prefect. purely an argelian matter, this is. hmmmmmm.
START ready, my wife must meditate for a time before she is. use that time to good advantage i see no reason why we should not. very well, captain.
START to enterprise kirk.
START small chamber below this room there is. suffice, perhaps that will. captain, spreading among my people, news of this frightful murder is. greatly disturbed, they are. already heard talk of closing argelius to space vehicles, i have.
START other people we should question, there are. go expedite their arrival here, perhaps i should, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes, do so, mister hengist. be present at the ceremony, anyone with any connection with this murder should.
START as ordered lieutenant karen tracy reporting, captain. herh herh herh.
START if just follow me, you will, lieutenant. herh herh herh.
START captain, under normal conditions, never done such a thing, scotty would have.
START but that blow on the head. put all his previous behaviour patterns into the junk heap, it could. yeesssssss.
START of course, another possibility there is. yes, hmmm.
START hysterical amnesia. when man feels guilty about something, to remember something too terrible, of his conscious memory he blots it out.
START ready are you, sybo, hmm? herh herh herh.
START ready, i am ready. the knife, may i have, please, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START certainly. among other gifts, the ability to receive impressions from inanimate objects, sybo has. it, you have, captain, hmm? herh herh herh.
START but it here i put when we arrived. gone, it is gone.
START dead, she is dead, jim. like the other one just.
START over and over again stabbed. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant, hmm? captain, hmm? where is.
START dead, lieutenant tracy is, scott. found alone in the room, you were. herh herh herh.
START dead, hmm? but i. herh herh herh.
START sitting there, i was. taking her readings, she was, and sitting here, now i am. hmmmmmm.
START you, i tell you, i not remember. passed out, i must have.
START be, it could be, jim. that head injury. herh herh herh.
START captain, been trying, i have. even believe this is really happening i cannot.
START no way into that place from up here, there is. prefect, to that chamber is there another entrance, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, door that leads into the garden, there is, but been locked for years, it is. hmmmmmm.
START locks, picked, can be, jim.
START prefect, at the cafe the night of the murder, both of these men were.
START they been during the past few minutes where've, hmm?
START captain, if you mind not please. yes, hmmm.
START been another murder, there is, hengist. of my crew one.
START as kara the same. yes, hmmm.
START please, i know nothing about it. kill anyone i did not.
START well, the girl killed, how was, hmm?
START stabbed. and no sign of the weapon, there is. yes, hmmm.
START if facilities, i only had.
START you. musician at the cafe, you were. for the murdered girl you played. yeesssssss.
START since little girl, she was, for me she danced. my daughter, she was. prefect, happened here, how could this thing have, hmm? found must the man who did it be. punished, he must be. herh herh herh.
START this true is, hmm? you, who are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of cantaba street morla, prefect. there, i was there. nothing to hide, i have. yeesssssss.
START know kara did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START of course he knew her. to be married, they were, but disgracefully, he behaved disgracefully. unheard of. jealous of her, was he. herh herh herh.
START very disquieting, that is.
START wrong, i know it was, but help myself i just could not. her, i loved her, and to the table with these men when she went over, stand to watch i could not, so i left and went home. yes, hmmm.
START often been a motive for murder, jealousy has.
START yes, i know. why the emotion is so strongly disapproved of here, that is. herh herh herh.
START prefect, i did kill anyone not. not, i could not. yeesssssss.
START see, we shall see, morla.
START sorry, jim. have been picked the lock may or may not. hard to tell even with the tricorder would it be.
START you prove you went directly home can, hmm?
START captain, with the questions please may i continue, hmm?
START with it well get on, man. there just stand not. herh herh herh.
START captain, captain. behaving very much like a man who is desperately trying anything to save his friend, you are. to save argelius as a space port for your starfleet would you be as desperate, hmm? yeesssssss.
START well of course, trying to save my friend, am i, if innocent, he is innocent. and he hasn't been proven guilty. yes, hmmm.
START of the circumstances need i remind you, captain, hmm? in both cases, discovered over the body and later claimed to remember nothing, your friend scott was.
START ready, i am ready, jaris. hmmmmmm.
START on one condition, prefect. going on, that the room be sealed so that no one can leave or enter while the ceremony is. hmmmmmm.
START captain, you mean my neck is have to depend on some spooky mumbo jumbo going to, hmm?
START to us concerning the situation you related. my opinion in, an interesting phenomenon, the argelian empathic contact is, but sound enough to risk a man's life the technique is not. yes, hmmm.
START what you suggest, mister spock, hmm?
START to learn the truth simply that we beam mister scott on board the enterprise and employ our computers.
START proud people, these are. their own customs, they have, their own laws, and here we are subject to them, while we are. absolutely imperative that this matter be resolved according to argelian law, it is. is that clear, hmm? yeesssssss.
START it any more than you do i like not, spock, but nothing we can do about it, there is. kirk out,
START begin, let us. let the circle be broken not. concentrate upon the flame which burns upon the altar of truth. herh herh herh.
START what the circumstances indicate i care not, jim. have done it scotty simply could not. herh herh herh.
START normally, no, but his head could that blow on. hmmmmmm.
START with you i agree, captain. perfectly satisfied mister scott is guilty, am i.
START unproven, that is, sir. yeesssssss.
START prove it, we can, if insane, he is insane.
START gentlemen, please. any man do such monstrous things, how could, hmm?
START what we hope to find out that is, sir. hmmmmmm.
START sir, i swear to you i did kill your wife or the other ladies not. hmmmmmm.
START mister hengist. on the enterprise, make a recording of the registrations of mister scott's conscious and subconscious mind, we can. tell us what happened to him in the recent past, they will.
START no room for doubt would there be. know, we would know. and after all, what we are after that is, is it not, prefect, hmm? to know, hmm? herh herh herh.
START you, sir, to remember nothing about the murders claim. hmmmmmm.
START if so, this is, killed without knowing it, you may have. your machines tell us this, will, hmm? yeesssssss.
START remain, no doubt will.
START very well. go to your ship, will we, and face the ancient penalties, he who is guilty will, they may be barbaric and horrible though. death by slow torture, the ancient penalty for murder was. never been changed, that law has. understand that do you, mister scott, hmm?
START sit here, each testifier will, this plate place his hand on. any deviation from factual truth, immediately detected and relayed to this computer, will be which will in turn notify us. already fed the computer his medical reports, doctor mccoy has. give their data to the computers for analysis, our laboratory experts are examining the murder weapon and will. begin, shall we, hmm?
START mister scott, you take the stand, will, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to account for periods of functional amnesia sufficient abnormalities, hmm?
START captain, how that can be i see not. herh herh herh.
START of memory unless scotty's lying about his loss. hmmmmmm.
START lying i am not, captain. i remember not a thing about the first two murders. herh herh herh.
START captain, hmm? black out i did not when mister jaris' wife was killed.
START all right, scotty, have it let us. yeesssssss.
START holding hands, we were. when the lights went out, broken, the circle was. i heard the poor lady scream, and as, near the head of the table anyway i went toward her, was i. but something in my way, there was. hmmmmmm.
START all right. hit it on the head, let us. scotty, kill sybo did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no, captain. sure of, that i am.
START been saying that right along, he is. it did before it means no more now than. herh herh herh.
START scotty, to me lie. you, how old are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START after the lights went out, mister scott, holding your hand, who was, hmm?
START you on the other morla on the one side and, sir.
START but that means not anything, captain, with room that small. out, the lights were. had time to kill the lady would anyone have.
START the verifier showed that, telling the truth, was he when he said he did not kill her.
START two other women murdered, there were.
START mister scott. kill kara did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START remember i not.
START kill lieutenant tracy did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START remember i not.
START telling the truth, all that proves is that he is when he says he does not remember.
START waste of time, this is. yeesssssss.
START well, if convince me that the machine is incapable of error, you can, and if it shows he did kill the women not. hmmmmmm.
START no error, there will be. as for the rest of it, show, the readings will. step down, you can, mister scott, if no objections, there are.
START to the entire procedure i object.
START prefect, you mean well i know, but had experience, have i.
START for the time being, accept captain kirk's explanation of the machine's accuracy as factual, we will. i do, however, to myself the right to make the final determination reserve.
START ask no more, we can. mister morla, you take the stand, will, hmm?
START you at the time that kara was murdered, where were, hmm?
START sure i am not. walking home, i assume. angry, i was angry. yeesssssss.
START relative state, anger is, sir. violence, were you angry enough to do, hmm?
START never done violence in my life, have i. i think not i could. got to believe me, you have. kill her i would not. not, i could not. her, i loved her, and me, she loved me.
START that is true not! she loved him he might think, but not, she did not. me, she told me. jealous, he was jealous. all the time. constantly, they fought constantly. herh herh herh.
START kill lieutenant tracy did you, hmm?
START kill sybo did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START all right, mister morla, step down now, i think you can. of a hunger that never dies sybo spoke. something that thrives on fear, terror, death. mister spock, maybe, going about it in the wrong way, are we. assume that sybo was a sensitive, let us. that s, sense something, did he, something evil.
START documented fact, sensitivity of certain argelian women is, captain. yes, hmmm.
START genuine, my poor sybo's talent was, gentlemen. true, what she told you was. yeesssssss.
START all right, then, it she said, what was, exactly, hmm? monstrous evil, ancient terror.
START she said something else, make sense words that did not. hmmmmmm.
START computer, linguistic bank. of following word definition. redjac.
START no such word in the linguistics bank, there is, hmm?
START working. affirmative. proper name.
START redjac. source earth, nineteenth century. language, english. for mass murderer of women nickname. other earth synonym, jack the ripper. yeesssssss.
START ridiculous, that is. of years ago he lived hundreds.
START man could survive all these centuries not.
START she died just before, my wife said, hunger that never dies, it is. yes, hmmm.
START yes, all men die. and jack the ripper could be alive if he were a man not. but everything, uncovered points to jack the ripper, have we, which is an impossibility, it is not, hmm? or is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of the life forms we know of humans and humanoids make up only a small percentage. entities possessed of extremely long life spans, there are, virtually immortal.
START we know that someone or something killed three women. if impossible for it to be human, it is, to be something else, it has. to kill something driven.
START it feeds on death sybo said.
START which would tend to support the proposition that the murderer was human not. unknown in the galaxy deriving sustenance from emotion is not, and among the strongest and most violent of the emotions, fear is. yes, hmmm.
START surely, prefect, gone far enough, this has. someone, killed three women, some man has. the prime suspect in our hands we have. are we let him go and start chasing ghosts going to, hmm?
START no, mister hengist, not ghosts. possibly human not, but not ghosts. mister spock, check out the possibilities. herh herh herh.
START computer, for past five solar minutes digest log recordings. correlate hypotheses. with life forms register compare. question. this galaxy could such an entity within discussed limits exist in, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of alpha carinae five derives nourishment from the emotion of love the drella. sufficient precedent for existence of creature, there is, nature unknown, which of fear could exist on emotion. yeesssssss.
START computer, of such entity extrapolate most likely composition.
START working. to meet with specified requirements, exist without form in conventional sense, entity would. of energy of highly cohesive electromagnetic field most probable mass.
START affirmative. precedent, mellitus, of alpha majoris one cloud creature.
START no, seen the mellitus myself, i have. in its natural state, gaseous, it is gaseous. when at rest, it is, solid, it is solid. mister spock, assume the existence of this creature, let us. hmmmmmm.
START in the heart of the most populous city of old earth and was never identified, i point out that jack the ripper slew at will. yeesssssss.
START seems not likely, does it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of a hypnotic screen i suggest the possibility, which to the presence of the killer blinds all but the victim. yes, hmmm.
START many such examples that exist in nature, extremely possible there are. hmmmmmm.
START fantasy, this is! sitting right here, we all know the murderer is. trying to cloud the issue, you are. got a mind to, i have.
START satisfied the course of this investigation is valid enough i am. be seated, mister hengist.
START all right, mister spock, what we have, hmm? creature without form, that feeds on horror and fear, assume a physical shape to kill, that must.
START and i suspect preys on women because women are more easily and more deeply terrified, of the species generating more sheer horror than the male.
START computer. criminological files. of unsolved mass murders of women since jack the ripper cases.
START captain, aligned directly between argelius and earth, those places are.
START yes. when man moved out into the galaxy, with him that thing must've moved. computer, identify the proper names kesla and beratis.
START working. kesla. to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet deneb two name given. beratis. to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet rigel four name given. additional data. murders on rigel four occurred one solar year ago. hmmmmmm.
START from rigel four, you come.
START well, many people do. crime it is not. yeesssssss.
START no, but investigating is, we what are. you mind taking the stand would, mister hengist, hmm? yeesssssss.
START not, i will not. herh herh herh.
START prefect, gone far enough, this has. i will take the stand not. herh herh herh.
START appreciate your position, i can, sir. in charge of civil disturbances locally, you are. if the entity for, you are which we search, what better position from, hmm which to kill with impunity? hmmmmmm.
START you left jaris' house just after, missing, we discovered the murder knife was. yeesssssss.
START and unaccounted for, you were when lieutenant tracy was murdered.
START an entity which feeds on fear and terror would find a perfect hunting ground on argelius, planet without violence, as peaceful as sheep, where the inhabitants are. as a hungry wolf in that fold would the entity be.
START gentlemen, of the law i know something. engaging in sheer speculation, you are. yeesssssss.
START computer. of exhibit a report on analysis. herh herh herh.
START working. exhibit a on visual. of blade composition, boridium. of handle composition, murinite. to folk art forms details of carving on handle conform, of origin indicating place.
START specify. of origin point. herh herh herh.
START of argus river region artefact produced by hill people, planet rigel four.
START now then, mister hengist.
START dead, he is dead, jim. yes, hmmm.
START but impossible, that is.
START the computer will respond to these controls not. unquestionably controlling it, the entity is.
START no use, is it, captain. blocked, the bypass circuits are.
START what mean does it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START control the entire operation of the ship, it means that thing can, including the life support systems.
START kill us all, you mean it could, hmm?
START indeed, try, it will try, but not immediately. it feeds on fear and terror we know. nearly four hundred and forty humans aboard this ship, there are. try to breed fear and terror before it kills, surely it will. hmmmmmm.
START all hands, the captain, this is. your posts stay at. remain calm. captain out. bones. what's the sedative situation, hmm?
START got some stuff that would tranquillise an active volcano i have. yes, hmmm.
START good. start distribution immediately. hold back that fear, the longer we can, have to get that thing out of the computer we the more time will. prefect, all be safer here, you will. spock, with me come.
START spock, you have a compulsory scan unit built into the computer banks, do not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes we do, captain, but with the entity in control. hmmmmmm.
START are there certain mathematical problems not, hmm which simply cannot be solved? hmmmmmm.
START indeed. if focus the attention of the computer on one of them, we could.
START it, that ought to do. yeesssssss.
START our friends learned very quickly apparently. yeesssssss.
START of control out. it on manual put. bridge. yeesssssss.
START we have not much time, captain.
START you said it yourself, spock. terror, it wants terror, not just death.
START all right. your station man, mister sulu.
START the first time i heard a malfunction threaten us, this is.
START been restored, normal environmental levels have, captain, but it will last long not. few hours at best.
START be enough time, that should. get at it, let us. hmmmmmm.
START you, stop me now, cannot, captain. do you no good, it will. i control all circuits. silence me you cannot. you, reach me, cannot. extremely limited in life, your manual overrides are. hmmmmmm.
START proceeding, captain, but need some time, i will. yeesssssss.
START if this ship you destroy, you destroy yourself. yes, hmmm.
START attempting to generate terror, it is, captain.
START your post man, mister. if of the other systems go out any, to manual override switch, and above all, be afraid, do not.
START with of this stuff an armful, be afraid of a supernova i would not. hmmmmmm.
START computer, class a compulsory directive, this is. to the last digit the value of pi compute.
START as we know, transcendental figure without resolution, the value of pi is. work on this problem to the exclusion of all else until we order it to stop, the computer banks will. yes, hmmm.
START yes, keep that thing busy for a while, that should. the argelians, the first to panic, will be. get back to the briefing room let us.
START supposed to be afraid of i wonder who it is we are not.
START i doubt very much whether the computers, inhabited by more than a group of figures for a while, will be. yeesssssss.
START resistance, there is, captain, but succeeding, the directive is. turning to the problem, bank after bank is. yes, hmmm.
START if of the computers you drive it out, have to go somewhere else, it will. yes, hmmm.
START how doing are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START almost finished i am. just jaris and me. hmmmmmm.
START complete computer control, captain. fled, the entity has.
START yes, but where to, hmm? bones, happen if that thing entered a tranquillised body, what would, hmm? herh herh herh.
START well, take up knitting it might, but nothing more violent than that. yes, hmmm.
START you and jaris you say everyone's had a shot but, hmm? herh herh herh.
START well, willing to take a chance on mister spock, i am. better give yourself a shot, doc.
START no, so i think not. to stay clear i think i ought. yeesssssss.
START as i say do. yes, hmmm.
START your arm extend, mister jaris.
START kill her i everybody keep back or will! kill her i will! keep back! hmmmmmm.
START better be careful, you would. going to hurt somebody with that thing, you are. hmmmmmm.
START get him to the transporter room, let us, quick! hmmmmmm.
START die, you will, die, die. die, everybody will.
START kill, kill, you all kill. hmmmmmm.
START deep space. full power. of dispersion widest angle. maintain. herh herh herh.
START to get excited no need, captain. do it, i will.
START it, you do, spock. yes, hmmm.
START everybody die. all suffer, you will.
START you did have to shove me not, mister spock. have gotten round to it, i would. hmmmmmm.
START well, all right, jaris is. yes, hmmm.
START what do with that thing did you, captain, hmm? send it back to the planet did you, hmm?
START no. it out into open space we beamed, scotty. widest possible dispersion. yeesssssss.
START die, that thing cannot. hmmmmmm.
START possibly, doctor. for some time its consciousness may continue, of billions of separate bits of energy consisting, floating forever in space, powerless.
START but die finally, will it. you seem very happy about the whole thing. herh herh herh.
START why not, hmm? for know whether i was innocent or guilty a while there i did not. yes, hmmm.
START bones, it take for this tranquilliser to wear off, how long will, hmm?
START know i not. five or six hours. i gave them a pretty big shot, jim.
START yes, see that, i can. well mister spock, for the next five or six hours, going to have the happiest crew in space, we are. of course, we will get much work done not.
START captain, since to argelius to rest you came, take advantage of the opportunity i suggest you. yes, hmmm.
START splendid idea, that is, mister spock. so, i know a cafe where the women are. yes, hmmm.
START go see, let us! yeesssssss.
START correct, our scanner survey was, captain. it is there. pure tritanium. yeesssssss.
START as hard twenty one point four times, to be exact. hmmmmmm.
START be able to break it we will not, captain. phaser off a specimen i will. herh herh herh.
START smell that do you, hmm? like honey a sweet odour. years ago, it was, on another planet. with a an odour like that a thing.
START in the growing season in this hemisphere of this planet, we are. doubtless many pollen aromas, there are. herh herh herh.
START negative, scotty. checking something out we are.
START gone, it is gone. been wrong could i have. eleven years ago, the last time i caught an odour like that was. herh herh herh.
START to read dikironium for a minute seemed, and then i lost it. scanning it i it is almost like something out there knows am. of keeps changing itself into something different it kind. possible that is not. do that, nothing can.
START it immediately fire into! yeesssssss.
START spock. dead. and find every red corpuscle gone from their body, you will. hmmmmmm.
START to enterprise kirk. scotty, lock in on us. medical emergency.
START you know what it was you think, captain, hmm? herh herh herh.
START something that, possibly exist, cannot, but it does. yeesssssss.
START to bridge kirk.
START your position hold.
START then inform them that we might be a little late, you will.
START jim, the yorktown's ship surgeon will know how late want to. those vaccines, transferring to us are highly perishable, is he.
START gentlemen, remaining in orbit until i find out more about those deaths we are, my responsibility on. perfectly aware that it might cost lives on theta seven, am i. kirk out. autopsy report.
START you saw their colour. there was a red corpuscle left in their bodies not.
START marks, cuts, of any kind incisions, hmm?
START not a one. medically impossible, what happened is.
START of past similar occurrences i suggest you look at the record tapes. find the uss farragut lists casualties eleven years ago from exactly the same impossible causes, you will.
START thank you, captain. check those tapes immediately, i will. herh herh herh.
START first, to consciousness for a moment can you bring ensign rizzo, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, but it. hmmmmmm.
START it hurt him if you do so, will, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START his present condition in, it would make much difference i think not. hmmmmmm.
START transfusion completed, sir. still far below normal, his pulse and respiration are. hmmmmmm.
START of cordazine give him one cc, nurse.
START rizzo. the captain, this is. you hear me can, hmm? remember what happened to you do you, hmm?
START remember. cold, i am cold. so cold, i am. yeesssssss.
START attacked by something, you were. when it happened, notice an odour of any kind did you, hmm? rizzo. rizzo! remember a sickly sweet odour do you, hmm? smell it did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes. yes. smell. strange smell. like being smothered in honey, was it.
START feel a presence did you, an intelligence, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START trying to draw strength from us, it was. it, i felt it. it was, it was, there, it was there. herh herh herh.
START beginning to sleep again, he is. risk another shot, i cannot. herh herh herh.
START already told me what i wanted to know, he is. herh herh herh.
START with the captain what's, hmm? never seen him like that before i have.
START to find out i intend. i, in the medical record library, will be. herh herh herh.
START oh, captain. subspace message from starfleet. inquiring, they are inquiring. herh herh herh.
START not now. to me immediately have the security duty officer report. herh herh herh.
START continuing scanning. of life forms on the planet still no readings.
START identify it as a life form let us assume that it is something so completely different that our sensors would not.
START composed of that rare element, it suppose was. strange, gaseous creature. yes, hmmm.
START scanned for that element, i have, captain. no trace of dikironium on the planet surface or in the atmosphere, there is.
START it camouflaged itself suppose. assume that it is intelligent, let us, looking for it, that it knows we are.
START to hide from a sensor scan, have to be able to change its molecular structure, would it, to lead or wood changing itself to ivory like gold changing itself. yeesssssss.
START just suggested something that never occurred to me, you have. to a tape record it may provide some answers which i think you will find doctor mccoy is looking at this very moment.
START the new security officer are you, hmm?
START your father was.
START yes, sir, but any special treatment on that account i expect not.
START get none aboard this ship, you will, mister. yeesssssss.
START captain, report on ensign rizzo, i have. dead, he is dead, sir. yes, hmmm.
START yes, sir. good friends, we were, graduated the academy together. herh herh herh.
START get a crack at what killed him, you will. interested, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START for disrupter effect i want four men armed with phaser two set. me in the transporter room in five minutes join. accompany me to the planet surface, you will. yes, hmmm.
START changing, reading is, sir.
START right, spock was. notice the molecular shift, hmm?
START dikironium reading now, sir. bearing ninety four mark seven, of elevation six degrees angle. holding steady. yeesssssss.
START over that rise. take two men, to the left circle around. take the other two and go the other way, will i. dangerous, that creature is. if you see it, fire full phasers.
START swensen, with me, bardoli come. yes, hmmm.
START mister garrovick, studied your report, have we. mister spock, begin. yes, hmmm.
START the size of the thing you saw, what was, ensign, hmm?
START say it measured from ten to sixty cubic metres i would, sir. it varied in size, as it moved fluctuated.
START like a, was it, gaseous cloud. parts of it, see through, could i. more dense, other parts were. yes, hmmm.
START ensign, sense any intelligence in this gaseous cloud did you, hmm?
START what, did i, sir, hmm?
START get any subconscious impressions that this was a creature did you. living, thinking thing, of chemical elements rather than just a strange cloud, hmm? herh herh herh.
START but come to actual contact with it you did not, did you, hmm?
START no, sir. furthest away from it, i was. out of nowhere, it seemed to come, for a moment hovered, then my men moved toward. fast, it was fast, incredibly fast.
START say it hovered did you, hmm?
START fire at it, you did, did you not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you from the creature, what distance were, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes. i, er, well, i did fire while it was hovering not, sir.
START you froze you mean, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no, sir. exactly freeze i did not.
START you doing, what exactly were, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START well, startled for a second, i was. and then by the time i fired, already moving, the thing was.
START any further information, you have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START gentlemen have any further questions do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START for a moment i only hesitated, sir. sorry, i am sorry. yes, hmmm.
START ensign, relieved of all duties and confined to quarters until further notice, you are. yes, hmmm.
START little hard on the boy, you were, jim.
START he froze. killed, one man was. another may die. yeesssssss.
START both be filing reports, you will. your comments and recommendations then make. yeesssssss.
START captain, taken the liberty of cleaning the radioactive disposal vent on number two impulse engine i while we are waiting have, but ready to leave orbit in under half an hour will we be. yes, hmmm.
START we are leaving orbit not, mister scott. not that quickly.
START captain, to rendezvous with them the yorktown requesting information on how soon we expect. yes, hmmm.
START only needed desperately and has limited the medicine for theta seven colony is not.
START aware of the situation, am i, engineer, and getting a little tired of my senior officers conspiring against me, i am. forgive me. have used the word conspire perhaps i should not. yeesssssss.
START nothing, sir. to scan continuing. hmmmmmm.
START are you aware, change its molecular structure, can it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START scanning for any unusual movement are you, hmm?
START of gaseous cloud any type, hmm?
START run a full scanner probe twice, we have. yeesssssss.
START then run it twenty times if, what it takes, that is!
START i hope i am disturbing you not, doctor.
START no disturbance, interrupting another autopsy report is, mister spock. relief, it is.
START your advice i need.
START i understand not your reasoning. yes, hmmm.
START you need advice from me, hmm? kidding, you must be. yeesssssss.
START his creature jim and, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START precisely. studied the incident involving the uss farragut have you, hmm?
START no. with all these deaths and injuries, only had a chance to scan the tapes i have. eight or ten hours of record tape there, there are.
START fortunately, i read somewhat faster. in brief, doctor, annihilated, nearly half the crew and the captain were. garrovick, the captain's name was. yeesssssss.
START as our ensign the same.
START in, mind if i come, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to bridge kirk. scanning report.
START maintain search. kirk out. it, have just vanished, cannot. herh herh herh.
START they do sometimes, if lucky, we are lucky. in many forms, monsters come. of them all you know the greatest monster, jim, hmm? guilt. yes, hmmm.
START to the point get.
START jim, when exposed to unknown dangers for the first time, a young officer is, under tremendous emotional stress, he is. now we all know that.
START am i, hmm? speaking of lieutenant james t i was. of the starship farragut kirk. eleven years ago, the young officer at the phaser station, you were when something attacked. to the tapes according, this young lieutenant kirk insisted upon blaming himself.
START normal emotion, you had. startled, you were. for a grand total of perhaps two seconds you delayed firing.
START if i had delayed not, have been killed, it would. yes, hmmm.
START seem to think so the ship's exec did not. quite clear on the subject, his log entry was. fine young officer who performed with uncommon bravery, lieutenant kirk is. yes, hmmm.
START you understand, do not, hmm? it killed two hundred crewmen.
START very important to you, captain garrovick was, was he not, jim, hmm?
START yes. my commanding officer from the day i left the academy, was he. of the finest men i ever knew one. fired soon enough the first time i i could have killed that thing if would. hmmmmmm.
START you know not that, jim. that any more than you know that garrovick could have destroyed it you know not. yes, hmmm.
START help how i feel i cannot. an intelligence about it, there is, bones. malevolence. evil, it is evil. it, destroyed, must be.
START that, destroy yourself, you could, your career, of yourself eleven years ago a young boy who reminds you.
START push our friendship past the point where i have to take official, do not.
START not, i am not, jim. professional, this is, captain. preparing a medical log entry on my estimation of the physical and emotional condition of a starship captain, am i. which of command grade requires a witness. yeesssssss.
START take it, do i, doctor, commander, me unfit or incapacitated that both of you or either of you consider, hmm?
START correctly phrased, captain. as recommended in the manual. our reply, as recommended also, is, sir, noted in your recent behaviour certain items, we have, which, on the surface, seem unusual. to inquire further we respectfully ask permission. hmmmmmm.
START blast it! forget the manual! your questions ask. hmmmmmm.
START sir, waiting now at the rendezvous point, the uss yorktown is. it carries perishable drugs. yes, hmmm.
START they need those vaccines on theta seven, captain. we delaying here, now why are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START because convinced that this is the same creature that attacked the farragut eleven years ago i am.
START on the tapes, my report is. as it attacked us eleven years ago, as consciousness, i lost consciousness, feel the intelligence of the thing, i could. sense it thinking i could, planning.
START you say, sense its intelligence, you could, captain, hmm? how communicate with you did it, hmm?
START as you lost consciousness you state that it happened just. very tricky thing, a semiconscious mind is. imagination, a man never knows how much is real or how much is.
START it is whatever, doctor, it is whatever, would you call it deadly not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes, no doubt about that, there is.
START and what if, the same creature that attacked eleven years ago from a planet over a thousand light years from here, is it, hmm?
START obviously, captain, if an intelligent creature, it is, if the same one, is it, if capable of space travel, it therefore is, pose a great threat to inhabited planets, it could. yes, hmmm.
START of ifs a lot, i agree, but my command judgment in, they out weigh other factors. intuition, however illogical, mister spock, as a command prerogative is recognized. herh herh herh.
START jim, we are trying to gang up on you not.
START and not, you have, doctor. expressed the proper concern, you have, asked the proper questions, you have. both done your duty, you have. to make now may i ask what medical log entry you intend, hmm? yeesssssss.
START this point at, my medical log remains open.
START in that case, gentlemen.
START reading on the whatever it is i have, captain. leaving the planet surface, heading into space.
START all decks, red alert. red alert. to leave orbit prepare. yes, hmmm.
START captain, maintain warp eight speed much longer we cannot. approaching the critical point, pressures are.
START barely closing in on it, we are, captain. pursuing it for days, we could be.
START if necessary. to increase our speed, do what you can, scott.
START spock, how read you that, hmm? herh herh herh.
START conflicting data, captain. to be in a borderline state between matter and energy it seems. of both elements. possibly use gravitational fields for propulsion, it could. yeesssssss.
START and you find not that sophisticated, mister spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START extremely efficient, captain. another matter, whether that indicates intelligence is.
START we will be using the impulse engines not. turn the alarm off. hmmmmmm.
START captain, do it, we cannot. if this speed we keep, blow up any minute now we will. yeesssssss.
START to warp six go.
START hi. at alert station, everyone else is, so you some dinner i brought. yeesssssss.
START hungry i am not.
START are we still chasing that thing half way across the galaxy, hmm? yes. of balance has the captain lost his sense, hmm? maybe. to explode is the entire crew about ready, hmm? positively. lucky you are out of it, you are. hmmmmmm.
START what you mean, of it out, hmm? it, i caused it. you know that, too, you, do not, hmm? if fired my phaser quickly enough on argus ten, would i, have happened this would not. herh herh herh.
START you, i told you, christine, hungry i am not. herh herh herh.
START like that doctor mccoy thought you might say something. his officially logged prescription for you, this is. one word on it, it has. eat. now if you follow not his orders, you hauled down to sickbay and fed intravenously would doctor mccoy could and possibly have. yeesssssss.
START slowing, the creature is. down to warp two, it is. yes, hmmm.
START understand i not. outrunning us, it was. herh herh herh.
START maybe, decided to fight, is it. phasers ready, hmm?
START coming to a full halt, is it, sir. magnification one.
START captain, to return to my post request permission.
START there. coming, it is coming, sir. yes, hmmm.
START the deflectors will stop it not, captain. herh herh herh.
START i, surmised this, should have. for to be able to use gravity as a propulsive force the creature, have to have this capacity, it would. hmmmmmm.
START to contact five seconds. all hatches and vents secure. all lights on the board show green. sir! the number two impulse vent! red light we have! yes, hmmm.
START when it entered impulse engine number two's vent, it attacked two crewmen. it then got into the ventilating system, and air for only two hours, we now have.
START chance for survival, one man has. dead, the other is. add that little price tag to your monster hunt, you can.
START enough, that is, bones.
START enough it is not! care as long as you could hang your trophy on the wall you did not. well, on it it is not, captain, in it, it is.
START may i suggest that we no longer belabour the question of whether or we should have gone after the creature not. now been rendered academic, the matter has. now after us, the creature is. yes, hmmm.
START yes, well, been many light years away from us, could it have. to turn and attack here instead it chose. why, hmm?
START to tell impossible, captain, until make a closer survey of the creature, i can.
START if you play analyst want to, spock, use someone else, not me. with the ship and the crew, my concern is. yes, hmmm.
START i know, prefer to wallow in emotion rather than, you would.
START mister spock, very kind of you to come here, is it. herh herh herh.
START sir, coming through the vent, is it. yeesssssss.
START of here get out! attempt to seal it off, will i.
START my way on, garrovick. to three four one security. medical alert. scotty, reverse cabin pressure three four one. yeesssssss.
START if we let that thing into the ship, have much company, he will. yeesssssss.
START jammed the vent control, i must have when i hit it. yes, hmmm.
START pulled it back into the ventilation system, see if the reverse pressure has.
START my life he saved, captain. be lying dead in there, i should, not him.
START fortunately, dead, neither of us is, ensign. the reverse pressure worked. closed, the vent is.
START misunderstand my next question, do not. mister spock, you dead why are not, hmm?
START that green blood of his, it is. yes, hmmm.
START based on copper, my haemoglobin is, not iron.
START bet he left a bad taste in the creature's mouth, will i, too. yes, hmmm.
START yes. different, the scent is. i think i understand something now. herh herh herh.
START do you believe, in communication with the creature, you are, hmm?
START what it is i know not, mister spock, but alive, you remember i said the thing was. it may be communication as we understand it not, but alive and intelligent, i did know it was, and i think i know something else now. hmmmmmm.
START open the vent. to the bridge on my way. kirk out. ensign garrovick. yeesssssss.
START on the bridge, you were when we were attacked.
START yes, sorry, i am sorry, sir. i know, confined to quarters, was i, but when the alert sounded. herh herh herh.
START very commendable, ensign. your impression of the battle, what was, hmm?
START understand i not, sir.
START asking for your military appraisal of the techniques used against the creature i am. yes, hmmm.
START ineffective, captain. i realise, captain, you did everything, do, you could. that, i know that. just that nothing works against a monster that can do the things that thing does, it is. yes, hmmm.
START and ensign, your appraisal of your conduct on the planet, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START firing, i delayed firing. yeesssssss.
START if you had delayed firing not, hmm? no difference, ensign. no weapon known, made any difference, would have. then or eleven years ago. for duty report, ensign. yes, hmmm.
START results positive, captain. already nearly out of scanner range, the creature has left the ship at high warp speed and is. move, the way that thing can, captain, believe it i would not.
START bearing one two seven mark nine, it was, but lost it now i have.
START changed course before to mislead us, it has, captain. dictate that, logic would. herh herh herh.
START no, playing intuition, i am. mister chekov, for tychos star system compute a course.
START inform them that, pursuing the creature to planet four of that system, are we. the location of its attack on the uss farragut eleven years ago that is.
START i not understand, captain. herh herh herh.
START in garrovick's quarters, somehow different, i said the scent of the creature was. my mind said home something in. hmmmmmm.
START rendezvous with the uss yorktown in forty eight hours, we will. yes, hmmm.
START pursue the creature and destroy it, i assume that you now believe we should. yeesssssss.
START you agree not with mister spock, hmm?
START the time factor that bothers me, is it. perishable, those drugs are. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, here to spawn, evidence indicates the creature is. if so, reproduce by fission, will it, not just into two parts, but thousands. hmmmmmm.
START our only possibility antimatter seems. yes, hmmm.
START be sufficient, an ounce should. drain it from the ship's engines and transport it to the planet surface in a magnetic vacuum field, we can.
START contact medical stores. spare in the transporter room in fifteen minutes, i want as much haemoplasm as they can.
START to use that haemoplasm to attract the creature i presume you intend, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START get it to the antimatter, we must. to red blood cells it seems attracted. what better ba, we have, could it, hmm?
START still one problem, there is, captain.
START have to take, a chance we will, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START also, we certain the transporter will operate under those conditions cannot be. if beaming up, a man is when that hits, we may lose him.
START exactly why i have decided to set the trap myself, that is.
START captain, so little hemoglobin in my green blood, there is, the creature could harm me extensively not. to be the one it therefore seems logical for me.
START negative, mister spock. this plan fails in case, need you aboard the ship, i will. in that event, need another plan, we will. yeesssssss.
START require two men to transport the antimatter unit, will it.
START like permission to go with you, would i, sir. herh herh herh.
START you in mind, i had, mister garrovick. yes, hmmm.
START to enterprise kirk. yes, hmmm.
START to maximum orbit proceed immediately. hmmmmmm.
START just think, captain, less than one ounce of antimatter, more powerful than ten thousand cobalt bombs, here is. yeesssssss.
START hope it is as powerful as man will ever get, let us. detonator. yes, hmmm.
START to enterprise kirk.
START antimatter container positioned and armed. call you back, i will when it is baited. kirk out. herh herh herh.
START the haemoplasm. already taken, the bait is.
START need something else for bait we will. yes, hmmm.
START garrovick, to the ship get back. to prepare to detonate tell them.
START captain, you are going to be the bait not. herh herh herh.
START i said, to the ship get back. ensign, you an order i gave.
START to us scan us and lock on. going to be close, it is. very, very close. stand by. stand by, enterprise.
START smell it, i can, captain. sickening, it is sickening. honey sweet.
START got them. of them a piece, anyway. herh herh herh.
START to travel crazy way, over the universe spreading a man's molecules all.
START well then, thank pitchforks and pointed ears. as as it worked long, jim. yes, hmmm.
START fair statement, that is, bones. dead, now that the creature is, save some lives, let us. deliver your medicine, we will. bridge, kirk, this is.
START for a rendezvous with the yorktown have mister chekov lay in a course, maximum warp. yeesssssss.
START oh, ensign, me in my quarters meet when you have cleaned up. like to talk to you about your father i would. several tall stories i think, like to hear, you would. yeesssssss.
START everyone, where is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START they weren't expecting us perhaps.
START scheduled well in advance, our arrival was, doctor. routine, the annual check of every scientific expedition is. yeesssssss.
START subspace contact with a robert johnson i had, of this expedition the leader, an hour ago.
START report anything wrong did he, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no, yet something wrong, there was. i, pin it down, cannot. disjointed, his conversation was, his thoughts a little foggy, unrelated. chekov, check that building. mister spock and, check this one, will i. of you the rest, take a look around. find anyone, see if you can. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START man, sir. in there. dead man.
START it looks like exactly what. death by natural causes. old age.
START quite impossible, doctor. this expedition before we beamed down i ran a personnel check on. of them were i assure you that none. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk of, i am. yes, hmmm.
START have to speak louder, you will. hmmmmmm.
START captain kirk of the uss enterprise i i say am. you, who are, hmm?
START robert johnson, i am. my wife, this is, elaine.
START you, how old are, hmm? you, how old are, hmm?
START i am, er, me see let. twenty nine, am i, and elaine is. yeesssssss.
START twenty seven, i am. yes, hmmm.
START mister johnson, you hear me can, hmm?
START hear you i can. not deaf yet, you know. not yet. yes, hmmm.
START me what happened can you tell, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START your instruments show anything did, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START so beautiful, elaine was. so beautiful. so beautiful. yes, hmmm.
START hear you, he can, jim, but he understands not. let him rest, let us.
START stay seated. commodore stocker, asked you to be part of this briefing, have i because gamma hydra four falls in your administrative area. herh herh herh.
START that, i appreciate that, sir. yes, hmmm.
START doctor wallace, as an expert in endocrinology, appreciate you working very closely doctor mccoy i would. yeesssssss.
START doctor mccoy, you fill them in would, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START suffering from extreme old age, the expedition is, and growing older by the minute, they are. much older. turned up absolutely nothing, my examinations have. in fact, clue i have not.
START sensors reveal nothing which is inimical to human life. of harmful cosmic rays the atmosphere screens out the usual amount.
START close to the neutral zone between our federation and the romulan empire, we are. possible the romulans have a new weapon and are using this colony as guinea pigs, it is. yeesssssss.
START already begun investigation into that possibility, i have, captain. hmmmmmm.
START sure you understand that i am anxious to get to starbase ten to assume my new post, am i.
START yes, commodore. do everything we can to make sure you make your duty, will we. yeesssssss.
START doctor, is there something, do for you, can i, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START how long been has it, hmm?
START six years, four months, and of days an odd number. you mean you not know, hmm?
START well, been a long time, it is. change if it started all over again things would not, would it, hmm? your job, you have, my ship, have i, and change, neither one of us will.
START you said it. not, i did not. in all those years, you once i only heard from. stargram when my husband died. you know, married after we called it off i you never asked me why got. yeesssssss.
START well, you met someone you loved i supposed that.
START i met a man i admired. great man.
START and as you in your field. you did give up a thing not. yes, hmmm.
START on my way, i am. herh herh herh.
START checking it on it, we are. reached no conclusions as yet, have i. never been investigated, the comet was a rogue and has. yeesssssss.
START thank you. anxious to get to the base, you are, but few facilities of our own here, have we. do quite nicely, i think the enterprise will. in engineering, i will be, mister spock. maintain standard orbit, mister sulu. yes, hmmm.
START i know this is sound foolish going to, but to be having a little trouble hearing i seem.
START probably nothing important, is it.
START well, worry about it, do not. it up perhaps a little hypersonic treatment might clear. herh herh herh.
START oh, yes. up with, let me know what you come. in the sickbay, i will be. herh herh herh.
START the last one. robert johnson. of death cause, old age.
START what you could, you did. herh herh herh.
START which to absolutely nothing adds up.
START vitamins, all you need are, but come up anyhow, you can. yeesssssss.
START bones, i believe, getting grey, you are. hmmmmmm.
START to you you take over my job and see what happens.
START you mean i see what.
START your problem what's, jim, hmm?
START probably right, you are, doctor. by the way, how you have been running this ship lately i like not.
START why, hmm? just muscular strain, is it not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no, jim. advanced arthritis, is it, and spreading, it is spreading.
START run it through again, i can, but come up with the same thing, i will. yes, hmmm.
START to the surface all of us who went down, with of chekov the exception, are aging at various rates. for each day approximately thirty years. i know not what's causing it. virus, bacteria, or evil spirits, but trying to find out, i am. yes, hmmm.
START spock, for some figures could i ask, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i did say you weren't affected not, mister spock. perfectly healthy, you are, that is, for of a hundred any normal vulcan on the high side.
START captain, to my station can i go back, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to it you feel up, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of course i do. of rest i just need a wee bit, all, that is. yes, hmmm.
START leave, you can, too, lieutenant galway. lieutenant galway, hmm? yeesssssss.
START what, hmm? to me you spoke, doctor, hmm?
START yes, to you i spoke. i said that, leave, you could, too. go down to your quarters and get some sleep now why you not.
START no. i want not to sleep. you understand, cannot, hmm? if i sleep, i find, what will, hmm when i wake up? herh herh herh.
START lieutenant galway, your position assume. your duties start.
START ten years younger than i am, she is, and she looks, yeesssssss.
START he aged why hasn't, hmm?
START i not know. hmmmmmm.
START well i know want to! his youth is it, his blood type, his heritage, his glands, his genes, hmm?
START his genes. all right, nurse. for another complete physical prepare chekov.
START come along, ensign. hurt this will not. much. yeesssssss.
START few years ago on aldebaran three, to slow down the degeneration of plant life my husband and i tried various carbohydrate compounds.
START then try that, doctor wallace. try anything, but it quickly do. yeesssssss.
START on the bridge, i will be. to chekov keep me posted as.
START on your way to the biochemistry lab, i thought you were, doctor. yes, hmmm.
START look, we know the problem. of the affliction we know the progress. therefore, of research once we find the proper line, only logical we find the solution, is it. hmmmmmm.
START like my first officer you sound.
START insoluble, no problem is. not even ours.
START that did spring from logic not. yes, hmmm.
START our situation haves not its roots in logic. logical organ the heart is not. when i married theodore wallace, i thought, over you, was i. wrong, i was wrong. hmmmmmm.
START when realise that did you, hmm? today, hmm? herh herh herh.
START your husband than you, how much older was, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START that make, what difference does, hmm? herh herh herh.
START quite a difference, that is. yes, hmmm.
START jim, brilliant man, he was. stationed on a lonely outpost, we were. working together, we were. i want not to talk about him. i talk about us want to. yes, hmmm.
START look at me. look at me. what you see, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i see captain james kirk, of morality a man, decency, handsome, and strong. herh herh herh.
START what offering me are you, jan, hmm? love, or going away present, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START give us some more blood, chekov. the needle will hurt not, chekov. take off your shirt, chekov. roll over, chekov. breathe deeply, chekov. blood sample, chekov. marrow sample, chekov. skin sample, chekov. if i live long enough, going to run out of samples, i am. hmmmmmm.
START oh, yes. live, i will live, but i will enjoy it not. yeesssssss.
START to twenty thousand perigee increase orbit, mister sulu.
START hoped for a few words with you at your convenience, i would. yeesssssss.
START very little time, have i. yeesssssss.
START if i may say so sir, due date at starbase ten, we have.
START going to be late, are we. to leave this area until we have found the solution for this problem i intend not.
START captain, watching four very valuable and one almost irreplaceable members of the starfleet failing before my eyes, am i. i do something to help want to. yeesssssss.
START yes, yes. if so concerned, you are, send a message to starbase ten, i will.
START captain, this morning you sent such a message.
START yeoman, hmm? that, where is.
START to you i gave it. you signed it. hmmmmmm.
START if signed it, would i, i would have asked for it not, l, now would, hmm?
START mister spock. just thinking i was.
START something to report, you have, hmm?
START yes, sir. the cause of the affliction, we have.
START it, what is, hmm?
START of gamma hydra four carried the planet directly through the comet's trail the orbit. on conventional radiation settings, nothing, we discovered nothing. to the extreme lower range of the scale on resetting our sensors, undetected radiation appeared. below normal radiation levels but definitely present, and undoubtedly residue from the comet. yes, hmmm.
START good, spock. well done. get this to doctor mccoy immediately let us. oh. lieutenant, to starfleet command take a message. to the proximity of the romulans due, better use code two, you would.
START but, captain, broken code two, the romulans have. if you remember the last bulletin. yeesssssss.
START message. to affliction may be comet key which passed by gamma hydra four. now, said comet is,
START quadrant. to be alerted for complete analysis of radiation and means found to neutralise it, all units are. highly dangerous, comet is. kirk, commanding enterprise. immediately, lieutenant. go let us. herh herh herh.
START oh, mister sulu. to twenty thousand mile perigee increase orbit. herh herh herh.
START being questioned, i fail to understand why each one of my commands is. told, now do as you are, mister sulu. hmmmmmm.
START mister sulu, our present position, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START radiation, hmm? as good an answer as any, that is, but we know about it earlier why did not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START possibly, doctor, because as efficient as before my thinking processes are not. yeesssssss.
START all right, bones, going up to the bridge, am i. me posted keep. spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, i see i am going to be making any house calls on you not. yes, hmmm.
START something, i wondered if perhaps there was which could lower my sensitivity to cold. yeesssssss.
START i am a magician not, spock, just an old country doctor. hmmmmmm.
START doctor mccoy, have any effect on this radiation sickness, none of our usual radiation therapies will.
START well, then we just start over, all, that is. harder, we work harder, faster, and to, we start completely from scratch if we have. but something, we find something.
START spock, word with you, can i have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START mister spock, function with a chief engineer, a starship can, chief medical officer, even a first officer under physical par. but disastrous to have a commanding officer whose condition is any less than perfection, is it. herh herh herh.
START aware of that, i am. hmmmmmm.
START like you to take over command of the enterprise, i would.
START on the grounds that the captain, because of his affliction, to perform his duties is unable.
START need i remind you, sir, contracted the same affliction, that i too have, hmm?
START yes, but vulcan, you are. much greater life span, you have. to a much smaller degree you show the affects. yeesssssss.
START half human i am, sir. down, my physical reflexes are, reduced, my mental capacity is. easily, i tire easily. no, sir. fit for command i am not. yeesssssss.
START well, if not, you are, with your vulcan physique, then obviously captain kirk, be, cannot. herh herh herh.
START sir, duties to perform, i do have.
START mister spock. i like not what i am about to say but regulations demand it. and as a starfleet flag officer, follow regulations, i must. as of the enterprise second in command, convene an extraordinary competency hearing, you must.
START matter of choice it is not. when unfit, a captain is, physically or mentally, mandatory, a competency hearing is. make me quote a regulation, do not which you know as well as i do.
START going to hurt a bit now this is not.
START what you said the last time that is.
START hurt did it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START dead, she is dead. to age more rapidly than the rest of us her metabolism caused her, but the same thing's happen to us unless going to. herh herh herh.
START we got, how long have, bones, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START oh, of days a matter. perhaps hours. hmmmmmm.
START ordered by commodore stocker and reluctantly called by myself, let it read that this competency hearing was. yeesssssss.
START it also read that i consider it invalid let.
START mister spock, statement, may i make, hmm? had to resort to these legal grounds in order to save the lives of some very valuable members of the starfleet, i have. tried to convince captain kirk of the necessity of proceeding to starbase ten, have i, but been overruled in each case, i have. mine, the responsibility of this hearing is.
START on the contrary, commodore. as as second in command of the enterprise presiding officer and, mine, the responsibility is. captain kirk, would to make a statement you like, hmm?
START yes, like to make a statement i would. the captain of this ship and am totally capable of commanding her i am. call this whole thing off and get back to work, let us. yes, hmmm.
START quite impossible, it is, captain. quite specific, the regulations are. entitled to direct examination of all witnesses immediately after the board has questioned them, you are. hmmmmmm.
START of you very kind, spock. herh herh herh.
START mister sulu, how long served with captain kirk have you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to your knowledge, ever had any difficulty making decisions has he, hmm? yeesssssss.
START order you to maintain standard orbit around gamma hydra four did he, hmm? yeesssssss.
START not did he, several minutes later, repeat that order, hmm?
START order you to increase orbit did he, hmm? yeesssssss.
START several minutes later repeat that order did he not, hmm?
START not, he did not. when i give an order, to be obeyed i expect it. i have not to repeat myself. yeesssssss.
START mister sulu, answer the question. yeesssssss.
START yes, sir. his order captain kirk repeated. yeesssssss.
START thank you, mister sulu. yeoman atkins, of witnesses you handed captain kirk a fuel consumption report in the presence, which he read and signed. is that correct, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START sir, more important things on his mind, he had. herh herh herh.
START yeoman, simply answer the question, you will.
START i, i guess he forgot, signed it, would he.
START forgot he would signed it, would he. yeesssssss.
START thank you, yeoman. you may leave. lieutenant uhura. here a bulletin from starfleet command i have which states that the romulans have broken code two. your initials are these, hmm which appear at the bottom?
START and those, whose initials are, hmm which appear directly below yours? yeesssssss.
START of captain kirk those.
START to send a message about the comet did captain kirk ask you, hmm which passed gamma hydra four? herh herh herh.
START oh, yes, but to code three he changed it. hmmmmmm.
START you reminded him that the romulans had broken code two after. yeesssssss.
START several hours ago, of this board at the request, of captain kirk you ran a complete physical examination. hmmmmmm.
START medical banks, compute described subject's physical age, as comparative base using established norms.
START no, thirty four, i am. thirty four years old i am. hmmmmmm.
START with you the computer differs, captain.
START you give us your professional evaluation of captain kirk's present physical condition, will. herh herh herh.
START suffering from a, captain kirk is, peculiar physical degeneration which strongly resembles aging. herh herh herh.
START his mental capacity degenerating even more rapidly is not, hmm?
START yes, yes, but better man right now, is he. herh herh herh.
START doctor, of captain kirk's physical age you heard the computer's analysis. agree with it do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START blasted machine, it is, spock! argue with a machine you cannot.
START agree with it do you, doctor, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes. yes, i do, agree. and sorry, i am sorry, jim. hmmmmmm.
START no further questions, this board has. unless you, commodore stocker, like to add, have something that you would. herh herh herh.
START no. quite satisfied, am i, mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START wish to call any witnesses do you, captain kirk, hmm?
START perfectly capable of speaking in my own defence i am, mister spock.
START captain, suggest, i would suggest. yeesssssss.
START no, no, no. all right, is it, spock. all right, it is. only one reason, there is, and one reason alone, for having this, hearing. to leave gamma hydra two i refused.
START yes. of the tongue a slip.
START inability to remember having given commands, you are, reading and signing important orders and then forgetting them, as compiled by our own chief surgeon your physical analysis. appear to be irrefutable proof of failing physical and mental conditions, all these things would. yes, hmmm.
START no more questions, we have, captain.
START me anything ask. anything.
START there'll be no more questions, captain. if leave the room so the board can vote, you would. herh herh herh.
START well, since the senior officers are incapable and, of flag rank, am i, forced by regulations to assume command, i am. yes, hmmm.
START sir, never commanded a starship, you have.
START you have, what would, with far less experience than i have a junior officer, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the danger from the romulans. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, to save these people we have. mister sulu, for starbase ten set a direct course. warp five. yeesssssss.
START immediately, mister sulu. to return to their posts, all officers are. herh herh herh.
START so, been relieved, i have. herh herh herh.
START sorry, i am sorry, captain. yes, hmmm.
START yes. been a prosecuting attorney, you should have.
START regulations. give me regulations, do not. wanted command all along, you have. you get first little excuse.
START captain, i have assumed command not. herh herh herh.
START i hope, proud of, you are. what you mean, you have assumed command not, hmm?
START as you i suffer the same affliction, sir. hmmmmmm.
START if in command you are not, who is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START stocker, hmm? crazy are you, hmm? never had a field command, he is.
START unfit for command, mister scott was. ranking officer, commodore stocker is. yeesssssss.
START refusing a direct order are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no, sir. give a command order onboard this ship, only commodore stocker can.
START you traitorous, disloyal, me in the back the first chance you get you stab, hmm? spock. get out. i never have to look at you again want to. yes, hmmm.
START oh, jim. sorry, i am sorry. truly i am.
START of myself in there i made a fool. have let them confuse me i should not, rattle me.
START but old i am not, jan. not, i am not. few muscular aches makes not a man old. and you run not a starship with your arms. with your head you run it. as sharp as it ever was my brain's. of radiation poisoning a simple case, and me of my command they relieve. getting a little grey i i admit am, but do that to you, radiation will. yeesssssss.
START oh, jim, you forgive me, will, hmm? work to do, i have.
START jan, you know me. me closely look at. tell me. am i getting old, hmm? yeesssssss.
START what doing here are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START seem to be the place where i can be of the most use, it would. herh herh herh.
START like to relieve doctor mccoy, maybe you would. what about chekov, hmm? yeesssssss.
START bones, to be, there has. to be, there has. we beamed down together. on the surface together, we were. the same spot. together all the time, we were.
START no, not all the time. captain, for a few moments he left us. yeesssssss.
START us, he left us, hmm? us, he left us. he went into the building. spock, something happened.
START yes. yes, indeed, captain. doctor, you remember. herh herh herh.
START scared, he was scared! he saw the dead body and he ran out of the building and, scared to death, was he. yes, hmmm.
START yes, yes. be, now that could. right. scared. heart beats faster, short, breathe gets, and cold sweats and adrenaline flows there is. adrenal activity. now hold on just a minute. something that i read once, there was. ancient history, was it, just after the atomic age. for radiation sickness used. adrenaline.
START doctor, the specific accepted for all radiation sickness, hyronalin is. herh herh herh.
START yes, yes. now. but before, adrenaline. highly promising. early research, but it, they abandoned it when hyronalin was discovered. yeesssssss.
START quite possible, doctor. developed could perhaps a sufficiently efficacious compound be.
START just stand there jawing, do not, spock. you and doctor wallace get cracking. yes, hmmm.
START thank you, mister sulu. lieutenant uhura, me know if we contact any romulan let. yeesssssss.
START romulans approaching from both sides. bracketed, we are bracketed, sir. herh herh herh.
START going up to the bridge, am i.
START no, jim. do it you cannot.
START to go to the bridge, i have. under attack, we are.
START me go let.
START under attack, we are. to go to the bridge, i have. got to go to the bridge i have.
START to raise the romulans keep trying. herh herh herh.
START trying, i am trying, commodore. hmmmmmm.
START if talk to them, i could, to them why we violated the neutral zone explain.
START listening to explanations the romulans are notorious for not. yes, hmmm.
START right, lieutenant uhura is, sir. tangled with them before, have we. yeesssssss.
START greenhorn, my ship up there ruining. yes, hmmm.
START jim, if to give you a shot, i have. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, this serum i made the necessary computations and produced. crude and dangerous, it is, but no time for refinements, we have.
START all right. let us, go, let us.
START cure or kill, it could, doctor. hmmmmmm.
START give me any vulcan details, do not. me the shot just give.
START no. take the first shot, i will.
START how long think this ship can take the pounding do you, hmm? got to get up there, i have.
START jim, kill you, it could. yes, hmmm.
START die anyway, will i. do it.
START sir, fired another, they have. yeesssssss.
START stopped, the ageing process has. getting stronger, his bodily functions are. hmmmmmm.
START sir, tried all known hailing frequencies, i have. they simply ignore us. yes, hmmm.
START us, they know they have. give out, they know our shields will. herh herh herh.
START well then, no alternative but to surrender, have we.
START sir, the romulans take not captives.
START losing power we are, sir. yeesssssss.
START what am i do going to, hmm? got to do something, i have. herh herh herh.
START surrounded by romulan vessels, we are. of ten maximum. to a hundred thousand kilometres range fifty.
START engineering, the captain, this is. i want full emergency power. i want everything within about two minutes. i want the warp drive engines on full standby. kirk out. to starfleet command open up a special channel. code two.
START but, captain, code. yeesssssss.
START an order, that is, lieutenant. code two. hmmmmmm.
START message. to starfleet command this sector from enterprise. have inadvertently encroached upon romulan neutral zone. surrounded and under heavy romulan attack. escape impossible, shields failing. implement destruct order using corbomite device recently installed, will. since result in the destruction of the enterprise and all matter in a two hundred thousand kilometre diameter and establish a corresponding dead zone, this will, avoid this area for the next four solar years, all federation ships will. take place in one minute, explosion will. kirk, commanding enterprise, out. mister sulu, course one eight eight degrees, mark fourteen. speed, warp factor eight. stand by.
START romulans giving ground, captain. obviously, as you expected them to they tapped in. yes, hmmm.
START logical assumption, mister spock. still retreating are they, hmm?
START caught off guard, the romulans were, captain. falling behind, are they.
START of range are we out, mister sulu, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes, sir. and of the neutral zone out. hmmmmmm.
START secure from red alert. adjust a new course, two five seven degrees, mark three. for starbase ten heading.
START captain, i just wanted to assure you that, what i thought best to save you and the men, did i. yes, hmmm.
START noted. know, you should, however, that, very little a starbase can do that a starship cannot, there is. hmmmmmm.
START if i may say so, captain, now quite aware of what a starship can do with the right man at the helm, i am.
START looking good, you are, doc.
START feeling fine. so is scotty. the serum worked. he pulled a muscle during the reaction, but feeling fine, otherwise he is. yeesssssss.
START oh, very well. few bruises here and there. oh. ready, anytime you are, mister spock.
START quite ready now, i am, doctor.
START because of your vulcan physique, prepared an extremely potent shot for you, i have. however, you might like to know, removed all the breakables from sickbay, have i. yes, hmmm.
START very considerate of you, that is, doctor.
START i thought pleased to hear that you would be. yes, hmmm.
START well, gentlemen, all and all, an experience, remember in our old age, will we. which will be for some while not, i hope. take over, mister sulu. as she goes steady.
START as she goes steady, captain. yeesssssss.
START quite large, they are. seven feet tall is unusual not. extremely fast and strong, they are. lieutenant, hmm?
START in addition, of swords and knives an assortment. yes, hmmm.
START you stationed on the planet, how long were, doctor, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START only a few months. we found them totally uninterested in medical aid or hospitals. survive, they believe only the strong should. hmmmmmm.
START yes, but this case in, with take down the more people we, the greater chance, of violating one of their taboos, have we. yeesssssss.
START agreed. got it into their heads we are showing force, they once have, forget them signing any mining treaty, you can.
START very well. scotty, in command, you are. been sighted in this sector, bear in mind that the klingons have. negotiating down there we while are, the enterprise to become an incident up here we want not. hmmmmmm.
START aye, sir. keep on our toes, we will. yeesssssss.
START halt! of the earth vessel, you are, hmm?
START captain kirk, am i.
START with open hearts and hands, we come. yes, hmmm.
START move a muscle, do not.
START unaware of any state of war between our peoples, i am, captain. hmmmmmm.
START or your policy to kill klingons on sight is it, hmm?
START young, he was young, and inexperienced. hmmmmmm.
START our sworn enemies by their own words, does maab know that the klingons are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START for our rocks we understand only that he also offers things of value, and freely handed us his weapons and other devices, he has. you do the same, will, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START me call my ship and inform them let.
START to bring down an attack upon their village, hmm? as i told you, it is, maab. to bargain honestly earthmen fear. hmmmmmm.
START you hand us your weapons, will, hmm?
START so their word scrupulously they keep. unusually honest, they are. you say is that what i heard, doctor, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, that, i mentioned that.
START he also mentioned that they, highly dangerous, can be.
START dangerous if lied to, if violated, their customs are. to no one we lied, doctor. we violated no customs. explain to me why one of my men is dead, you perhaps will. yeesssssss.
START because drawing a weapon on another of their guests, was he.
START grant looked up, saw a klingon, made a purely instinctive defensive move. your scrupulously honest friends anyway what's a klingon doing down here among, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START look, jim. to you to lose a crewman i know what it means. yeesssssss.
START only one down, that is, doctor. over four hundred more up there in orbit, there is. and klingon down here, there if is, there might be a klingon ship up there somewhere. yes, hmmm.
START mister scott. picking up something on the sensors, i am, sir. to be another ship seems. hmmmmmm.
START well, put it on the screen, let us.
START just at the edge of our sensor range, it is, sir. to get an exact reading hard.
START you think, a klingon ship, is it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START who else, playing cat and mouse with a starship, would be, hmm? well, hurt us much out there they cannot, like that bobbing about. to call the captain yet no need. yeesssssss.
START have chewed you out i should not. sorry, i am sorry. herh herh herh.
START yes, quite right, you are, mister spock. inefficient and illogical. hmmmmmm.
START shown friendship by handing over our weapons, you have. making a gesture in return, is she. yeesssssss.
START jim! you touch it, have to try to kill you, her nearest male relative will. offering you a chance for combat, they are. they consider it more pleasurable than love.
START appear, it would appear, captain, you a disappointment that he finds. yes, hmmm.
START the teer akaar, i am. of capella i lead the ten tribes.
START and eleen, this is, to give an old man a son to rule these tribes a young wife. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, i am. of all first, protest the killing of my crewman, i must.
START if your man, it was, was it his privilege to die for you not, hmm? understand i not. yes, hmmm.
START different, their customs are, teer.
START and of my people different from those, too, teer. of death frightens them the sight. yes, hmmm.
START take this let me, jim. true, what maab has said is. different, our customs are. unimportant, what the klingon has said is, and we hear not his words. i just called the klingon a liar. yes, hmmm.
START laughter, teer, hmm? the klingon an honoured guest also is not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the earth people who first bargained for our rocks, was it. hmmmmmm.
START best to have two who bargain for the same goods is it not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i who speak for the tribe, is it, maab.
START for many i speak, teer. of the klingon hear the words.
START what earth men offer you, hmm? you obtained from them in the past what have, hmm? for the sick powders and liquids, hmm? as you do we klingons believe. die, the sick should. live, only the strong should. promised to teach the youth of your tribes many things, earthmen have. what, hmm? what things, hmm? cleverness against enemies, hmm? of weapons the use, hmm? herh herh herh.
START the earth federation offers one other thing, akaar. our laws. and always remain yours, the highest of all our laws states that your world is yours and will. this differs us from the klingons. made up of conquered worlds, their empire is. take what they want by arms and force they.
START different customs, the earth men have, but never lied to our people have they. yeesssssss.
START bargain with earthmen there are those of us who will not, akaar.
START fight me, do you say you will, maab, hmm?
START your choice let that be, teer. yeesssssss.
START our communicators we need, our belts those devices on. if klingon ship somewhere, there is.
START the sky interests me not. heard i i must consider the words have. hmmmmmm.
START the ship's disappeared, sir. of range gone out. yes, hmmm.
START mister scott, getting a call from a vessel, i am. it is so faint i, make it out, cannot. yeesssssss.
START put a booster on it, lieutenant. to pull it in try. yeesssssss.
START lost it, i have. like a distress signal from an earth vessel it sounded.
START no quarrel with you, i have, captain. to return to my vessel i wish merely. hmmmmmm.
START of vessel type. location. yeesssssss.
START small scout ship, captain. we need the mineral, too. sent to negotiate, i was.
START wait. if you lead these people now, be certain, the right decisions, you make. yeesssssss.
START of the ten tribes afraid is the new leader, hmm? me kill him for you let. yeesssssss.
START or me fight let the klingon and. it might amuse you. herh herh herh.
START to see in new ways, perhaps to be a teer is. to like you i begin, earthman, and i saw fear in the klingon's eye. hmmmmmm.
START the signal clear now, i have, mister scott. distress call, it is. from the ss dierdre, it is.
START dierdre, hmm? freighter that is.
START reporting, under attack, are they. running, they are running, to manoeuvre trying. klingon vessel attacking, is it. yeesssssss.
START it up picking, sir. taking a fix.
START to captain kirk enterprise. come in, captain. to captain kirk enterprise. come in, captain.
START teer, you carry a child who would be. herh herh herh.
START die, i must die.
START of a teer no man may touch the wife.
START prepared to die, was she, earthman. yeesssssss.
START proud to obey the laws, i was. kill him first. he laid hands upon me. my right to see him die, is it.
START to mister spock enterprise. doctor mccoy, come in please. herh herh herh.
START it on the sensors, have i, sir. my channel tie into, lieutenant.
START to take us out of orbit prepare, mister sulu.
START distress call from a federation ship under attack, we have. where our duty lies, that is. take us out of orbit, mister sulu. ahead warp five.
START forced to leave capella to aid a federation vessel under attack by a klingon vessel, we were. forced to answer the distress signal, we were unable to contact our landing party before we were. our inability to reach the landing party is strange and, concerned, am i.
START assume that something's keeping them busy up there, i must. the klingon ship.
START seem a logical conclusion, that would. yeesssssss.
START captain, going to fix that woman's arm, am i. only kill me once for touching her, they can. yeesssssss.
START very good idea that is, bones. herh herh herh.
START me see that arm let. yes, hmmm.
START you will touch me not. herh herh herh.
START always desirable, to live is. yeesssssss.
START all right. go, let us.
START klingon. nothing to concern you there, there is.
START we made an agreement, maab. right to my weapons, have i. yeesssssss.
START be on our screens by now, it should. yeesssssss.
START at best, freighter might travel warp two. hmmmmmm.
START well aware of a freighter's maximum speed, am i, mister sulu.
START with her stay, bones. to get trapped in nice place. yeesssssss.
START but defensible entrance, captain.
START yes, i see. scout up the trail that way. see what, in the way of an exit, have we. take a look around, will i.
START now listen, of a high teer you may be a capellan woman and the widow, but doctor, i am, and my tradition to care for the sick and injured, it is. now, me see that arm let. yes, hmmm.
START you will touch me in that manner not. herh herh herh.
START to me you listen, young woman. touch you in any way or manner that my professional judgment indicates, i will. hmmmmmm.
START as i thought just. come anytime now, it can. hmmmmmm.
START how you know, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START because doctor, am i, how i know, that is.
START tell so much with a touch, even the women of our village cannot. strange hand. very soft. yes, hmmm.
START the walls get higher and narrower, but way out, there is. yes, hmmm.
START good. if block off that entrance, we could, hold them off, give us more time, it would. have to go around these hills, would they.
START enough loose rock and shale, there is. yeesssssss.
START think we could create a sonic disruption with two of our communicators do you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START work, only a very slight chance it would. hmmmmmm.
START well, if we can you think not, try maybe we should not. yes, hmmm.
START captain, i did say that exactly not. herh herh herh.
START produce a sympathetic vibration on the weak area of that slide, the sound beams should.
START human capellans are not, jim. humanoid, they are humanoid. certain internal differences, there is. equipment to handle an emergency i have not.
START well, if you think not you can handle it. yes, hmmm.
START cave in there there is. probably the only shelter around here. yes, hmmm.
START need help getting her in there, i will. hmmmmmm.
START look, doctor i am, not an escalator! spock, me a hand give! herh herh herh.
START no! allow only your touch, i will.
START vessel justs disappear not. herh herh herh.
START nothing there is, mister scott. clear, all channels and frequencies are. hmmmmmm.
START nothing, sir. if destroyed, it were destroyed, pick up debris readings of some sort, i would. hmmmmmm.
START it could have run away from us not, sir. not a freighter. herh herh herh.
START mister chekov, pull the microtape on that distress call. it replayed i want.
START hear it did you, hmm? they called us by name. not a general distress signal, but one aimed right at us.
START would they normally call for the nearest starship not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START ordered into this sector, how would a freighter know we were, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START trap. diverted from the planet, we were. hmmmmmm.
START or an authentic distress call could it be.
START stay long enough to make certain, we will. continue search pattern. yes, hmmm.
START just a minute. me get her on the rock let. you go there.
START no, no. here, pain is. yeesssssss.
START how arrange to touch her did you, bones, her a happy pill give, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START in mine from now on, it is.
START no, no. there, it is there. there, the the pain is. hmmmmmm.
START vegetation, captain. water nearby there evidently is. hmmmmmm.
START good, but as much as we need water we need weapons just, spock.
START seem to be little weapon potential at hand, there would. hmmmmmm.
START easy, easy. here, i am here. want the child, now you must! yeesssssss.
START no. here, to husband child belongs. yeesssssss.
START yes, yours, it is yours. yes, hmmm.
START no, no. got it all wrong, you have.
START yes, mccoy. yours, it is yours.
START no. to yourself say, mine, the child is. mine, it is mine. it is. yes, hmmm.
START to enterprise kirk. come in. to enterprise kirk. come in.
START fortunately, suitable tensile cohesion, this bark has. herh herh herh.
START more like it, that is. since the capellans never developed the bow, as big a surprise as gunpowder was on earth, this may come.
START no, no, mister spock. to support its back you place this arm under here, and to support its head this hand here.
START rather, i would rather, rather not, would i. thank you.
START mccoy. our child bring.
START explain later, i will.
START prove very interesting, that should. yes, hmmm.
START turning back, are we. warp five, helm. yeesssssss.
START warp five, sir. for capella four on course. hmmmmmm.
START registered in this sector, the carolina is.
START ignore it, lieutenant. as my order log it, my responsibility.
START scotty, if turn out to be real, it should. yes, hmmm.
START an old, there is, old saying on earth, mister sulu. me once fool, shame on you. me twice fool, shame on me. yeesssssss.
START me with a rock my patient spattered. gone, she is gone. hmmmmmm.
START all right, it is. in there, it is. i guess, forget psychiatry, will i, with surgery stick. i really thought, learned to want it, would she. hmmmmmm.
START relative term, virtue is, doctor. head straight to the warriors, she will.
START go with you, will i. yes, hmmm.
START bones, you signed aboard my ship you took a medical oath long before. that small patient in there needs you.
START to planet estimating, hmm?
START mister scott, hmm? sensors picking up a vessel ahead, our path cutting across. herh herh herh.
START an alien, it is, sir. by configuration a klingon warship. our path taking position directly in.
START the uss enterprise calling unidentified klingon vessel, this is. come in. uss enterprise calling klingon vessel. acknowledge, please.
START it on the viewscreen now, have i, sir. still distant. holding a position dead ahead, sir.
START drawing a line, to step over it daring us.
START still closing. of flight the alien's directly in our line.
START the commander of the uss enterprise, this is. your intention identify yourself and. acknowledge. close out the frequency, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START ready, phaser banks are, sir. yes, hmmm.
START and go right down their throat we will, if necessary. see if they have the belly for it, let us.
START the earthmen make excellent game. surprised me, their cleverness has. hmmmmmm.
START honour our law, we will, and to you our word, klingon. yeesssssss.
START dead, the child is, maab. do as, with me, you will.
START dead. as they slept i killed them.
START if true, to them take us.
START doubt my word do you, klingon, hmm? the wife of a teer, i am. die in my own tent, will i.
START first, verify her story, we will. yeesssssss.
START this what your sworn word means is, klingon, hmm? herh herh herh.
START the cavalry comes over the hill in the nick of time anymore not.
START if by that you mean we, expect help from the enterprise, cannot, agree, i must agree.
START just one thing i want, there is. yes, hmmm.
START get him, one of us must. hmmmmmm.
START of you the next man who raises a weapon destroys all. you and your primitive knives and your weapons, teach you what killing really means, i will.
START fight! warriors or children are you, hmm? maab, flee, i will flee. when to fire the klingon turns, i will.
START it there hold. your weapons drop.
START you, we missed you, mister scott. herh herh herh.
START well, at any rate, prove interesting, this should. hmmmmmm.
START when actually doctor mccoy's child, the woman starts explaining how the new high teer is.
START we actually not understand it ourselves, mister scott. yes, hmmm.
START doctor mccoy, nor does.
START contact starfleet. been secured by treaty, inform them the federation mining rights on capella have, documents signed by the young high chief's regent. report follows. herh herh herh.
START named leonard james akaar, the child was, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to it has a kind of a ring, you think, do not, james, hmm?
START yes. i think, a name destined to go down in galactic history, is it, leonard. what you think, spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START both going to be insufferably pleased with yourselves for at least a month, i think you are, sir.
START dress uniforms, spit and polish. i know not how much longer i am going to be able to stand this. like my neck's in a sling i feel. herh herh herh.
START the vulcans are the last delegates, to pick up, have we. as as we get them aboard soon, able to relax, will we be.
START that vulcan salute go, how does, hmm?
START with your presence vulcan honours us. to serve, we come.
START doctor. my wife, my aides and she who is. hmmmmmm.
START our pleasure, madam. as arrange a tour of the ship i soon as you are settled will. conduct you, mister spock will.
START prefer another guide, i would, captain. yes, hmmm.
START as you wish, ambassador. mister spock, leave orbit in two hours, will we. to beam down and visit your parents would you care, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START captain, my parents, ambassador sarek and his wife are. yes, hmmm.
START after all these years among humans, learned to smile you still have not.
START with so little provocation humans smile.
START and come to see us in four years you have not, either.
START the situation between my father and myself has changed not. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock. moment, if you please. yeesssssss.
START his first instruction in computers i gave spock, captain. to devote his knowledge to starfleet instead of the vulcan science academy he chose. herh herh herh.
START sorry, i am sorry, ambassador. i did mean to offend not. that, i thought that.
START mrs. sarek, understand i just not.
START amanda. i am afraid you could pronounce the vulcan name not. yes, hmmm.
START after a fashion, and of practice after many years. continue the tour, shall we, hmm? my husband did request it. herh herh herh.
START like a command it sounded more.
START of course. vulcan, he is. his wife, i am. hmmmmmm.
START and his son, spock is.
START the vulcan way you understand not, captain. logical, it is logical. better way than ours, it is. but easy it is not. kept spock and sarek from speaking as father and son for eighteen years, it has. hmmmmmm.
START my best officer, spock is, and my friend. yes, hmmm.
START glad he has such a friend, i am. it hasn't been easy on spock. neither human nor vulcan. at home nowhere except starfleet. yes, hmmm.
START take it that spock disagreed with his father on a choice of career i. yes, hmmm.
START nothing against starfleet, my husband has. but depend on force vulcans believe that peace should not. yes, hmmm.
START used only as a last resort, starfleet force is. an instrument of civilisation, we are. and better opportunity for a scientist to study the universe than he can get at the vulcan science academy, it is. yes, hmmm.
START perhaps. but to follow his teachings sarek wanted spock, as of his own father sarek followed the teachings.
START both stubborn, are they.
START human trait, captain, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START mister ambassador, i understand, retired before this conference was called, you had. my curiosity forgive, but as a doctor, interested in vulcan physiology, i am. it unusual for a vulcan to retire at your age is not, hmm? after all, only a hundred and two, you are. herh herh herh.
START one hundred two point four three seven precisely, doctor, your years measured in. other concerns i had.
START be taken here the vote will not, ambassador gav. heard in the council chambers on babel, my government's instructions will be.
START no! you! how you vote, of vulcan sarek, hmm? herh herh herh.
START in council, his vote carries others. know where he stands and why, i will. hmmmmmm.
START for reasons tellarites argue not. argue, they simply argue. yeesssssss.
START gentlemen. quite correct, ambassador sarek is when he points out this is not the council chamber of babel. fully aware that the admission of coridan is a highly debatable issue, i am, but solve it here you will not. yes, hmmm.
START correct, you are, captain. quite logical.
START met gav before have you, ambassador, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START my last council session we debated during. ambassador. hmmmmmm.
START spock, always suspected that you were a little more human than you let on, i have. mrs. sarek, of the vulcan youth i know about the rigorous training, but tell me, ever run and play like the human children did he, even in secret, hmm?
START well, he, very fond of, he did have a pet sehlat he was. yes, hmmm.
START sort of a fat teddy bear, it is. herh herh herh.
START teddy bear, hmm?
START excuse me, doctor. been a rather long day for my wife, it has. captain. yeesssssss.
START teddy bear. hmmmmmm.
START my way on. all duty personnel on yellow alert. alarm the passengers, do not. kirk out.
START small ship, captain. been there five minutes, is it, of sensors remaining outside phaser range at extreme limit.
START of a scout ship sensors indicate the size, but unfamiliar, the configuration is. most unusual. yeesssssss.
START answer a hail does she, hmm?
START tried all frequencies and hooked in the universal translator, i have. no response, sir.
START this quadrant except ours starfleet records no authorised vessel in. hmmmmmm.
START to guess what she is care, hmm? yeesssssss.
START guess, captain, hmm? for my estimate i shall need more data. yes, hmmm.
START mister chekov, to intercept that vessel plot course. i see what she looks like close up want to. yeesssssss.
START this evening you embarrassed spock. that, not even a mother may do. vulcan, is he. hmmmmmm.
START also human, he is.
START starfleet officer, he is. yeesssssss.
START approve of starfleet i thought you did not.
START it is a question of approval not. the fact exists. in starfleet, is he. he must command respect if, to function, is he. herh herh herh.
START sarek, proud of him, you are, you are not, hmm? showing almost human pride in your son, you are. hmmmmmm.
START it requires not pride to ask that spock be given the respect which is his due. as my son not, but as spock. understand do you, hmm?
START not really, but it matters not. you anyway i love. i know. logical it is not. yes, hmmm.
START interesting. travelling at approximately warp ten, they were. hmmmmmm.
START captain, this quadrant starfleet acknowledges report on our situation and confirms no authorised federation vessel in.
START back on original heading, captain. the intruder changed course immediately after we did. paralleling us again, it is.
START well, shadow, have we. faster, more manoeuvrable and unidentified. mister spock, of sensor readings full analysis. i know who that intruder is want to. yes, hmmm.
START vulcan, speak to you, would i. herh herh herh.
START seem unavoidable, it does.
START how vote you on the coridan admission, hmm?
START to wait for the council meeting you seem unwilling, ambassador. no matter. admission, we favour admission.
START under federation law, protected and its wealth administered for the benefit of its people, can coridan be. herh herh herh.
START well for you, that is. no mining interest, vulcan has. yes, hmmm.
START been carrying coridan dilithium crystals, some of your ships have. yeesssssss.
START gentlemen. gentlemen. between yourselves is your business, whatever arguments you have. running the ship, my business is. as as i command long, order, there will be.
START understood. payment for your slander, there will be, sarek. hmmmmmm.
START illogical, threats are. and usually expensive, payment is. yeesssssss.
START to captain kirk security.
START he killed, how was, hmm?
START broken, his neck was. by an expert. yes, hmmm.
START well, of the break from the nature and location, say the killer knew exactly where to apply pressure to snap the neck instantly i would. yeesssssss.
START that knowledge would who aboard have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START spock. short time ago, your father i broke up an argument between gav and. yes, hmmm.
START interesting, hmm? spock, realise that makes your father the most likely suspect do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START vulcans approve not of violence. hmmmmmm.
START have done it you are saying he could not, hmm?
START no, captain. merely saying it would be illogical to kill without reason, i am. hmmmmmm.
START but if, a reason, had he, done it, could he have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START if reason, there were, quite capable of killing, my father is. logically and efficiently.
START mrs. sarek, sorry to disturb you, i am. speak to your husband, i must. yeesssssss.
START been gone for some time, is he. his habit to meditate in private before retiring, is it. what's wrong, hmm? spock, hmm?
START of me you want something, captain, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START ambassador, the tellarite. been murdered, gav has.
START yes. ambassador, you during the past hour, where were, hmm?
START captain, accusing him you are not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START mother. if only on circumstantial evidence, logical suspect, is he.
START agree, i quite agree. herh herh herh.
START then you during the hour, where were, hmm? yeesssssss.
START in private meditation, captain. tell you that such meditation is a personal experience, spock will, to be discussed not. with earthmen especially not. herh herh herh.
START very convenient excuse that is, ambassador. yes, hmmm.
START difficult to say with vulcan physiology, it is, but i believe, something to do with his cardiovascular system, is it.
START you help him can, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i know not that yet either. yes, hmmm.
START sorry about your father, am i.
START yes, adversely affect our mission, could it.
START are you worried about him not, hmm?
START human emotion, worry is, captain. happened, i accept what has. cloaked against sensor probes, the ship's hull seems to have a high density level or is. manned, it is manned, but make out specifics sensors cannot. yes, hmmm.
START i see. well, nothing like it, the romulans have. certainly the federation or the neutral planets not. what about the klingons, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i think it unlikely, one of theirs, is it. yes, hmmm.
START captain, hmm? of a transmission i picked up the last part. like that other one just. it immediately i put the recorder and the directional locator on.
START the intruder ship, it is, sir. yeesssssss.
START to mister spock's station for decode switch recorder, lieutenant. yes, hmmm.
START sir, of this ship the directional locator indicates reception point somewhere within the body.
START personal receiver, hmm? in contact with that vessel, somebody on board is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START possibly, captain. but decode this transmission i cannot.
START in no known code, it is. no detectable pattern, there is. no standard references apply. hmmmmmm.
START only negative. of our computer records it fits none, and alien, it is alien. hmmmmmm.
START murder, hmm? someone out there playing tag, hmm? lieutenant, got your sensor locator on a wide beam, you have. established a receiver on board this vessel, you have. to the interior of the ship tighten your field. yes, hmmm.
START if that alien vessel starts transmitting again, i know who on board the enterprise is receiving want to. yeesssssss.
START bones, he, how is, hmm?
START as far as, tell from instrument readings, can i, malfunction in one of the heart valve, our prime suspect has. similar to a heart attack in a human, is it. but with vulcan physiology, impossible to tell without an operation, it is. mrs. sarek, any previous attacks, he has had, hmm?
START yes. three others, there were. for the condition my physician prescribed benjisidrine. yeesssssss.
START you tell me why did not, hmm?
START there was nothing you, done, could have. yeesssssss.
START ambassador, when did, these attacks, you have, hmm?
START two before we left vulcan, the third a few hours ago. on the observation deck, i was. when murdered, the tellarite was, quite incapacitated, was i.
START no witnesses, there were, hmm?
START doctor, propose surgery for the heart defect do you, hmm?
START i am sure not. tough enough on a human, is it. on a vulcan, of the question an ordinary operation's out. herh herh herh.
START because of the vulcan heart of the construction. herh herh herh.
START well, glad somebody's asking me something around here, i am. well, the procedure, discussing would require tremendous amounts of blood for the patient, are they.
START checked the blood bank, i have. there is enough vulcan blood and plasma to even begin such an operation of this type not. yeesssssss.
START other vulcans aboard, there are. hmmmmmm.
START yes, say that is rare, i would.
START run a number of blood tests on mister spock, we have. it is true vulcan blood either not. human blood elements in it, it has. yeesssssss.
START be possible to filter out the human factors, it should. hmmmmmm.
START even you could give that much blood not, spock. kill you, it would. hmmmmmm.
START indeed. estimate the odds, i would.
START it, i see it, spock, but rigelian, that was.
START very similar to vulcan, rigelian physiology is.
START similar is good enough not. still experimental, is it. herh herh herh.
START but look promising, it does. yeesssssss.
START spock, need such great amounts of blood that, we would, even if the drug worked on the vulcans as well as a rigelian, which doubtful, i am doubtful, still drain sarek to a critical level, it would. herh herh herh.
START never operated on a vulcan before, plus the fact i have. oh, studied the anatomical types, have i. i know where all the organs are. but lot different from actual surgical experience that is. so if i kill not him with the operation, the drug probably will. yeesssssss.
START what drug, doctor, hmm? asleep, my husband is. what drug, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to speed up reproduction and replacement of blood in the body a chemical stimulant. only experimental, is it. yeesssssss.
START been used successfully on test subjects on rigel five, it has. herh herh herh.
START it places a tremendous strain on the spleen and the liver. in sarek's condition, kill him, the stimulant would. herh herh herh.
START miss chapel, hmm? i underwent a physical examination last week. you pull those records would, please, hmm? yeesssssss.
START already pulled. perfectly healthy, you are, mister spock.
START that got, what has.
START going to use it on yourself, you are. to your father a transfusion from you. yeesssssss.
START seem the only answer, would it. hmmmmmm.
START damage you internally, it could. kill you, it could. sorry, i am sorry, spock. sanction it, i cannot.
START and to permit it i refuse. i will risk both of you not. yeesssssss.
START then to death you automatically condemn sarek. and you, doctor, have no logical alternative either. if you not operate, die, sarek will. the means to perform the operation, you now have. volunteering myself as the blood donor i am. at my station until you require me, will i be.
START on deck five, i am, my quarters near. been attacked by an andorian, have i. security. security team. hmmmmmm.
START bad wound, is it. punctured left lung. centimetre or so lower, have gone through the heart, it would.
START in the brig questioning the andorian prisoner will i be.
START spock, much worse, your father is. no longer a choice, there is. to operate immediately, i have. prepared, we can begin as soon as you are. herh herh herh.
START to the ship, my first responsibility is. by starfleet order of first importance, our passengers' safety is. being followed by an alien, are we, possibly hostile, vessel. relinquish command under these circumstances, i cannot.
START turn command over to scotty, you can.
START on what grounds, doctor, hmm? command requirements recognise not personal privilege. in the brig interrogating the andorian, will i be.
START thelev, he is thelev, of my staff a minor member. served adequately, i know nothing of him except that he has. herh herh herh.
START been subjected to questioning under verifier scan and truth drug, he has. nothing, he reveals nothing. been so conditioned as part of a preconceived plan, i suggest his mind has. herh herh herh.
START violent race, my people are, but no quarrel with captain kirk, we have. hmmmmmm.
START you suggest a plot. it profit us to harm the captain, how could, hmm?
START i not know. no logic in thelev's attack upon the captain there is. no logic in gav's murder there is.
START forget logic and devote yourself to motivations of passion or gain, perhaps you should. reasons for murder, those are. yes, hmmm.
START spock, turn command over to somebody else, you must.
START mother, when commissioned, i was commissioned, to carry out responsibilities i took an oath which were clearly and exactly specified. hmmmmmm.
START command this ship, any competent officer can. give your father the blood transfusions that he needs to live, only you can.
START command this ship under normal circumstances, any competent officer can. the circumstances are normal not. carrying over one hundred valuable federation passengers, we are. being pursued by an alien ship, are we. subject to possible attack, we are. been murder and attempted murder on board, there has. i, dismiss my duties, cannot. yeesssssss.
START duty, hmm? to your father, your duty is.
START i know, but take precedence, this must. if give the transfusion without loss of time or efficiency, could i, i would. my reason sarek understands. yeesssssss.
START well, not, i do not. it is human not. dirty word that is not. human, you are, too. through, let that part of you come. your father's dying. yes, hmmm.
START mother, lived on vulcan so long, how can you have, married a vulcan, raised a son on vulcan, without to be a vulcan understanding what it means, hmm? herh herh herh.
START if what it means, this is, to know i want not. hmmmmmm.
START to adopt a philosophy it means, of life a way, which is logical and beneficial. we, disregard that philosophy merely for personal gain, cannot, no matter how important that gain might be. herh herh herh.
START as important as your father's life, nothing is. hmmmmmm.
START to agree, can you imagine what my father would say if i were, if to give up command of this vessel, i were, of lives jeopardise hundreds, risk interplanetary war, for the life of one person all, hmm?
START oh, to him go. now. please. yeesssssss.
START like to get my hands on the guy with the sledgehammer, i would.
START no, my head the one inside. i, how long have. yeesssssss.
START to you now let that be a lesson. still alive, just lie there and be happy you are. herh herh herh.
START not good. if only operate, i could. herh herh herh.
START what's stopping you, hmm? all ready, i thought you were. hmmmmmm.
START i was. when you became injured, spock assumed command. he is going to stay there until, back on your feet, you are, his life even if it costs sarek. regulations. yeesssssss.
START damn him for his loyalty i cannot, for his duty doing, but i am going to let him commit patricide not.
START jim, if you stand, start to bleed again, you could. yes, hmmm.
START bones, die without that operation, sarek will, and you, operate without transfusions from spock, cannot. convince spock i am all right and order him to report here, i will. as as he leaves the bridge soon, turn command over to scotty and report to my quarters, will i. that fill your prescription, will, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START take over, will i, mister spock. to sickbay with doctor mccoy you report.
START captain, quite all right are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START certified him physically fit, i have, mister spock. an operation to perform and both of us are required i now since have. yeesssssss.
START get out, spock. chekov, of the intruder what's the status, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to the bridge call mister scott. herh herh herh.
START captain, moving closer, the alien vessel is. yes, hmmm.
START belay that order. stay here, i will. yeesssssss.
START captain, picking up the alien signal again, i am, but coming from inside the enterprise, it is. yeesssssss.
START security, hmm? to the brig security. search the prisoner immediately. hmmmmmm.
START up over two hundred percent, mister spock's blood reproduction rate is. risen to three hundred and twenty four, sarek's heartbeat has. over forty blood pressure ninety, dropping.
START good or bad, i wish i knew whether that was. initiate sterile field. herh herh herh.
START where do you think, going, you are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START see the captain, i must. herh herh herh.
START my patients walk not out in the middle of an operation.
START the alien ship. the norm i have just realised that if their power utilisation curve is not, be possible to identify them this way, it should. very important.
START so your father's life is. herh herh herh.
START captain, changed course and speed, the alien ship has. moving directly toward us at warp eight. hmmmmmm.
START to the bridge bring the prisoner. deflectors on. red alert. to fire on my order phasers stand by.
START moving away. turning now. coming around again, he is. hmmmmmm.
START as he passes fire, ensign. herh herh herh.
START clean miss, sir. yes, hmmm.
START his weaponry report on, mister chekov. hmmmmmm.
START standard phasers. good. more speed, they may have, but giants they are not.
START captain, jammed, the intercoms are. asking what's going on, all the ambassadors are.
START to take a good guess tell them, but clear that board, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START coming around again, he is. herh herh herh.
START like that one more, and going to lose both these men, am i. yeesssssss.
START my order on, fire photon torpedoes two, four and six. widest possible scatter. herh herh herh.
START full spread missed, sir. moving too fast for us, are they. yes, hmmm.
START off, the systems are.
START sickbay systems put on priority, call engineering and have. herh herh herh.
START buckled, number four shield has, sir.
START switching over. shields firming up. still weak, number four is, sir. if they hit us there again, go altogether, it will. yes, hmmm.
START good, your friends out there are. have to destroy this ship to win, they will. herh herh herh.
START intended from the beginning, that was, captain. hmmmmmm.
START andorian you are not. you, who are, hmm?
START damage control procedures, all decks. phasers, that ship out there has. alike, at least our weapons are. yes, hmmm.
START gone, number two shield is.
START engineering, the captain, this is. for phaser banks cut power on port side except. my signal at, cut starboard power. kirk out. you, who are, hmm?
START your own answers find, captain. long to live you have not.
START spy, you are, to pass as an andorian surgically altered. to use terror and murder to disrupt us and prepare for this attack planted in the ambassador's party. yeesssssss.
START what doing are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START starting to drift, we are, sir. her on course shall i hold, hmm?
START no. your phasers stand by, mister chekov.
START aye, sir. phasers standing by. just hovering out there, he is, sir.
START looking us over. dead as far as he knows, we are.
START baiting him, you are. trying to lure him in, you are. herh herh herh.
START he comes here. range decreasing. to sublight speed dropping close.
START your fire hold, mister chekov.
START secure from general quarters. lieutenant, open the hailing frequency. if to surrender they wish. yes, hmmm.
START lieutenant, to starfleet command relay. tell them, a prisoner, have we.
START to sickbay take him. yeesssssss.
START miscalculated, i seem to have. herh herh herh.
START quite through shaking the ship around are you, hmm?
START spock, they, sarek how are, hmm?
START i mind not telling you, for a surgeon trying you sure make it difficult.
START all the luck, some doctors have. herh herh herh.
START captain, find the alien, i believe you will.
START their ship we damaged. to avoid capture they destroyed themselves. bones, thelev's body, brought to your lab, will be. as soon as possible i want an autopsy performed. hmmmmmm.
START i think, find he is an orion, you will, doctor. hmmmmmm.
START been raiding the coridan system, intelligence reports that orion smugglers have.
START but they gain by an attack on starfleet, what would, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, of course. with orion carefully neutral, clean up supplying dilithium to both sides and continue to raid coridan, they would. yes, hmmm.
START the power utilisation curve, the thing that confused me was. to us it made them seem more powerful than a starship or anything known. constructed for a suicide mission, that ship was. since to return to their home base they never intended, use one hundred percent power on their attacks, could they. the thing i understand not is why i did not think of it earlier. yes, hmmm.
START you, had something else on your mind, might have.
START no, but you anyway thank. hmmmmmm.
START and you, sarek. to your son would you also say thank you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i not understand. herh herh herh.
START for your life saving. hmmmmmm.
START to him spock acted in the only logical manner open. one thanks not logic, amanda. herh herh herh.
START logic, logic! sick to death of logic, i am. do you know how i feel about your logic want to, hmm? yeesssssss.
START emotional, is she not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START always been that way, she has.
START indeed, hmm? why marry her did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START at the time, to do it seemed the logical thing.
START doctor, return to my station now, will i.
START at your station, you are, mister spock.
START doctor mccoy, i believe, enjoying all this, you are. yeesssssss.
START indeed, captain. never seen him look so happy, i have. herh herh herh.
START reached projected point three, we have, captain. to new course two oh one mark one five adjust.
START she, how is, doc, hmm?
START to the starfleet small thanks. herh herh herh.
START now really, commissioner, blame the starfleet, you cannot. yes, hmmm.
START received the proper inoculations ahead of time, should i have. yes, hmmm.
START extremely rare, sakuro's disease is. literally billions to one, the chances of anyone contracting it are. herh herh herh.
START sent to epsilon canaris three to prevent a war, was i, doctor. to the inefficiency of the medical branch of the starfleet thanks, been forced to leave before my job was done, i have. hmmmmmm.
START commissioner, assure you that once we reach the enterprise i can, with its medical facilities, have you back to your job in time for you to prevent that war, we will. yeesssssss.
START we rendezvous with that ship of yours, how soon will, captain, hmm?
START you check your automatic scanner, will, please, hmm?
START odd, that is. never seen anything like that before i have. yeesssssss.
START i, nor have. yeesssssss.
START with us staying right. sensor readings, mister spock.
START of ionised hydrogen vaguely like a cloud, but with strong erratic electrical impulses. herh herh herh.
START got it, we have.
START helm answers not, captain. yes, hmmm.
START the pods, neither do. dead, communications are. building overload. cut all power relays. yeesssssss.
START what's happening, hmm? to know i demand. yes, hmmm.
START as much as we do you already know, miss hedford. outside, whatever that thing is, yanked us off course from the enterprise, is it. yeesssssss.
START jim, got to get miss hedford to the enterprise, have we. her condition.
START i know, bones, but nothing i can do about it, there is.
START i insist, your scheduled rendezvous with the enterprise, you make. yes, hmmm.
START miss hedford, do what we can we will, when we can. at the moment, helpless, we are helpless. as well sit back and enjoy the ride you might. yes, hmmm.
START enterprise, the galileo, this is. come in, please, come in. enterprise, the galileo, this is. come in, please. no good, it is. transmitting we are not. bones, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START similar to earth, gravity is. of its size most unusual in view. to be iron and nickel the bulk of the body seems. more than an asteroid. like a small planetoid, say, i should say. of a planet breakup possibly a remnant. for human life totally suitable. hmmmmmm.
START all right, we get out and get up. issue phasers. bones, maintain full alert. commissioner, stay inside, you will. yes, hmmm.
START to stay inside just how long am i supposed, captain, hmm?
START very good question, that is. answer it, i wish i could. all right. go, let us.
START most unusual. unlikely. in fact, captain, say quite impossible i would. herh herh herh.
START reason must there be. herh herh herh.
START look a little further let us. yeesssssss.
START jim, i just took a tricording sweep, and the same readings almost as spock got, i got when we were pulled off course.
START so, i think so, with us only it reads here on the surface. in that direction, is it, and it reads solid not. more unstable, it is, tenuous, of gases like a collection.
START bones, get a physiological reading on that, it is whatever. yeesssssss.
START hello! real are you, hmm? i mean, imagining you i am not, am i, hmm?
START real enough, are we. herh herh herh.
START the f, hmm? well, it matters not. cochrane, i am cochrane. been marooned here who knows how long, i have. if you only knew how good, to see you, is it. and woman. beautiful one at that. herh herh herh.
START vulcan, you are, are you not, hmm?
START ma'am. food to a starving man, you are. of you all. hey, nice ship that is. simple and clean. to get her to go again been trying, hmm? well, forget it. it will work not. yeesssssss.
START human, he is human, jim. everything checks out perfectly. herh herh herh.
START mister cochrane. identify we were forced off our course and taken here by some force we could not. yes, hmmm.
START which to be on the surface of this body at the moment seems. yeesssssss.
START well, know anything about that i would not. hmmmmmm.
START you say we, unable to get the ship to function again, will be, hmm?
START not a chance. some sort of dampening field down here, there is. power systems not work. take my word for it.
START you mind not if we continue to try, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START go right ahead. got plenty of time, you have. herh herh herh.
START what about you, cochrane, hmm? how get here did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START marooned, you, i told you. look, have lots of time to learn about each other, we will. small place over that way, i have. of home all the comforts. even offer you a hot bath, can i.
START to notice i needed one how perceptive of you. yes, hmmm.
START if you not mind, mister cochrane, like more than just a statement that you were marooned here, would i. long way off the beaten path, it is. hmmmmmm.
START right, that is. why i am so glad to see you, that is. look, i will tell you everything you know want to, but not here. sure a beauty, your ship is.
START yes, she is. and been out of circulation quite a while, you have. to you the principles may be new. mister spock, why you not explain our methods of propulsion to mister cochrane, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START talks a lot, but he says not much. yeesssssss.
START noticed something else, have i. hmmmmmm.
START familiar, he looks familiar. hmmmmmm.
START familiar, hmm? you mention it now that, he does. herh herh herh.
START quite place him, i cannot, but. what about miss hedford, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no temperature yet, but got to get under way soon, we have, jim. you, i guarantee you, develop, it will develop. what are we do going to, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes. tools and supplies left over from my crash, i had. yes, hmmm.
START not earth, but livable, it is livable. over that next ridge i grow vegetables in the fields. come on in. yes, hmmm.
START of home indeed all the comforts, mister cochrane. the antiques, where'd you get, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you mean my instruments, hmm? changed a lot since i crashed, i imagine things have. yeesssssss.
START you keep it so terribly hot in here must, hmm? herh herh herh.
START the temperature's a constant seventy two degrees. to drink let me get you something cool. hmmmmmm.
START feel hot do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START infuriated, i feel infuriated, deeply put upon, and absolutely outraged.
START quite a hike here, it was. tired, you are. take it easy for a while just. yes, hmmm.
START rest later, i will, doctor. yes, hmmm.
START yes, i know. running out of time we it means are. hmmmmmm.
START that, what was, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START well, sometimes the light plays tricks on you. surprised what i have imagined i have seen around here sometimes you would be. herh herh herh.
START nothing, we imagined nothing, mister cochrane. the same entity, there was an entity out there and i suspect it was which brought us here. explain. yeesssssss.
START nothing to explain, there is.
START very low tolerance level where the safety of my people are concerned i you will find have. you out here we find, any business being, where no human has. virtually hijacked in space and brought here, we were. now i am just requesting an explanation not, mister. demanding one, am i.
START all right. the companion, it was.
START what i call it, that is. as of fact a matter, captain, i did crash here not. brought here in my disabled ship, was i. almost dead, i was. my life the companion saved. hmmmmmm.
START injured, you were, hmm? yeesssssss.
START dying, i was dying, mister spock. herh herh herh.
START you seem perfectly all right now. the matter, what was, hmm?
START an old man, i was. herh herh herh.
START what, you were, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, how it did it i know not, but the companion rejuvenated me, me young again made, now, i like am.
START to reserve judgment on that part of your story i prefer, sir. meanwhile, of yours is would you please explain exactly what this companion, hmm?
START you, i told you, what it is i know not. it exists, it lives, and communicate with it, i can. herh herh herh.
START pretty far out story that is. herh herh herh.
START mister cochrane, first name, you have, hmm?
START of alpha centuri zefram cochrane, of the space warp the discoverer, hmm? yeesssssss.
START right, that is, captain. herh herh herh.
START but impossible, that is. zefram cochrane died a hundred and fifty years ago. yeesssssss.
START revered throughout the known galaxy, the name of zefram cochrane is. named after him, planets were. great universities, cities. yeesssssss.
START is your story a little improbable not, mister cochrane, hmm?
START no, true, it is true. eighty seven years old, i was when i came here. hmmmmmm.
START this companion found you and rejuvenated you you say, hmm? you doing in space at the age of eighty seven, what were, hmm?
START tired, i was tired, captain. i was die going to, and to die in space i wanted. all, that is.
START true, never found, his body was. yes, hmmm.
START looking at it, you are, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START how you feel, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START terrible. i feel, how should, hmm?
START running a little temperature, you are. lie down, perhaps you should.
START doctor, you please just leave me alone, will. the heat, it is. hmmmmmm.
START all right. to relax try. jim, started, it is started, the fever. over a hundred, it is, and climbing, it is climbing. yeesssssss.
START we have, how long do, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START of hours a matter, all, that is. yes, hmmm.
START mister cochrane, brought here a hundred and fifty years ago, you say you were, hmm? you look not over thirty five. herh herh herh.
START i have aged not. to that the companion sees.
START captain. these instruments, they date from the time indicated. your ship from, mister cochrane, hmm?
START it, i cannibalised it. the food, water, gardens, everything else i need the companion gives me. apparently, of the native elements it creates it out. yes, hmmm.
START communicate with it, you say you can. doing here, perhaps you can find out what we are. yeesssssss.
START know, i already know. hmmmmmm.
START mind telling us you would not, hmm?
START like it you will not.
START it i already like not. hmmmmmm.
START here to keep me company, you are.
START you brought us here you mean, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no, the companion did. i told it, die of loneliness, would i. i thought, release me, would it. instead, you here it brought.
START no! no! no! disgusting, that is! animals we are not! no! oh, no! inhuman, it is inhuman! no! no! hmmmmmm.
START spock, run additional tricorder readings. you can learn anything. to use against this thing find me a weapon. yeesssssss.
START to find a weapon you ask me. intend to destroy it do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START whatever's necessary to get us off this planet and commissioner hedford to the hospital, i intend to do. if the companion stands in the way, then of the way we push it out. clear, spock, hmm?
START begin to age again, would i, normally.
START do you leave here want to, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START believe me, captain, of boredom immortality consists largely. like out there in the galaxy what's it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START on a thousand planets and spreading out, are we. we cross fantastic distances and everything's alive, cochrane. life everywhere. millions of planets with intelligent life, we estimate there are. we have begun to map them not. interesting, hmm?
START how would to sleep for a hundred and fifty years and wake up in a new world you like, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START all out there waiting for you, it is, but need your help to get away, we will. yeesssssss.
START got it, you have.
START do almost anything, you seem to think this companion of yours can. yeesssssss.
START very powerful, i said it was. hmmmmmm.
START it cure her could, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i not know. yes, hmmm.
START how communicate you with it, hmm?
START got to try, we have. helpless, we are helpless. see if, do something, can it.
START how do you it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of clear my mind and it comes i just sort. herh herh herh.
START bones, what make you of that, hmm?
START of some kind almost a symbiosis, of joining a sort.
START exactly what i think. to a beloved animal not exactly like a pet owner speaking, you say would, hmm?
START no, more than that, it is. hmmmmmm.
START agreed. like love more. herh herh herh.
START all right are you, hmm?
START yes. me a little it kind of drains, but all right, am i. yeesssssss.
START do anything to help miss hedford the companion cannot. yeesssssss.
START then die, she will die. yeesssssss.
START if anything i could do to help, there is, i would, and i will, but expect nothing from the companion, we can. hmmmmmm.
START spock! all right are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you, it attacked you, hmm?
START evidently. unquestionably, simple electricity, a large part of its substance is.
START oh, yes. scientist or a physicist i am not, mister spock, but am i correct in assuming that anything that generates electricity, shorted out, can be, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of the companion put this in the proximity, this switch throw, and scramble every electrical impulse the creature can produce, it will. fail, it cannot fail.
START you, it troubles you, cochrane, hmm?
START my life the companion saved. taken care of me all these years, is it. hard to explain, we have been very close in a way that is. an affection for it, i suppose i even have.
START also keeping you prisoner, it is. yeesssssss.
START i want not it killed.
START it powerless we may simply render.
START but you not know. kill it, you could. stand for that i will not.
START getting out of here, are we, cochrane. to it face up. do anything i have to to save all of our lives, i will.
START of view i suppose from your point, right, you are.
START you feel we understand how, mister cochrane, but to be done, it has. yeesssssss.
START all right. to contact it you want me, hmm?
START some risk, there is, captain. we know not the extent of its powers.
START it ours nor. hmmmmmm.
START stop it! killing them, you are! stop it, please! stop it! choking them, you are! let them go. choking them, you are! stop it!
START of us cochrane got it off, but whether he did us a favour or not i know not. yes, hmmm.
START that, what kind of talk is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START how fight you a thing like that, hmm? got a ship up there somewhere, have i, for four lives here responsibility, of them dying one because of me. hmmmmmm.
START your fault it is not.
START in command i am, bones. my fault it makes it. how fight you a thing like that, hmm?
START soldier so often that you forget you are also trained to be a diplomat, maybe you are. try a carrot instead of a stick why not, hmm?
START the universal translator on the shuttlecraft. try that, we can, to that thing talk. hmmmmmm.
START for use with more congruent life forms, the translator is.
START adjust it, change it. boring, the trouble with immortality is it is. give you something to do, adjusting the translator will. herh herh herh.
START possible, it is possible. if widen its pattern of reception, i could.
START your alley right down, spock. to work get it here and get. still out there, that thing is. better go that way.
START all scanners, spherical sweep. range, maximum. have to pick it up, will they.
START if the shuttlecraft powered away, mister scott, but just towed, if it were, hmm?
START of residual matter floating around there'd still be traces, lieutenant.
START bearing two ten mark forty. strong particle concentration. on it, are we, mister scott. yeesssssss.
START as she goes steady, mister sulu.
START what think you it means, mister scott, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the shuttlecraft was on schedule until, shy five hours of rendezvous, was it. then something happened.
START well, feel a lot better if it were a little more definite, i would. hmmmmmm.
START wreck it did not. no debris, there was. no trace of expelled internal atmosphere, there is, no residual radioactivity. ah, it is. something took over. tractor beams maybe. something. now on, they dragged it away on the heading we are. herh herh herh.
START if no further traces, there are, how are we follow them going to, hmm? yeesssssss.
START this course we stay on, see what comes up.
START big galaxy, it is, mister scott. herh herh herh.
START this device what's the theory behind, hmm?
START certain universal ideas and concepts common to all intelligent life, there are. of brainwave patterns this device instantaneously compares the frequency, it recognises selects those ideas and concepts, and then provides the necessary grammar.
START with on the sending end, a voice or the approximation of whatever the creature is. not one hundred percent efficient, but nothing ever is. ready, mister spock, hmm?
START we communicate, how can, hmm? my thoughts, hearing them, you are. interesting, this is. hmmmmmm.
START yes. change the entire situation, the matter of gender could.
START way ahead of you, i am.
START then it is a zookeeper not. yeesssssss.
START no. lover. companion. wrong to keep us here against our will, it is. yeesssssss.
START of his own kind a man needs the company, or cease to exist, he will. to me he felt it. yeesssssss.
START her to a place where we can care for her one of us will cease to exist if we get not.
START of his species the man needs others. why you are here, that is. continue, the man must.
START companion, to understand try. the nature of our species to be free, is it, just as, your nature to stay here, is it. cease to exist in captivity, we will. herh herh herh.
START stopped their peculiar degeneration, your bodies have. nothing to harm you will there be. continue, you will, and continue, the man will. necessary, this is.
START marvellous opportunity to add to our knowledge, this is. it about its nature ask, its history.
START this is a classroom not. trying to get us out of here, am i. herh herh herh.
START again, a chance like this may never come. tell us so much, it could. yeesssssss.
START captain, why build that translator with a feminine voice did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START but i heard. yeesssssss.
START universal constants, the idea of male and female are, cochrane. no doubt about it, there is. female, the companion is. hmmmmmm.
START understand i not.
START not, you do, hmm? see it with a cane, a blind man could. pet you are not. you are a specimen kept in a cage not. lover, you are.
START what, i am, hmm?
START her attitude when she approaches you is profoundly different than when she contacts us. soft, her appearance is, gentle. melodic, her voice is, pleasing. understand the emotion i totally not, but exists, it obviously exists. the companion loves you.
START do you know what, saying, you are, hmm? for all these years, let something as alien as that crawl around inside me, i have, my mind into, my feelings.
START what complaining about are you, hmm? you alive it kept.
START that thing fed on me. me, it used me. disgusting, it is disgusting.
START nothing disgusting about it, there is. just another life form, is it, all, that is. used to those things, you get.
START as bad as it is, you are. hmmmmmm.
START most illogical, your highly emotional reaction is. for one hundred and fifty years been emotionally satisfying, your relationship with the companion has, eminently practical, and totally harmless. been quite beneficial, it may indeed have.
START fascinating. totally parochial attitude. yeesssssss.
START him, i heard him. loved and he resents it, was he. yeesssssss.
START to be an asteroid belt approaching what seems, sir. to n scanners report approximately seven thousand bodies of sizes running from types . yeesssssss.
START to m approximately thirty four percent of the bodies of atmospherian types h. yes, hmmm.
START all right, then. do it the hard way, we will. for life form registration all sensors set. automatic selection. hmmmmmm.
START mister scott, there are thousands of them out there on could they be, if on any of them at all, they are. hmmmmmm.
START right, that is, lieutenant. thousands. and look them over one by one, will we. yes, hmmm.
START companion, love the man do you, hmm?
START understand i not. yes, hmmm.
START important to you is he, more important than anything, hmm? as though he were a part of you is he, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START part of me, he is. continue, the man must. hmmmmmm.
START continue he will not. cease to exist, will he. for him by your feeling, you are condemning him to an existence, find unbearable, will he. cease to exist, he will. yes, hmmm.
START he ages not. forever, he remains forever.
START of his body you speak. of his spirit i speak. companion, inside the shelter, dying, a female of our species is. she will continue not. what will happen to the man unless you release all of us, that is. yes, hmmm.
START i not understand.
START obstacles to overcome, our species can only survive if we have. take away all obstacles you. without to strengthen us them, weaken and die we will. as a toy you regard the man only. with him you amuse yourself.
START wrong, you are. the centre of all things, the man is. for him i care. yes, hmmm.
START but you, really love him, cannot. the slightest knowledge of love you have not, of two people the total union. the companion, you are. the man, is he. two different things, you are. join you cannot. love you cannot. you may keep him here forever, but always be separate, you will, apart from him. yeesssssss.
START what hope to gain by that did you, jim, hmm?
START to convince her of the hopelessness of it try. love sometimes expresses itself in sacrifice. she loved him i thought maybe if, let him go, would she. hmmmmmm.
START but she or, inhuman, is it, captain. expect her to react like a human you cannot.
START useless, it is useless. i know.
START i understand not it. she is sick at all not.
START you understand, do not, hmm? the companion, it is. hmmmmmm.
START perfectly healthy, she is. like a hammer heart, respiration normal, blood pressure normal. medically impossible, this is. yeesssssss.
START here, we are here. yeesssssss.
START of us both. as the commissioner and the companion those you knew. both here, we are. herh herh herh.
START companion, the power to create life you have not.
START for the maker of all things, that is.
START dying, commissioner hedford was.
START too weak to hold on, that part of us was. in a moment, been no continuing, there would have. now, together, are we. yeesssssss.
START then both here, you are, in the one body, hmm?
START one, we are one.
START zefram, you, we frighten you. never frightened you before, we have. loneliness. loneliness, this is. oh, what a bitter thing. oh, zefram, so sad, is it. how bear you it, this loneliness, hmm? yeesssssss.
START that will be necessary not, captain. operate as before, your vehicle will, so the communications device, will.
START letting us go, you are, hmm?
START do nothing now to stop you, we could. know love you said we would not because we were not human. human we now are. know the change of days, will we. know death, we will. but to touch the hand of man, as important, nothing is.
START very beautiful, you are. yes, hmmm.
START me understands part of. not, part does. but me, it pleases me.
START explain many things, could i. yes, hmmm.
START oh, me walk let, zefram. me feel the earth against my feet let. me feel the warmth of the sun on my face let. you beside me. me feel these things let. yeesssssss.
START go ahead, cochrane, a few things to do, have we. yeesssssss.
START mister scott, the captain, is it.
START perfectly all right. can, a fix on us, you get. yeesssssss.
START computing your position now, the helm is, captain.
START very good. continue transmitting i will. assume standard orbit when you arrive. transport up in the shuttlecraft, will we.
START interesting story, scotty. tell you now i cannot because, quite frankly, i know not how it is going to end. kirk out.
START go with you, i cannot, zefram. herh herh herh.
START of course you can. to, you have. yeesssssss.
START this place my life emanates from. if leave it for more than a tiny march of days, i should, cease to exist, will i. return, i must return, consume matter to maintain your life, even as you must. herh herh herh.
START to be human you gave up everything, hmm? but you stay here even if, eventually die, you will. yeesssssss.
START of this hour the joy. pleased, i am pleased. yeesssssss.
START well, i, just fly away and leave you here, cannot. yes, hmmm.
START free must you be, zefram cochrane. hmmmmmm.
START you saved my life, of me took care. you loved me. understood, i never understood. now, i do now. yeesssssss.
START locked in, we are, captain. standard orbit established. to receive you shuttlecraft bay standing by. herh herh herh.
START waiting, the enterprise is, mister cochrane. yes, hmmm.
START i, take her away from here, cannot. if i do, die, she will die. if her, i leave her, die of loneliness, she will. to her i owe everything. leave her i cannot. her, i love her. is that surprising, hmm?
START it over think, mister cochrane. whole galaxy out there waiting to honour you there is. hmmmmmm.
START honours enough, i have. herh herh herh.
START but age, you will, of you both. no immortality, there will be. both grow old here and finally die, you will. yes, hmmm.
START been happening to men and women for a long time that is. got the feeling it is one of the pleasanter things about being human, i have, as as you grow old together long. yes, hmmm.
START sure are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START plenty of water here, there is. for growing things the climate's good. to plant a fig tree i might try. to that a man's entitled, is he not, hmm? it is gratitude not, captain. now that i see her, touch her, i know that i love her. have much years together, we will. happy ones, will they be.
START captain, tell them about me, do not. yes, hmmm.
START well, sure the federation can find another woman somewhere who'll stop that war, i am.
START yes. something odd about that man, there is, and quite pinpoint it, i cannot.
START making a rather hasty judgment, you perhaps are. only been aboard seventy two hours, mister norman has. herh herh herh.
START i know when something does not strike me right, and not, he does not. herh herh herh.
START specifics, doctor. arguments labels make not.
START all right. something wrong about a man who never smiles, there is, of the job whose conversation never varies from the routine, and talk about his background who will not.
START with gaping defects in logic i find your argument strewn. hmmmmmm.
START maybe, but evaluate a man by logic alone you cannot. besides, made for his physical exam without reason, he has avoided two appointments that i have.
START that is at all surprising not, doctor. probably terrified of your beads and rattles, he is.
START an unplanned course change being fed into the instruments, there is, sir. yeesssssss.
START i cannot, sir.
START auxiliary control, the captain, this is. auxiliary control, what's going on down there, hmm?
START sir, on total override, auxiliary control is.
START to security kirk.
START lieutenant uhura, to the bridge have mister spock report. herh herh herh.
START lieutenant rowe, sir. in auxiliary control, am i. ensign jordan's been knocked out. yes, hmmm.
START of the intruder any sign, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no, sir. gone, he is gone. put out a full security alert on all decks, have i. yes, hmmm.
START find him. kirk out. mister spock, to be taking an unscheduled ride we seem. yeesssssss.
START sir, the instruments will respond not. yeesssssss.
START emergency manual monitor, the captain, this is. report. yes, hmmm.
START here, you are allowed not. hmmmmmm.
START to engineering kirk. yes, hmmm.
START scotty, in your area, the intruder is.
START captain, here, he is here. yeesssssss.
START scotty, hmm? security, in the engineering section, the intruder is. have all units converge on that point.
START sir, picking up speed, we are. warp five, six. warp seven, sir. yes, hmmm.
START i cannot, sir. jammed, all the controls are.
START be necessary it will not, captain.
START tell security, found the intruder, have we. mind telling me what this is all about do you, mister, hmm? yeesssssss.
START confirmed, captain. taken out all the override controls, he is. if we tamper without knowing where the trigger relay is, extinguish ourselves, we could.
START you, who are, hmm?
START i assure you, no threat to humanity or humanoid life, are we. you no harm we mean, but your ship we require.
START you require, hmm? we, who and what are, hmm?
START i control the trigger relay, sir. be overcome by physical means i cannot, and to use your phasers if you attempt, the trigger relay, activated, will be. for approximately four solar days we shall continue on our present course, at which time we shall arrive at our destination. yeesssssss.
START programmed to respond in that area i am not. yeesssssss.
START it seems, going to take a little trip, are we.
START captain kirk. transported down to our planet, the following individuals will be. yourself, science officer, medical officer, communications officer and navigator. herh herh herh.
START any meetings or discussions, held aboard the enterprise, can be. yes, hmmm.
START if you come not with me, your engines, destroyed and you will remain in orbit here forever, will be.
START i must say, a gracious invitation, that is. yes, hmmm.
START word, there is. no corresponding meaning there among us is, but to mean something to you humans it seems. herh herh herh.
START and that word, what is, hmm?
START it i believe not. herh herh herh.
START welcome aboard, kirk. been a long time, it is, eh, hmm?
START well, to be absolutely accurate, laddybuck, refer to me as mudd the first, you should, of this entire sovereign planet ruler. herh herh herh.
START ruler, hmm? harry, of my ship returned immediately i want control. no intention of staying as your guests, have we. yes, hmmm.
START well, i am afraid, a bit of a problem there, there is.
START to enterprise kirk.
START to enterprise kirk. hmmmmmm.
START now, now, now, now, jamie boy, have no unauthorised communications, let us.
START this man you know, captain, hmm?
START oh, know him, do i. harcourt fenton mudd, thief. yeesssssss.
START swindler and con man.
START leave you with that impression, did i, hmm?
START and thereby hangs a tale, yes. but look around you, kirk. quite a place, it is not, hmm? i hope, all going to enjoy it, you are. yeesssssss.
START mudd, of yours i want that trained machine, norman, to deactivate the trigger mechanism and free my ship.
START that, i shall do, kirk, when ready, i am ready. yes, hmmm.
START telling you now, i am. hmmmmmm.
START and the telling on this planet, i do, kirk, old boy. the listening, you do.
START all right, listen, i will listen. what telling are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START harry mudd, liar and an outlaw and in deep trouble, you are. i want navigational control restored, my ship released.
START sorry. that'd be against the law. my law. decreed by mudd the first. voted in by the resident population. lovely, are they not, hmm? admit, you must, kirk, for beauty that i still retain my eye. always be surrounded by it, i decreed that i should, and to pass, my decrees always come. had five hundred of them made up to attend me i have. of them identical all, beautiful, compliant, obedient. yeesssssss.
START of the same model five hundred, hmm? that seems rather redundant.
START all right, harry, explain. how get here did you, hmm? you in custody after that affair on the rigel mining planet we left. yeesssssss.
START yes, well, to backward planets i organised a technical information service bringing modern industrial techniques, to struggling young civilisations throughout the galaxy making available certain valuable patents. hmmmmmm.
START pay royalties to the owners of those patents did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, actually, kirk, as of the free enterprise system a defender, as a matter of principle i found myself in a rather ambiguous conflict. yeesssssss.
START pay royalties he did not.
START knowledge, sir, to all should be free.
START to a vulcan fuel synthesiser i sold the denebians all the rights. hmmmmmm.
START you know how'd, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START that is what, have done, would i. herh herh herh.
START typical police mentality, is it. got no sense of humour, have they. me, they arrested me. herh herh herh.
START worse than that. on deneb five, do know what the penalty for fraud is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START his choice, the guilty party has. death by electrocution, death by gas, death by phaser, death by hanging.
START your entire peroration the key word in, mister spock, was, death. barbarians. well, of course, i left.
START jail, he broke jail. yes, hmmm.
START transportation, i borrowed transportation. herh herh herh.
START no respect for private property, they have. they damaged the bloody spaceship. well, away, i got away, but navigate i could not, so i wandered out through unmapped space, and here i found mudd. hmmmmmm.
START to substantial risk and effort to bring a starship here you went. logically, compelling motive, you must have. herh herh herh.
START spock, going to love it here, you are. you do they all talk just the way.
START go on, with it get on, harry.
START then unable to discern your problem, i am.
START let me go they will not. they study me want to. they learn more about human beings want to.
START your tongue watch, lad. talking about mudd the first, you are. well, anyway, of ideas i ran out. to do i simply ran out of things for them, and they insisted that i bring them more human beings. to serve they need human beings, to study. so to promise them a prime sample i had. starship captain. bright, loyal, fearless and imaginative. done would any captain have. lucky to get you, i was. so going to take over for me here, you are, and get off this rock and back to civilisation, i can. yeesssssss.
START not, i think not, harry.
START you misunderstand me, lad. i am asking you not. telling you, am i. no choice, you have. to their quarters show them. yes, hmmm.
START ah. that, gentlemen, to the memory of my beloved stella is a shrine. yes, hmmm.
START oh, no, no, no. merely deserted. you see, gentlemen, behind every great man, a woman urging him on, there is. and with my stella, it so was. me on into outer space she urged. she meant to not that, but with her continual, eternal, confounded nagging. well, of her constantly i think, and every time i do, i go further out into space. herh herh herh.
START very interesting, that is. you leave your wife and then bring her along. hmmmmmm.
START i had the androids construct a perfect replica of stella so that, gaze upon her and rejoice in her absence, could i. gentlemen, attend. stella, dear.
START marvellous, it is not, hmm? the last word with her, i finally have, and with you.
START find this quite comfortable, you will. down the hall, your quarters are. yeesssssss.
START the makers designed us. of andromeda they came from the galaxy.
START they were, as you say, quite humanoid, but, your civilisation unlike, common, robots were. to evolve a perfect social order we performed the necessary service functions and freed our makers. yeesssssss.
START of them what became, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START our home planet's sun became a nova. only a few exploratory outposts survived. this unit, myself, of one such outpost in your galaxy was part. yeesssssss.
START then of your makers survive some. yeesssssss.
START no, captain. of time they died over the stretch. hmmmmmm.
START whom serve now do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START free to visit them, you are.
START all right. later, we might later. in the meantime, you mind leaving us would, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START we leave you, why should, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i think, in much trouble, are we.
START great help, that is, mister chekov. bones, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i think mister chekov's right. in much trouble, we are. yes, hmmm.
START spock. and in much trouble, if you say we are.
START we are, and direct our attack to the heart of the matter, we must. operate independently, obviously this many androids cannot. central control system must there be which guides the entire android population.
START try and find it. of you the rest, look around, you can learn everything. see what else i can find out from mister mudd i will. go, let us.
START i trust, enjoying yourself, you are, mister spock.
START very interesting. very interesting. most unusual device, this is. herh herh herh.
START our central control complex, is it.
START understand there are more than two hundred thousand of you, did i, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START seem to be a simple relay centre, this would. of you controlled through this device are all, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START oh, quite understandable, that is.
START say so, i should.
START say, i must say, the styling i like. herh herh herh.
START they were, of course, to my personal specifications made, as the maisie series, indeed were, the trudie series, and particularly the annabel series.
START you believe in male androids, do not, harry, hmm?
START male, hmm? well, i suppose, their uses, have they. herh herh herh.
START body like that last, how long does, hmm? yeesssssss.
START captain, just had a most fascinating meeting with norman, have i, and convinced i have discovered a very important inconsistency, i am.
START so glad you enjoyed it, i am, doctor. herh herh herh.
START jim, see the research facilities, you should. got a lab down there that, have they. well, spend the rest of my life studying it, could i. yeesssssss.
START so admire a man who devotes himself to knowledge, i do. herh herh herh.
START lose your head, do not, bones. nobody's staying anywhere. hmmmmmm.
START be bored i would not, tell you that, i can.
START of me let go! now what doing are you, hmm? of a woman what kind. yes, hmmm.
START splendid. splendid. to mudd welcome, mister scott.
START harry mudd! oh, you bogus frat, you. the cause of all this, you are, are you, hmm?
START scotty, ordered to stay aboard, you were. hmmmmmm.
START aye, sir. and me into the transporter beams i stayed until that female gargantua threw. hmmmmmm.
START what mean does she, the last one, hmm?
START did i tell you not, kirk, hmm? to your ship i beamed a few dozen androids up. been sending your crew to the surface for the past couple of hours, they have. all down now, they are.
START an entire crew aboard, there is. of androids an entire crew. they learn very quickly, captain. the fact is, taken over your whole ship, have i. nothing you can do about it there is. yeesssssss.
START harry, harry, never get away with it, you will.
START well, to stop me who's, hmm?
START but now, captain, now, a ship of my own as fast as any in the fleet, have i, so they catch me, how will, eh, hmm? of it just think, laddybuck. with his own crew of lovelies aboard your vessel harry mudd. think about that.
START to i am trying not. herh herh herh.
START successfully accomplish it, could he, captain. questioned a number of the androids, have i, and totally loyal to mudd, they are. the fact that this android population can literally provide anything a human being could ask for in unlimited quantity, perhaps of more concern is. hmmmmmm.
START yes, i know. what worries me that is. how will my crew react in a world where, have everything they want simply by asking for it, can they. yeesssssss.
START and alice, you are. yeesssssss.
START oh, well, it makes not much difference. both lovely, you are. herh herh herh.
START what a shame you are real not. hmmmmmm.
START even better than leningrad, this place is. yeesssssss.
START to make anything for you you may command us, or for pleasure do the work yourself. the services of any number of craftsmen, you may have, of the computer facilities exclusive use. anything. herh herh herh.
START captain, see this shop, you should! why, facilities we have never even thought of, they have.
START is that the way, going to do it, you are, mudd, hmm? my people at their weakest point hit, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to make you happy and comfortable we only wish, captain. if to serve your kind we are, understand you, we must. our lord, only one example for us, harry mudd was. now, learning a great deal from all of you, are we.
START all right, here we are, birds in a gilded cage. the question is, how we get out of here, hmm?
START know i not, sir, but very nice gilded cage, it is.
START and very pleasant place, it is, captain.
START what offer you did they, uhura, hmm? herh herh herh.
START all right. getting back to the ship, we are, and you forget it, do not. straighten up! with everything you always wanted this may be a gilded cage filled, but still a cage, is it. we belong not here. we belong on that ship up there. yeesssssss.
START alice, to please us give us back our ship. to our ship return us because we desire it. herh herh herh.
START but unhappy here we are.
START the state, unhappiness is which occurs in the human when wants and desires are not fulfilled. yes, hmmm.
START no, beautiful lady, it is, and her, we love her. herh herh herh.
START bones, have, time to take any psychological readings of the androids, you had, hmm?
START i did. and forget it, you can. perfect, they are perfect, flawless, mentally and physically. no weaknesses, perfectly disciplined. no vices, no fears, no faults. of purpose just a sense. believe me, nothing tougher to overcome, there is, even among humans. yeesssssss.
START yes. what this crew needs that is, of purpose a little sense. herh herh herh.
START mudd, few questions i ask you want to.
START have time to answer them afraid i will not. all packed, my bags are. take the enterprise out of orbit in less than twenty four hours, the androids will. but been a real pleasure having you here, is it, kirk. get for you i is there anything can, hmm?
START stubborn fellow, you are, are you not, hmm? but i not mind. that at all i mind not. because leaving here quickly enough, i will be, and stubborn at your own leisure can then you be. one last time. stella, dear. yes, hmmm.
START no longer take your orders, we can, harry mudd. yes, hmmm.
START wise, our makers were. to serve they programmed us.
START yes, but what i am saying, that is. my bags on the ship put. yeesssssss.
START harry, i think, something else in mind, have they.
START to help ourselves we prefer. mistakes, we make mistakes, but human, we are human. and the word that best explains us, maybe that is. yes, hmmm.
START we will harm you not, but take the starship, we will, and remain on this planet, you will.
START now, look here. do that you cannot! now, listen. to serve us, obey us, you must. yeesssssss.
START alice number one, obey me. my bags on that ship put! herh herh herh.
START allow any race as greedy and corruptible as yours to have free run of the galaxy we cannot. yes, hmmm.
START curious, i am curious, norman. just how you intend to stop them, hmm? yeesssssss.
START we shall serve them. eager to accept our service will their kind be. become completely dependent upon us, soon they will. yes, hmmm.
START take care of them we shall.
START your kind the whole galaxy controlled by, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes, captain. and happy, we shall serve them and you will be, and controlled. herh herh herh.
START so had its amusing aspects, far this thing has, but very funny that threat the androids made about taking over all the humans in the galaxy is not.
START indeed, not, it is not. to accomplish it they may quite possibly be able. yes, hmmm.
START to stop them whatever method we use, make haste, we must. able to leave orbit, they have only to install some cybernetic devices aboard the enterprise and they will be.
START how know you so much, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START them, i asked them.
START they answer our questions why should not, hmm? we can do anything to stop them they think not. yeesssssss.
START to leave us on this ruddy rock and leave by yourself you wanted.
START all right, we got to work with, what have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, captain, androids and robots, capable of independent they are just not, creative thought.
START yet totally inadequate to the task of directing more than two hundred thousand of them, the device that norman claims to be their central control is.
START i agree. direct them, what in your opinion does, hmm? yeesssssss.
START large number of alices and trudies, there are, maisies, annabels, and to my research according, herman series, an oscar series, of series in fact a whole plethora. but only one norman. hmmmmmm.
START to function as they do, one component of a mass brain linked through a central locus must each android mind be. yes, hmmm.
START seem logical, that would.
START yes, logical. what it is, that is. and use against them, that in turn gives us a weapon that we can. use wild, we must, insane, irrational illogic aimed right at norman! herh herh herh.
START captain, you sing and dance as well as anyone i have ever seen, but what the devil talking about are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START seem to be a sound, what would, and our only perhaps, opportunity. herh herh herh.
START opportunity, hmm? now, listen, spock, you may be a wonderful science officer, but believe me, you could sell fake patents to your mother not. yeesssssss.
START care to induce my mother to purchase falsified patents, i fail to understand why i should.
START get to the point let us. harry, to help you said you wanted. do you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START captain, of a wholesome the kind, antiseptic galaxy that these androids would run, purgatory for a man like me, would be. hmmmmmm.
START fine, that is, harry. expecting us to make a break for it will the androids be, and where you come in, that is.
START i do, what can, hmm?
START nothing, harry. to sleep just go. yeesssssss.
START oh, harry. i do believe, putting on weight, you are.
START caring for him, we are, but his medical equipment aboard the enterprise our doctor needs. yeesssssss.
START programmed to serve, you are. if we are allowed access to our medical equipment not, die, harry mudd will. cease to function, he will. have failed to serve, you will.
START dying, he is dying.
START no, lying, they are lying. trick, is it. to make him look sick doctor mccoy injected something into harry mudd. trick to get back on board and sabotage the ship, it is.
START uhura, why tell her did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START because i want an android body. immortality, i want immortality. live forever, i will, captain. young and beautiful, will i be. yes, hmmm.
START it myself i half believed.
START next, take the alices on a trip through wonderland we. hmmmmmm.
START their captivity. enjoy the music do you, hmm?
START him, she likes him. mister chekov. no place for an officer, the floor is. attention! now stand absolutely still.
START better, that is, mister chekov. yeesssssss.
START illogical, your statement is. hmmmmmm.
START how look does it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START completely inner directed. to everything oblivious.
START of course. inevitably lead to a total description of the parabolic intersection of dimension with dimension, your computations would.
START you, i love you. however, you, i hate you. yeesssssss.
START yes, of course. exactly why i hate you, that is. because identical, you are. yes, hmmm.
START all right, worked so far, is it, but we are out yet not. yeesssssss.
START success, captain. been pruning the leaves and branches of the tree, we have. now, time to get to work on the root, is it. herh herh herh.
START if the control centre, norman is, done, he should be in a bind by what we have. if overload him further, we can, be able to immobilise all of them, we should. to do does everybody remember what, hmm?
START what doing here are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to surrender i want you. herh herh herh.
START illogical, that is. move more quickly than you, we can. invulnerable to attack, we are. much stronger, are we.
START no, stronger, we are stronger. prove it to you, will i. can you harm a man that, programmed to serve, you are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START but you already have, norman, laddy. on bread alone human beings survive not, you poor soulless creature, but of liberty on the nourishments, for man without freedom, what indeed is, hmm? of eternity naught but a mechanism trapped in the cogwheels.
START our burdens dying and crying and lamenting over. yes, hmmm.
START we be happy, only this way can. herh herh herh.
START contradictory, that is. logical it is not. mister spock. explain. yeesssssss.
START little tweeting bird chirping in a meadow, logic is. wreath of pretty flowers, logic is which smell bad. sure your circuits are registering correctly are you, hmm? green, your ears are.
START have killed him, you cannot. no weapons, you have. yes, hmmm.
START scotty. scotty's dead. too much happiness, he had. but happier he is dead, he now is, and miss him, we will. hear it for our poor, let us, dead friend.
START man but that lofty spirit, what is, of enterprise that sense, be sensed that devotion to something that cannot, be realised but only dreamed cannot! the highest reality.
START how like it did you, hmm?
START irrational, that is. illogical. dreams are real not. yeesssssss.
START to be illogical, our logic is. our advantage, that is. mister spock, time, it is time. the explosive.
START panic, do not. women and children first. yes, hmmm.
START the correct amount, i believe that is, captain. mister mudd, ready are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START be careful. i would want you to drop it not.
START easy now. oh, caught it, he is! yeesssssss.
START no explosive, there is. herh herh herh.
START all right are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START but no explosion, there was.
START he lied. lie, everything harry tells you is. remember that. lie, everything harry tells you is. yes, hmmm.
START to this carefully listen, norman. lying, i am lying.
START you say, lying, you are, but telling the truth, if everything you say is a lie then you are, but tell the truth, you cannot because everything you say is a lie. you lie. you tell the truth. but for, you cannot. illogical! illogical! explain. herh herh herh.
START human, you are. explain their behaviour, only humans can. explain. yeesssssss.
START programmed to respond in that area i am not. hmmmmmm.
START i believe, all immobilised, are they, captain. yeesssssss.
START kirk, old man, beginning to develop considerable respect for you, i am.
START with me would you consider entering a partnership arrangement, hmm? got some ideas, have i. yes, hmmm.
START partnership arrangement, hmm? you and me, hmm?
START got something else in mind, i have. go, let us. hmmmmmm.
START well, very unhappy, must you be, mister spock.
START human emotion, that is, doctor, with which, totally unfamiliar, am i. i be unhappy, how could, hmm? yeesssssss.
START well, of minds that work just like yours we found a whole world. logical, unemotional, completely pragmatic. and we poor, irrational humans whipped them in a fair fight. find yourself back among us illogical humans again, you now will.
START which i find eminently satisfactory, doctor, for as among a shipload of illogical humans nowhere am i so desperately needed. herh herh herh.
START kirk, to stay here now what's this i hear about my having, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes, mudd, been paroled to the android population of this planet, you have. yes, hmmm.
START being reprogrammed, the androids are. to adapt this planet for productive use, their original purpose was. begin that work again, will they. hmmmmmm.
START but what i do, hmm? kirk, no scientist, i am.
START as to be an irritant long as you continue, harry. up to you, it is. yes, hmmm.
START i suppose that taking everything into consideration, as it were, and noting all the different possibilities, manage, i could manage. and as detention sentences go, too uncomfortable this one is not. and back in the galaxy again, am i!
START yes, you are. oh, one more thing, there is, harry. programmed a special android attendant to take care of your every need, we have. she will help you find an incentive to work with the androids and exploit them not.
START of you i call that unexpectedly civil, captain. yes, hmmm.
START you, i order you. shut up, stella!
START kirk, you, do this, cannot. hmmmmmm.
START no, it open keep. this i like not. nothing since the first check in. contacted us again a half an hour ago, scott and sulu should have.
START nothing to report, they may have. our landing party our sensors indicate no life forms except. yes, hmmm.
START well aware of landing party procedure, both those men are. checked in with us by now, should they have. hmmmmmm.
START one, hmm? jackson, scott and sulu, where are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START sorry, i am sorry. clear it, i cannot, captain. hmmmmmm.
START to prepare to beam up one member of the landing party notify transporter room. then to me in the transporter room on the double have doctor mccoy report.
START dead, the man is.
START odd. indicate fog our probe data did not.
START no indications of. moment, captain. picking up life form readings. twenty four degrees mark seven. range one thirty seven point one six metres. multiple readings, captain. yeesssssss.
START to enterprise kirk.
START the ship's sensors reading now, what are, lieutenant, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START only picking up physical impulses from the three of them, i am. as make out, far as instruments can, nothing else down there that is alive, there is. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant, you hear me can, hmm?
START this stuff is whatever, getting thicker, it is. anything to do with the interference, that suppose has, hmm?
START i not know. register anything but us there has to be some explanation for the fact that the ship's sensors cannot, picking up readings of multiple life forms, we while are. still there are they, spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START listen. now, what think you that.
START you, who are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START more useful comment, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START real what we have just seen is not.
START however, on azimuth twenty four, over one hundred metres at just, definitely life forms, there are. erratic, confused, but definitely registering. yeesssssss.
START where we are going, that is. herh herh herh.
START pretty real illusion, that was, mister spock.
START the source of the life form readings, this is, captain. inside, they are inside, somewhere.
START to enterprise kirk. enterprise, come in. yeesssssss.
START with the first landing party is this how we lost contact, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START what about it, spock, hmm? anything to do with communicator interference, does this structure have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START say not, would i, captain. no indication of anything that would cause such interference, there is. yes, hmmm.
START and it picks up on our ship's sensors not. hmmmmmm.
START our sensors register the life forms inside, nor do. hmmmmmm.
START of some kind that cuts into our sensor scan could it be exerting a force field. herh herh herh.
START then affect spock's tricorder too, it would, it would not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START three witches, to be a castle and a black cat what appears.
START if we weren't missing two officers and a third one dead, say someone was playing an elaborate trick or treat on us, would i. herh herh herh.
START yes, mister spock. natural you would be. explain it to you one day, will i. shall, a look around, have we, hmm?
START seem to be in order, that would.
START gone, they are gone, mister desalle. the captain and the others simply stopped registering. yes, hmmm.
START for malfunctions check. hmmmmmm.
START i did, sir, as as it happened soon. hmmmmmm.
START mister desalle, exactly what happened to mister scott and his party, that is. they, disappeared, they just disappeared.
START nobody just disappears. encountered a magnetic field or some other obstruction, they may have. mister chekov, your sensors recalibrate. if you need help. yes, hmmm.
START do it, i can, sir. that green i am not.
START lieutenant uhura, to break through that static interference continue in your efforts.
START down there, we know they are. i want them found.
START so indicate, the readings would.
START dust, cobwebs. right, halloween is.
START spock. all right are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes. undamaged, i am undamaged, captain.
START saying something about trick or treat, you were.
START dungeons, curses, skeletons and iron maidens. all earth manifestations, they are. why, hmm?
START know i not, captain, but exist, these things do. real, they are real.
START of some sort could this be an earth parallel development, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of this parallels any human development none. more like a human nightmare, it is.
START as that terrifies man most on an instinctive level, if someone knew what it was. herh herh herh.
START ghost stories, ogres, demons. the whole. yeesssssss.
START to be drugged they appear, jim. their eyes look at. hardly blink at all. yeesssssss.
START he collapsed neither did jackson just before.
START alive, these two are. scotty, hear me do you, hmm? sulu, know who i am do you, hmm? to you what's happened, hmm?
START going to release us, they are. yes, hmmm.
START you are whoever, proven your skill at creating illusion, you have. now i know why and what you have done to my men want to. yes, hmmm.
START for resistance where did your race get this ridiculous predilection, hmm? you examine any object, you question everything. is it enough to accept what is not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START not when one of my men is dead because of it and two others turned into mindless. yeesssssss.
START you, who are, hmm? why bring us here did you, hmm?
START korob, my name is. and for bringing you here as, you who quite contrarily insisted upon coming, it was. warned to stay away, you were. yes, hmmm.
START charted this solar system before, mapping expeditions have. been any life forms on pyris seven, there never have. yeesssssss.
START ancient earth legends about wizards and their familiars, there are. yeesssssss.
START to serve the wizard demons in animal forms sent by satan.
START the legend i create not, captain. i merely report it.
START the different one, you are, mister spock. you think not like the others. no colours to your patterns of logic, there are. only black and white, there is. this around you you see all, yet believe you not. yes, hmmm.
START he knows not about trick or treat.
START i understand not that reference, of no importance, therefore it also is. gentlemen, most hospitable can i be. yes, hmmm.
START we are hungry not. hmmmmmm.
START all right, korob. what want you from us, hmm? yeesssssss.
START for the moment, you eat and enjoy merely that. oh, doctor, do try the wine. find it excellent, you will.
START hopefully, change that attitude, can i. yeesssssss.
START they are, you, i assure you. diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires. you cherish above all things all the crystalline forms that. for each of you if you leave here without further inquiry a fortune of them. yeesssssss.
START manufacture a ton of these on our ship, we could. to us they mean nothing.
START valueless, hmm? understand i not. i read.
START you read, it whatever is, you read it wrong. as for leaving, leave, we will leave when we are ready.
START most unpredictable, you are. made a small mistake i perhaps have. nevertheless, passed the tests, you have.
START doctor mccoy, mister spock and captain kirk. to know what we did to your men you wanted. simple matter for us to probe the minds of creatures like yourself, it actually is. yeesssssss.
START to think of yourselves as complex creatures you like, but flawed, you are. to your minds through many levels one gains admittance. too many to keep track of yourselves, you have. unguarded entrances to any human mind, there are. yeesssssss.
START not entirely, no. telepathy implys control and i assure you that i have full control over your friends not.
START think a man to death you cannot.
START do not. sylvia, do not.
START to enterprise kirk. come in. come in. herh herh herh.
START captain, all right are you, hmm? you, where are, hmm? are the others all right, sir, hmm?
START the temperature, sir. rising, it keeps rising. reading, mister. yes, hmmm.
START up sixty degrees in the past thirty seconds, it is. burning up we are, sir.
START desalle, your heat dissipation units channel bypass power into.
START relax now, you can, captain. safe, your ship is.
START almost back to normal, temperature is, dropping down fast. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant, to raise the captain again try. herh herh herh.
START to captain kirk enterprise. come in, please. to captain kirk enterprise. acknowledge. lost him again, have we, mister desalle.
START captain, seen something of our science, you have. now tell us about yours. herh herh herh.
START to be singing a different tune you seem. rather know more about yours, i would. you call it magic, you call it science. to both of them it seems unrelated.
START you name it, what would, captain, hmm? yeesssssss.
START attempt to name it i would not, but with tools, you seem to do with your mind what we do. you alter matter, it about by telekinesis move.
START yes, change the molecular structure, we can. yeesssssss.
START to lure us down here you kept scott and sulu as catspaws. you know we'd come how'd, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START oh, have to know we did not. they knew.
START of this enough! you will tell us what we know want to. hmmmmmm.
START too late for threats, it is. me contact the ship you let. how long do you think, it be before a search party arrives, will it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START there, no search party, will be, captain kirk. your ship an impenetrable force field around, captain. it will hinder orbit not, but prisoners within it, your people are. yeesssssss.
START some kind of a force field, it is, sir, but not like any other, ever heard of before, have i. coming from anywhere it is not. simply all around us, it is. herh herh herh.
START nothing to discuss, we have. hmmmmmm.
START wait. stay, the doctor will. next, your turn will be, captain. it makes little difference. take them out of here. herh herh herh.
START it will analyse not, sir.
START all right, but there and it is real, is it. if real, it is real, affected can it be. engineering, to divert all power systems to the outer hull stand by. for generation of maximum heat directed as ordered prepare impulse engines. maybe we, break it, cannot, but bet you credits to navy beans we can put a dent in it, i will. herh herh herh.
START how long been has it, hmm?
START thanks. i wonder what, doing to doc, are they. yeesssssss.
START sure we will find out shortly, am i. jim, all of these things that, seen, have we. to an earthman like yourself, seem quite familiar, they must. yeesssssss.
START precisely. to the psychological theory of the racial subconscious i refer you. the universal myths, symbols.
START and dungeons and castles and black cats. to the twilight world of consciousness they all belong. yeesssssss.
START to tap our conscious mind they tried.
START and they missed. they reached basically only the subconscious. korob seemed puzzled by your reaction to the environment, provided, would he.
START all normal, he expected me to react as though it were. well, to this planet he admitted that they weren't native.
START and not to have a knowledge of our scientific methods is most unlikely for any life form, met in this galaxy, have we. yeesssssss.
START to us as creatures they refer, as unfamiliar with, though we were some species that they were. if creatures, we are creatures, really like, i wonder what they are.
START agreed. totally alien. and hostile strangers showing such an acute interest in our galaxy i like not, our world, spock. like friendly visitors not at all. going to have to stop them, are we, cold. but at the moment.
START i, too, to suggest a course of action am at a loss at this time. yeesssssss.
START sent here for, you forget what we were.
START nothing, i forget nothing. puppet i am not, korob, like you.
START traitor, you are.
START fool, you are. nothing like this and i like it we have. to touch, to feel to understand the idea of luxury it i like. and to leave it i intend not. yeesssssss.
START duty to the old ones, have we. yeesssssss.
START what they know of sensations, hmm? new world, this is. herh herh herh.
START cruel, you are. you torture our specimens. herh herh herh.
START and that, too, is a new sensation. it stimulating i find.
START wrong, you are! discarding everything we live by, you are.
START my own decisions i live by. weak fool, you are, korob.
START the power, have i. hmmmmmm.
START but afraid to use it, you are. threaten me, do not. be an interesting sensation that i can squash you and would, yes. i find these new sensations i like. try to push me, do not. hmmmmmm.
START captain. time for our talk, it is. korob, take these men with you leave us alone and.
START ended this is not, sylvia.
START no real damage to the mind, there is, captain, of knowledge and will simply a drain. herh herh herh.
START that damage you call not, hmm?
START i, why should, hmm?
START know if you had compassion, you would. compassion should a woman have, but woman i forget you are not. hmmmmmm.
START but mistaken, you are, captain. woman now, i am. from a world without sensation as you and i now know it, i come. me, it excites me. more, i want more.
START to need us you seem. why, hmm?
START because knowledge, you have which i lack. but our abilities put together were. me about power tell, captain. how feel does it, hmm?
START fool, he is. do without him i will. but you, hmm? why i find you different, hmm? it be so difficult to dispose of you, why would, hmm?
START why you not simply probe my mind and get what you want, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no, not that, for you not. joining, what i want is. to yours willingly my mind. learn, think of the secrets you could. be yours that think of the power would. imagine, you anything can, give you, i can. yes, hmmm.
START very persuasive, you are. what happens if i go along, hmm?
START then ours together, everything would be. never conceived of the idea of togetherness before, i have. me, it excites me. you excite me. why, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START for you excite me the same reasons. very beautiful woman, you are. yeesssssss.
START your people, when here, they come here.
START like, they are like, like feathers in the wind without the transmuter. herh herh herh.
START the source. learn, you will. teach you later, i will. later. hmmmmmm.
START then device, is it. use tools, you do. yes, hmmm.
START it gives only form. teaching me substance, you are. yeesssssss.
START changed your mind you have not, hmm? return home you will not, hmm?
START here with you, my home is. to pick and choose a billion worlds of sensation. herh herh herh.
START and why not, hmm? been using me and my crew, you have.
START you, swept away, will be. you, your men, your ship, your worlds! yeesssssss.
START i see not any change.
START there, it is there, lieutenant. yes, hmmm.
START that electrical field we set up, it was, mister desalle, you wanted that dent. much it is not, but start, it is.
START it up keep, mister chekov. of reactors one channel the entire output, two, and three into the relay stations. it is whatever, starting to weaken, it is.
START leaving without my men i am not.
START your men anymore they are not. to sylvia they belong. no longer control them or her, i can. irrational, she is irrational. to your form the strain of adopting, for sensation and experience the insatiable desire. necessary she is a great danger and it was not. entered your galaxy in peace, could we have. yeesssssss.
START transmuter. yes, that, she mentioned that. hmmmmmm.
START no time to explain now, there is. to destroy us all she means. there might still be a chance. quickly. come.
START i think, stop her, can i.
START my problem, it is. one of my kind, she is. come quickly. yes, hmmm.
START make it, do you think you can, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START korob, last that door will not.
START important, korob seemed to think this was. said something about a transmuter. yeesssssss.
START captain, bit more alacrity, if you please. herh herh herh.
START very clever, you are, captain. more so than, imagined, would i. clever, resourceful and handsome. hmmmmmm.
START let her touch the wand, do not, captain. yeesssssss.
START you get tired of these games, do not, hmm?
START never played games i have. to me give it.
START i was sure before not, but now, i am now. the source of your power, this is, is it not. the transmuter.
START no, not the source. merely an amplifier, is it. the source, the mind is. simple, mine is, but how to use it yours has the key but you know not. hmmmmmm.
START too late it is not, captain james kirk. with me come. teach you, will i. teach me, you will. yes, hmmm.
START why, hmm? because nothing of your own, your people have, hmm? you need us is that why, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START your dreams we need, your ambition. with them, build, i can build. me the transmuter give. herh herh herh.
START you fool. you know what you are giving up, do not, hmm? your species finds desirable everything that. look at me. woman, am i. all women i am. hmmmmmm.
START what you are but you are not a woman i know not. tortured my men and taken their minds from them, you have. for love and return pain instead you ask. yeesssssss.
START take some explaining that'll, bones.
START as they really are korob and sylvia. an illusion, their forms were, like the castle and everything else just. only the power pack gave them reality.
START fascinating. to our galaxy a life form totally alien. if preserve and study this, we could. hmmmmmm.
START too late. of this all, just an illusion.
START no illusion. dead, jackson is. to enterprise kirk. come in.
START to beam up five.
START of the solar systems in this sector the distress call definitely came from one.
START you pinpoint it any closer can, lieutenant, hmm?
START negative. so badly garbled all we got was the name constellation, it was, then it, we lost it. yeesssssss.
START captain, been destroyed, sensors show this entire solar system has. nothing left but rubble and asteroids. yeesssssss.
START but incredible, that is. still intact, the star in this system is. destroy like that, only a nova could. hmmmmmm.
START to rubble and still no sign of the constellation every solar system in this sector blasted. matt decker's in command. happened to him, could what have, hmm?
START captain, to be intact the two inner most planets of this system appear.
START sir, picking up a ship's disaster beacon, i am.
START to raise it try, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START it on the sensors, i have, captain. by configuration, starship stopped in space. to be drifting she appears. yeesssssss.
START no answer, captain. is the automatic beacon, all i get. yeesssssss.
START recording normal energy output sensors not. herh herh herh.
START the constellation, is it. look at that.
START been wrecked by whatever destroyed these solar systems, she may have. yes, hmmm.
START attacked, she was attacked. red alert! red alert! your battle stations man!
START red alert. red alert. your battle stations man. herh herh herh.
START very good. for any other vessel initiate a full sensor scan of the immediate area. hmmmmmm.
START i, raise the constellation, cannot, sir. still getting the distress beacon, am i, but heavy subspace interference, there is. almost blocking the signal, is it. yes, hmmm.
START keep trying. mister spock, to the constellation full evaluation of the damage.
START also operative at a low power level. damaged and uninhabitable, the entire bridge is. to sustain life the rest of the ship seems able.
START all hands, to yellow alert go. stand by battle stations. lieutenant, have doctor mccoy, mister scott, and to me in the transporter room a damage control party report. yes, hmmm.
START going to board her, we are. mister spock, in command, you are. herh herh herh.
START out, filtration systems are, sir.
START to be shorted out the whole communication system looks, too, sir. yes, hmmm.
START scotty, check the phaser banks. been fired, see if they have. bones, with me, you come.
START what think you did it, sir, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START know i not, lad. but i want a full structural and control damage check, and going to have a look at those engines, i am. yeesssssss.
START abducted the crew was not, left, they just left. to enterprise kirk.
START improbable, captain. that of molten lead, the surface temperature of the inner planet is. an atmosphere poisonous to human life, the other has.
START continue our search, we will. kirk out. herh herh herh.
START captain, checked the engines, have i. hopeless pile of junk, the warp drive is. too badly off the impulse engines are not. something with them, we ought to be able to do.
START exhausted. give up without a battle they did not.
START but they, where are, hmm? i, imagine a man like matt decker abandoning ship while his life support systems were still operative, cannot. hmmmmmm.
START still intact, computer system is. playback the duplicate captain's log from the auxiliary control room, we can.
START matt. matt, jim kirk, it is.
START kirk. jim kirk, is it.
START to your ship what happened, matt, hmm? herh herh herh.
START ship. attacked. that, that thing.
START what thing, hmm? it, what was, hmm? yeesssssss.
START answer me! it, what was, hmm? what happened, matt, hmm?
START jim, give him a minute. in a state of shock, he is. herh herh herh.
START with the duplicate log ready, sir. yes, hmmm.
START the fourth planet. only two left now. scotty, to spock pull the microtapes from the sensor memory banks and beam them aboard. i want a full analysis, of what happened a complete report when they went in on that planet.
START to contact starfleet we tried. no one heard. no one! we could run not.
START to your crew what happened, hmm? yeesssssss.
START oh, to beam them down i had. dead, we were dead. no power, our phasers useless. behind, i stayed behind, the last man. the captain, the last man aboard the ship. what you are supposed to do, that is, it is not, hmm? and it hit again and the transporter went out then. down there, they were, and up here, i am. hmmmmmm.
START they say, no devil, there is, jim, but , there is. of hell right out, it, i saw it.
START matt, your crew, where is, hmm?
START no third planet, there is. yes, hmmm.
START captain, our report, washburn has. yes, hmmm.
START we made a complete check on structural and control damage, sir. as tell, far as we can, something crashed through the deflectors and knocked out the generators. been deactivated, somehow the antimatter in the warp drive pods has. yes, hmmm.
START deactivated, hmm? scotty, that, could some kind of general energy dampening field do, and for the heavy subspace interference would the same type of thing account, hmm? herh herh herh.
START aye, that all adds up. but do all that, what sort of a thing could, hmm? herh herh herh.
START if seen it, you would, know, you would. the whole thing's a weapon. be, it must be.
START what look like does it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START well, miles long, it is, with swallow a dozen starships, a maw that could. planets, it destroys planets, chops them into rubble.
START it, what is, an alien ship, hmm? or alive is it, or is it. yes, hmmm.
START both or neither. i not know. yeesssssss.
START matt, breaking up, your log stated that the fourth planet was. to investigate you went in. yeesssssss.
START this thing hovering over the planet we saw, with a force beam slicing out chunks of it.
START run a scanner check on it did you, hmm? of a beam what kind, hmm?
START to raise starfleet command due to heavy subspace interference unable. yeesssssss.
START robot weapon that purposely destroys entire solar systems. why, hmm?
START unknown, captain. however, computed the path of the machine, mister sulu has, as a base course using the destroyed solar systems. our star charts projecting back on, it came from outside we find that, from another galaxy. yeesssssss.
START if it follows its present path, go through the most densely populated section of our galaxy, it will.
START this whole thing's incredible. robot, hmm? like that a machine, build it, who would, hmm? herh herh herh.
START know we not. an alien race, apparently from another galaxy. yes, hmmm.
START bones, ever hear of a doomsday machine did you, hmm?
START no. doctor, i am, not a mechanic. herh herh herh.
START oh, your theories forget about! on the way to the heart of our galaxy, that thing is. what are you do about it going to, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START going to do is get you back to the enterprise we the first thing are. yeesssssss.
START oh, no, here, i stay here. i am leaving my ship not! hmmmmmm.
START no ship to leave, there is. dead hulk, is it! take her in tow, will we. stay onboard and get her ready i will. to the enterprise with the doctor and let him help you you go back. herh herh herh.
START just that i, it is, i, i never lost a command before.
START to enterprise kirk. have the transporter room beam doctor mccoy and commodore decker on board immediately.
START it came up on us fast, captain, but to maintain our distance we seem able.
START more manoeuvrable, we are, but gaining on us, it is. of total conversion drive sensors indicate some kind. hmmmmmm.
START it is whatever, let it go beyond us to the next solar system we cannot. to stop it we have. if robot, it is, the chances of deactivating it, what are, hmm?
START say none i would, captain. to attracts it the energy generated by our power nacelles seems. manoeuvre close enough without drawing a direct attack upon ourselves, i doubt we could.
START closing on us, is it, mister spock.
START all right. to beam us aboard lower your deflector screens long enough. yeesssssss.
START to beam ready, sir.
START captain, been attacked, have we. damaged, the transporter is. taking evasive action, we are. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, communication's damaged. unable to override interference, are we. yeesssssss.
START spock, hmm? spock, hmm? come in, spock. spock, hmm? stuck, we are stuck, blind, and deaf. hmmmmmm.
START well, stand around while our ship is being attacked, we just cannot. scotty, got to get me some manoeuvering power, you have.
START repair warp drive without a spacedock, i cannot.
START aye, still in fair shape, the impulse engines are. i might coax them.
START washburn, in there, you get. see what we can do about this viewing screen, let us. got to find out what's happening out there, i have. yeesssssss.
START no casualties, mister spock. we doing, how are, hmm?
START outrun it, we have, doctor.
START impulse and warp engines operative, transporter and communications under repair. operated in our favour, random chance seems to have. yes, hmmm.
START veering off, it is, for the next solar system back on course. the rigel colony, sir. hmmmmmm.
START to ignore anything as small as a ship beyond a certain radius evidently programmed. maintain a discreet distance and circle back to pick up the captain, we will. herh herh herh.
START let that reach rigel, you cannot. why, die, millions of innocent people would. herh herh herh.
START aware of the rigel system's population, i am, commodore, but only one ship, we are. strained, our deflector shields are, useless, our subspace transmitter is. logically, to survive in order to warn starfleet command, our primary duty is.
START to maintain life and safety of federation planets, our primary duty is. deny that do you, hmm?
START mister sulu, lay in an evasive course back to the constellation, you will. hmmmmmm.
START belay that last order, helmsman. one hundred and eighty degree turn, hard about. going to attack, are we.
START carry out my last order, you will, mister sulu.
START mister spock, officially notifying you that i am exercising my option under regulations as a starfleet commodore, i am, and assuming command of the enterprise, that i am. herh herh herh.
START the right to do so, you have, but advise against it, would i. hmmmmmm.
START that thing, destroyed, must be. hmmmmmm.
START to destroy it once before you tried, commodore. wrecked ship and a dead crew, the result was.
START solid neutronium, sensors show the object's hull is. single ship, combat it, cannot.
START mister spock, all, that will be. been relieved of command, you have. force me to relieve you of duty as well, do not. herh herh herh.
START let him do this you cannot, spock. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, out of line, you are.
START to blazes with regulations! you, let him take command, cannot when you know he is wrong!
START if certify commodore decker medically or psychologically unfit for command, you can, relieve him under section c, i can.
START certify that right now, i will. yeesssssss.
START also be asked to produce your medical records to prove it, you will.
START now, you know i have had time to run an examination on him not. yeesssssss.
START then your statement would be considered valid not. hmmmmmm.
START what about the captain, hmm? leave, we cannot leave.
START captain, fused solid, the impulse engines' control circuits are.
START you worry about your miracles, scotty, worry about mine, i will. to work get. hmmmmmm.
START deflector shields at full power. take much more of this, they cannot. hmmmmmm.
START helmsman, your course hold. stand by all phaser banks. yes, hmmm.
START deflectors holding, but weakening. retreat, we must retreat, commodore. the energy drain.
START in command here i am, mister spock. your course maintain, helmsman. get us in closer.
START to give it a try ready, hmm?
START scotty, you doing how, hmm? yeesssssss.
START all hooked up, controls are, sir. we, some power for you soon, should have. yes, hmmm.
START it now try, captain.
START to enterprise kirk. come in. enterprise, come in. mister spock, come in. to enterprise kirk. scotty, that power, where is, hmm?
START coming, sir. if i push these impulse engines too hard in the condition, in, are they, blow apart, they will. yeesssssss.
START washburn, to engineering get down. assist mister scott.
START scotty, to the edge push it right. got to manoeuver, this ship has.
START ceased fire, it has. being held in a tractor beam, we are. being pulled inside, we are, commodore. veer off, you must.
START lost warp power, we have. if the tractor beam within sixty seconds we break not, will, we never will.
START but you understand, do not, hmm? got to destroy it, we have! yes, hmmm.
START that, sir, is illogical. suicide, it is suicide. psychologically unfit for command, attempted suicide would be proof that you are. if you veer not off, you on that basis i shall relieve. yeesssssss.
START we, break loose, cannot! herh herh herh.
START we have got it not. being pulled inside, we are.
START scotty, me that power give.
START got it, you have, captain. to move us just enough. do better i cannot.
START it, that is, mister scott. keep that power coming.
START aye, sir. we still, move, cannot.
START it on keep pouring, scotty.
START captain, what we are doing i still know not. hmmmmmm.
START moving, we are moving, not, the enterprise is. see us and let the enterprise go, maybe that thing will. if i only had some phasers.
START phasers, hmm? got 'em, you have. one bank recharged, have i.
START scotty, just earned your pay for the week, you have. stand by. fire phasers. yeesssssss.
START loose, we are loose, commodore. hmmmmmm.
START good boy, jim. of us between the two, kill that thing, will we. yes, hmmm.
START closing fast on the constellation, it is. yes, hmmm.
START commodore, i suggest. yeesssssss.
START moving away, we are, commodore. hmmmmmm.
START programmed defensive sphere, this machine seems to have. subject to attack, any energy source entering that field is. yes, hmmm.
START warp drive and deflectors, out for a solar day, will be. repairs proceeding on transporter and communications.
START closing with us again, it is, sir. yeesssssss.
START sucking in space rubble from those destroyed planets, it is. refueling itself.
START maintain this speed for only seven hours before we exhaust our fuel, we can, but refuel itself indefinitely, it can. hmmmmmm.
START then have to fight it now before it gets any stronger we will. yes, hmmm.
START illogical. destroy it we cannot. therefore, we, save rigel, cannot. transport the captain and the others from the constellation and escape this thing's subspace interference in order to warn starfleet command, we must.
START mister spock, pierced the interference locally, we have. yes, hmmm.
START you raise starfleet can, hmm?
START mister spock, still in command, am i. speak for this ship, i will. to kirk enterprise. yes, hmmm.
START matt. what's going on, hmm? me mister spock give.
START in command here i am, jim. yes, hmmm.
START nothing. to regulations i assumed command according. yes, hmmm.
START speaking to a senior officer, you are, kirk.
START me spock give. yeesssssss.
START you, i told you, in command here, am i, to every rule in the book according, captain. to say at all, anything you have, say to me, you will.
START only one thing i want to say to you, there is, commodore. of there get my ship out.
START warp drive out. deflector shields down. transporter under repair. on emergency impulse power, are we.
START to repair warp drive how long, hmm?
START of consumption at our present rate, exhaust our impulse power long before then, will we.
START gaining on us, it is, sir.
START you, i told you, i am in command here and, give the orders, will i, captain. going to turn and attack, we are. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, relieve commodore decker immediately. direct order, that is.
START relieve me and you know it, you cannot. to regulations according. herh herh herh.
START blast regulations! mister spock, to assume command on my personal authority as captain of the enterprise i order you.
START commodore decker, relieved of command, you are. yeesssssss.
START i recognise not your authority to relieve me.
START with starfleet command you may file a formal protest, starbase, assuming we survive to reach. but relieved, you are. commodore. to place you under arrest i wish not.
START no. no, i suppose not that they do. very well, mister spock. yours, the bridge is.
START captain, assumed command i have.
START one moment, sir. commodore. i believe, scheduled for medical examination, you are. mister montgomery. herh herh herh.
START accompany the commodore to sickbay, you will.
START captain, taking an evasive course back to you, are we. try to stay ahead of the object until we can transport you aboard, we will.
START fine. of it just make sure you stay ahead. yeesssssss.
START hooked in ship's communication, have i. give you on impulse is one third power, the best i can. the shields are up but they will last long not. yes, hmmm.
START it going keep, scotty, it going keep. mister spock.
START plotting an intercept course, am i. rendezvous with you at fourteen thirteen point seven hours, will.
START too late, it is, sir.
START to enterprise kirk. why launching a shuttlecraft are you, hmm?
START it is whoever, captain, has no authorisation. lieutenant, raise the shuttlecraft. yeesssssss.
START to shuttlecraft enterprise. come in, shuttlecraft. herh herh herh.
START to enterprise shuttlecraft. decker here.
START commodore, insist that you return to the ship, i must.
START you said it yourself, spock. no way to blast through the hull of that machine, there is, so going to take this thing right down its throat i am. yeesssssss.
START kirk, this is. matt, killed, you will be.
START been prepared for death ever since i, have i, my crew ever since i killed.
START to die for an error in judgment no one expects you. yeesssssss.
START responsible for the lives of his crew, the commander is, and for their deaths. well, i, died with mine, should have.
START succeed you cannot, commodore. to return to the ship, your only logical alternative is. yeesssssss.
START matt. matt, to me listen. throw your life away like this you cannot. matt, starship commander, you are. you a valuable commodity that makes.
START stronger with you than without you we are! yeesssssss.
START gone, he is gone. constellation, come in, please.
START sir, of your friend may i offer my condolences on the death. most regrettable, it is.
START regrettable that he died for nothing, it is. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, sensors indicate a minute drop in the machine's power emanations. do you think the shuttlecraft explosion, done some damage, might have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START definite, the drop in power is, captain but negligible. still pursing us, the object is, to drain our power reserve at a much greater rate thereby causing us.
START mister spock, now operational, the transporter is. yeesssssss.
START transporter operational, captain. beam you aboard, shall we, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START little to be gained by staying aboard the constellation, there is. hmmmmmm.
START of that thing out there except possibly the destruction. your orders carry out, mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START spock, listen. maybe matt decker did die for nothing not. he had the right idea but enough power to do it not. result if a starship impulse engine is overloaded, am i correct in assuming that a fusion explosion of ninety seven megatons will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START ninety seven point eight three five. it be powerful enough to destroy that thing out there, will, hmm?
START negative, captain. pure neutronium, its hull is. no known way of blasting through it, there is. yeesssssss.
START not through it, spock, from inside it. it be enough, will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START insufficient data. to take further sensor readings i shall try. hmmmmmm.
START do the best, and make it fast, you can. to scott kirk.
START here, sir. to the enterprise the damage control party just beamed back. herh herh herh.
START good. scotty, to overload can you set the ship's impulse engines, hmm?
START aye. the shape the thing's in, hard to keep her from blowing, it is. yes, hmmm.
START as fast as you can set it and get up here. herh herh herh.
START of the inner mechanism impossible the object's neutronium hull makes sensor readings.
START spock, know you not, hmm?
START captain, getting dangerously close to the planet killer, you are. yes, hmmm.
START to get a lot closer i intend. going to ram her right down that thing's throat, i am. yes, hmmm.
START jim, you, killed, will be, like decker just. herh herh herh.
START no. no, to die i intend not, mister spock. rigged a delay detonation device, we have. have thirty seconds to beam me aboard the enterprise before the constellation's impulse engines blow, you will. yes, hmmm.
START your chances of survival are promising not. we even not know if the explosion will be powerful enough.
START calculated risk, mister spock.
START very slim timing, thirty seconds is. yeesssssss.
START chance, have to take, will i. kirk out. yes, hmmm.
START to be gambling your life on a cranky transporter's a mighty finicky piece of machinery, sir.
START understood. mister spock. to beam scotty on board prepare. yes, hmmm.
START with that thing what's the matter, hmm?
START power drain somewhere, it is, sir. i almost lost you. herh herh herh.
START never work like this, will it. the main junction circuitry, is it. get it, i will. hmmmmmm.
START out, transporter is, captain. have to stand by, you will. hmmmmmm.
START i cannot. power level's dropping too fast. better hurry, you would. herh herh herh.
START two thousand miles from the planet killer and closing fast, he is.
START to beam me aboard on my signal prepare. yes, hmmm.
START me aboard beam.
START energising. bridge, shorted out again, it is. hmmmmmm.
START och, with it what's wrong, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START gentlemen, me aboard beam.
START mister scott, to detonation twenty seconds. herh herh herh.
START sixty, fifty, forty.
START gentlemen, me aboard i suggest you beam.
START her now try, mister kyle. yeesssssss.
START bridge, him through, we got!
START welcome aboard, captain. sensors show all energy sources deactivated. quite dead, it is. yeesssssss.
START mister sulu, to minimum headway ease us back. as much as possible conserve power. lieutenant palmer, to expedite repairs on the warp drive tell mister scott. poor matt. to save others he gave his life in an attempt. to go not the worst way.
START indeed, captain. show that commodore decker died in the line of duty, i presume your log will.
START appropriate, captain. however, help wondering if there are any more of those weapons wandering around the universe i cannot.
START your readings start.
START spectacular, it is spectacular, it is not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START shame to have to intrude, it is.
START well, the last scout ship reported some pretty strange sensor readings. it investigated and the inhabitants contacted starfleet wants. told we we do what are.
START the soil, remarkably rich and fertile, here is, captain. quite efficacious, would husbandry be.
START sure about that are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START me homesick it makes. like russia just. yes, hmmm.
START of eden more like the garden, ensign.
START of course, doctor. just outside moscow, the garden of eden was. very nice place. made adam and eve very sad to leave, it must have.
START just outside moscow. all right. village about seventeen kilometres away on bearing two three two, there is. head that way, will we. yes, hmmm.
START what did somebody say, hmm? like this that paradise must've looked, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START as as we get out of the way soon, beam the body up.
START aye, captain. shame about hendorff, it is.
START it, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START losing potency in our antimatter pods, we are. it is serious i think not, but looking into it, we are. yes, hmmm.
START but nothing to worry about, you say there is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START well, sir, exactly say that i did not. herh herh herh.
START well, of it stay on top. got a job to down here, we have. as well finish it we might.
START i hear, nice down there, is it. hmmmmmm.
START yeah, nice, it is nice. if little more careful we are, we should run into any more trouble not. hmmmmmm.
START do with a nice walk in a garden with green leaves and grass i could.
START do the walking, we will, scotty. on the antimatter pod, you get. if worse, it gets worse, me know let, beam up, we will. kirk out. herh herh herh.
START handle it, scotty will. got a job to do, we have. your tricorder turn up anything on, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START indeed. for miles in all directions subsurface vibrations. yes, hmmm.
START heading for the village, we are. with the humanoids avoid contact. to make a full reconnaissance i want you and marple. and be careful. there may be other dangers besides poisonous plants. keep in constant communication. herh herh herh.
START it, what is, hmm?
START humanoid hiding directly behind us, there is, with remarkable agility moving, bearing one eight.
START it, what is, mister spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START visitor. to retain his anonymity one wanting, say, i should say.
START this beauty all, and now mister hendorff dead, somebody watching us. frightening, it is frightening.
START if you insist on worrying, worry about me. been wanting to get you in a place like this for a long time, i have. yeesssssss.
START mister chekov, yeoman landon. you find each other fascinating i know, but we are here to conduct a field experiment in human biology not.
START about to take some readings, i was. hmmmmmm.
START it is whatever, like a cat it moves. herh herh herh.
START jim, i like not this.
START i, neither do. all hands. been watched, have we, probably be watched we will. moving out, we are. formation l. hmmmmmm.
START you mind being careful where you throw your rocks would, mister spock, hmm?
START obviously highly unstable, captain. find of some importance, could this be. in large quantities, considerable source of power could it be. yeesssssss.
START of eden garden, with land mines. yeesssssss.
START to captain kirk enterprise. herh herh herh.
START stop it i could not, but why, i know why.
START something from the surface. like a pail of water on a fire, it is. beam, maybe, or transmission. and still on, is it. having it analysed, i am, but it is like nothing, seen before, have i.
START heading there now, we are, scotty. you need any help, hmm?
START nothing you can do about it, there is, sir. herh herh herh.
START all right, scotty. try and find out what's going on down here we will. kirk out.
START if correct about the force from the surface, scott is, to do with the vibrations i read earlier, it may have. hmmmmmm.
START of generator some kind, hmm?
START of the thorns like those that killed hendorff some. see the stuff on the end, hmm? like saplin, is it, thousand times stronger, it only is. herh herh herh.
START to find in paradise peculiar stuff.
START to make the whole crew turn handsprings i filled him with enough masiform d, and he is responding not. to get him back to the ship got, jim. hmmmmmm.
START to enterprise kirk. yeesssssss.
START beaming up, we are. notify transporter room. and to pick up mallory and marple make arrangements. scouting ahead of us, they are.
START aye, aye, sir. transporter room, to beam up landing party stand by.
START make transporter contact we cannot, sir. the entire system's inhibited. the way, now, is it, beam up a fly we could not. herh herh herh.
START scotty, is the transporter malfunction tied in with trouble, having with the antimatter pods, you are, hmm?
START know i not, sir. check it and get back with you, i will. scott out. hmmmmmm.
START spock. all right are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START acting like all his potions, doctor mccoy's potion is, my stomach turning. other than that, quite well i am. yes, hmmm.
START if red instead of green, your blood were, have an upset stomach you would not. hmmmmmm.
START just what you think you were trying to do, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START unaware of that plant, i surmised you were, so i.
START you, i assure you, captain, no intention of doing that i had. merely my own clumsiness prevented me, it was which prevented me from moving out of the way.
START i see. well next time, just yell. step out of the way as quickly as the next man, can i.
START so, i shall do. herh herh herh.
START to get yourself killed trying. know how much starfleet has invested in you do you, hmm?
START one hundred twenty two thousand two hundred. hmmmmmm.
START something after us, not only is, but after the ship as well, it is. yes, hmmm.
START captain, require a highly sophisticated planetary defence system, to affect the ship at this extreme range would.
START thirty seconds ago, there was a cloud in the sky not. yes, hmmm.
START primitive, the village is. of it strictly tribal from the looks. and captain, something else, there is. captain, come in.
START over there, is it! that way! i never saw anything like. hmmmmmm.
START jim, have stopped any of this you could not.
START me get into the academy his father helped. herh herh herh.
START captain. in each case, unavoidable, this was. hmmmmmm.
START prevented all of it, could i have. herh herh herh.
START how i see not. hmmmmmm.
START walk in paradise, among the green grass and flowers. beamed up at the first sign of trouble, should we have. yeesssssss.
START under orders to investigate this planet and this culture, you are.
START the option to disregard those orders if i consider them overly hazardous, i also have. this is that important a mission not, spock. of three of my men not worth the lives. for a minute i drop my guard because i like the smell of growing things, and dead, now three men are. and the ship's in trouble.
START mister chekov, totally inefficient, your tricorder readings are!
START your own business mind, sir! for your information, very high efficiency rating, have i. hmmmmmm.
START ensign, i will have you address me in that tone of voice not! herh herh herh.
START what you want, violence, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i will hurt you not. understand do you, hmm? i will hurt you not.
START well, strike you again i will not. been following us, you have, watching us. why, hmm?
START the eyes of vaal, am i. see, he must see.
START vaal, who is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START vaal, vaal is. everything, he is everything. yes, hmmm.
START name, do you have, hmm?
START akuta, i am akuta. the leader of the feeders of vaal, i am.
START they are going to hurt you not. you, i promise you. akuta, akuta, in peace, we come. like to speak to this vaal, we would.
START to vaal akuta alone speaks. the eyes and the voice of vaal, i am. vaal's wish, is it. herh herh herh.
START captain, fascinating, this is. if permit me, you will, sir, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START my ears for vaal, are they. given to me in the dim time so the people could understand his commands and obey, were they. herh herh herh.
START of the people of vaal you speak. nearby are they, hmm?
START close to vaal so we may serve him, we are. take you there i shall.
START to captain kirk enterprise. yes, hmmm.
START condition red. condition red. captain, grabbed us from the planet surface, something has. herh herh herh.
START no use, is it, mister scott. just barely holding our own, we are.
START aye, sir. is impulse power, all we have. yeesssssss.
START it on maximum put. full emergency circuits.
START all on, they are, captain. yes, hmmm.
START no, sir. slipping, we are slipping.
START computer banks, kyle. feed in a rate, me a figure get. to pull out with warp drive we might be able, but without it.
START starting to lose ground, we are. hurry up on that figure, kyle.
START maintain full reverse thrust against the pull. put a team on that warp drive. it working get.
START scotty, my chief engineer, you are. you know everything about that ship, to know, there is. more than the men who designed it. if you, get those warp engines working, cannot. yeesssssss.
START i will do everything, to do, there is, sir. scott out. herh herh herh.
START me about vaal tell. hmmmmmm.
START all the world knows about vaal. to fall and the sun to shine he causes the rains. all good comes from vaal. hmmmmmm.
START to him take me. to speak to him i wish. hmmmmmm.
START to him i shall take you, but speak to you he will not. to me he speaks only.
START take my chances, i will. hmmmmmm.
START fascinating. of workmanship a very high order, very ancient, generating great power. hmmmmmm.
START but the centre this is not, mister spock.
START no, captain. deep in the earth beneath us, the centre is. an access point, this is. also seem to be a, would it.
START force field, hmm?
START akuta, how talk you to vaal, hmm?
START well, get to it we cannot. talk to it unless it wants to talk to us, we cannot.
START vaal sleeps now. when hungry, he is hungry, to speak with him you may be able, if it, he desires it. herh herh herh.
START when get hungry does he, hmm?
START soon. come. give you food and drink, we will. if tired, you are, you may rest. hmmmmmm.
START the people of vaal, these are. yes, hmmm.
START the others, where are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no others, there are.
START children, hmm? to me you use unknown words. yes, hmmm.
START like yourselves little ones. they grow. hmmmmmm.
START replacements. necessary, none are. forbidden by vaal, are they.
START love. strange words. children. love. love, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START love is when two people are. yes, hmmm.
START ah, yes. the holding, the touching. forbidden this, vaal has. yeesssssss.
START these people, are from another place. come among us, they have. welcome them! herh herh herh.
START to vaal welcome.
START well, thank you. something for you, it does. hmmmmmm.
START yes, it does indeed, captain. me uncomfortable it makes. hmmmmmm.
START sayana, i am sayana. name, you have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes. spock. spock, i am spock. herh herh herh.
START to see what they find so amusing i fail. yes, hmmm.
START your house, this house is. send you more food and drink, i will. welcome in the place of vaal, you are.
START welcome we now are. trying to kill us, a while ago this whole planet was. it makes not sense.
START nothing makes sense down here. to enterprise kirk.
START no change, captain. the orb, decaying along computed lines, is it. with the warp drive no success. stop it, we are going down and we cannot.
START sick of hearing that word cannot, am i. of there get that ship out. yeesssssss.
START sir, doing everything within engineering reason, we are.
START then your imagination use. into the impulse engines, tie every ounce of power the ship has. discard the warp drive nacelles if, to, you have, and with the main section crack out of there, but of there get that ship out! yeesssssss.
START i just ran a thorough check on the natives, and complete lack of harmful bacteria in their systems, there is, no decalcification, of tissue no degeneration, no arteriosclerosis. in simple terms, jim, they are growing old not, and begin to tell you how old they are i cannot, twenty years or twenty thousand years.
START quite possible. with my atmospheric analysis it checks. their sun their atmosphere completely negates any harmful effects from. herh herh herh.
START to that a simple diet add, perfectly controlled temperature, no natural enemies, apparently no vices, no replacements needed. maybe, paradise after all, is it. hmmmmmm.
START apparently, correct, our hypothesis is. no living being there, there is. machine, is it, nothing more. hmmmmmm.
START well, the field's down, going in, people are. see what kind of luck we have, let us.
START that is the way not. herh herh herh.
START evidently not. no ordinary machine, this is, captain. it may well possess a rudimentary intelligence.
START but to eat it needs. frequently. so have any great power reserves it cannot. herh herh herh.
START be of any help that may not. only ten hours left in, the enterprise has which to break free. yeesssssss.
START what happens if vaal weakens around feeding time, hmm? spock, of the astrophysics lab check the electromagnetic section. of the total amount of energy being expended against the ship get an estimate. it hour by hour have them measure.
START my view in, of reciprocity a splendid example. yeesssssss.
START take a computerised vulcan mind such as yours to make that kind of a statement, it would. yeesssssss.
START certain absolutes, there are, mister spock, and the right of humanoids to a free and unchained environment, one of them is, conditions, the right to have which permit growth.
START their right to choose a system, another is which seems to work for them.
START jim, you are just going to stand by and be blinded to what's going on here not. humanoids, these are, intelligent. to advance and grow they need. you understand what my readings indicate, do not, hmm? been no progress here in at least ten thousand years, there is. life this is not. stagnation, it is stagnation. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, these people are healthy and, happy, are they. to call it what ever you choose, this system works, to it despite your emotional reaction. yes, hmmm.
START for you it might work, mister spock, but it works for me not. humanoids living so, service a hunk of tin, can they. yeesssssss.
START gentlemen, wait until our ship's out of danger, i think this philosophical argument can. kirk here.
START scotty, sir. reading on the power source mister spock requested, have we. when monitored, we first monitored, generating alternating cycles totalling one hundred to the twentieth power waltham units, was it.
START maintain did it, scotty, hmm?
START no, sir. power's dropping bit by bit. nominal, but definite drain.
START good. keep monitoring. how coming along with the circuit switchover are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START putting everything but the kitchen sink into impulse power we are, sir. take us another eight hours to complete the work, it will.
START cutting it a bit fine that is, scotty. herh herh herh.
START aye, but if we break not out, have to wait too long for the end of it i would rather we did not. hmmmmmm.
START of the enterprise burning up and us every time i think. hmmmmmm.
START yeoman, wasting energy, you are.
START captain, trapped, we are trapped, hmmmmmm.
START sit down, and to eat have something. hmmmmmm.
START up there, the enterprise is. hmmmmmm.
START that hasn't happened yet. happen, i wonder what would, hmm? yeoman, speculate. happen if someone on this planet died, what would, hmm?
START but they cannot. of them you said that vaal takes care. hmmmmmm.
START yes, to fall off a cliff or something, i suppose if someone were, of the population that might upset the balance. then need a replacement, would they.
START need a replacement, they would. opinion, mister spock, hmm?
START but these people, i mean, if anything about they know not. what i mean is, to have any natural er they seem not. i mean, it, how is, done, hmm?
START mister spock, hmm? the science officer, you are. explain it to the young lady why you not. yeesssssss.
START from a machine, hmm? like to see, that i would.
START i understand, vaal. done, shall it be.
START you know, if paradise, it weren't for vaal this place would be.
START together is paradise, any place we can be.
START i not know.
START we be able to get back aboard, will, hmm?
START martha, i not know. but to stay here, if we do have, it be so very bad would, hmm?
START no, not if, with me, you are.
START why look you like that, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START they touched the way. i not understand.
START angry they were not. i think, pleasant for them, was it.
START but to be gained, what is, hmm? it is a dance not. it gathers no food. it serves vaal not. but as though it was it did seem, to them pleasant. herh herh herh.
START pleasant, it is pleasant, makora. yes, hmmm.
START yes. this way they touched in. hmmmmmm.
START vaal! angry, he is angry. hmmmmmm.
START plain, the law is. given you the words of vaal, i have. beg the lightning to strike do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START we saw the strangers, of them the two, this thing do.
START to me vaal speaks truly. danger, the newcomers are. to meet me in the clear place tell the men of vaal when the strangers are asleep. vaal's own words, it is.
START kill, akuta, hmm? understand we not.
START simple thing, is it. the word of vaal, is it. done to all of them, it will be when the sun returns in the morning. yeesssssss.
START concerned, i am concerned, captain. be an ideal society this may not, but viable one, it is.
START right, bones was. living these people are not, existing, they are existing. create they not, they not produce, they even not think. to service a machine they exist. yes, hmmm.
START people, these are, not robots. the opportunity of choice should they have. to them to interfere we owe it.
START take my chances i will. why you not have a look around, hmm? to enterprise kirk. mister scott, hmm?
START it going how's, scotty, hmm? herh herh herh.
START you realise that within forty five minutes, the ship, pulled down into the atmosphere, will be, hmm?
START that, i know that. as you said, cutting things fine, that is. yes, hmmm.
START kirk out. it, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START disturbing. disappeared, the people of vaal seem to have. herh herh herh.
START vaal, on a peaceful mission, are we. to you or your people we mean no harm.
START variation in impulses, captain. reading us, i believe it is. strong jump on all wavelengths. herh herh herh.
START get out of here, let us!
START second degree burns. not serious, but bet they smart, will i. yeesssssss.
START doctor, an unsurpassed talent for understatement, you have. yeesssssss.
START concerned that the vaalians achieved true human stature, the good doctor was. i submit, no cause for worry, there is. taken the first step, they have. learned to kill, have they.
START ready here, we are, sir. been channelled into the impulse engines, all available power has. twelve minutes before entering atmosphere, we have. yes, hmmm.
START all right, scotty, her in full reverse put. of there get her out.
START captain, doing it, we are. pulling away, we are! hmmmmmm.
START no good, it is, sir. only a few systems responding, there is.
START nothing left to try again there is. i guess, have to fire me, you will, sir.
START fired, you are. four hundred people.
START die, they will die because i could not see a warning sign. to follow orders i had, always orders. yeesssssss.
START to ring the dinner bell fine time.
START bones, it, that is. with chekov stay. keep those people from feeding vaal. let them feed vaal, do not. keep them in the hut. mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START scotty, still have phaser power do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START aye, but what. herh herh herh.
START aye, sir, but they will penetrate that force field not. yes, hmmm.
START if correct, my guess is, they will have to not. stand by.
START to us vaal calls. go to him, let us. he hungers. please.
START assume so i would.
START good. weakened it considerable, the ship's pulling away must have. to be fed, it has, but hold out for days, its reserve capacity could. hmmmmmm.
START if to reinforce its energy field to ward off a phaser attack, it had, have to draw more heavily on its reserves, would it. hmmmmmm.
START tremendous upsurge in generated power, captain. trying to reinforce his energy field, obviously vaal is. yes, hmmm.
START good. see how long he can do it, let us.
START no power generation at all, captain. dead, vaal is. yes, hmmm.
START tractor beam gone. to antimatter pods potency returning.
START but vaal who put the fruit on the trees, was it, to fall caused the rain. for us vaal cared. herh herh herh.
START learn to care for yourselves, you will, with our help. and no trick to putting fruit on trees there is. you might enjoy it. learn to build for yourselves, you will, for yourselves think, for yourselves work, and yours, what you create is. what we call freedom, that is. like it, you will, lot. and learn something about men and women, you will, supposed to be, the way they are. for each other caring, with each other being happy, to each other being good. what we call love, that is. like that, you will, too, lot. you and your children.
START children, what are, hmm?
START the little ones, hmm? like you look, hmm? just go on the way, going, you are. find out, you will.
START i agree not with you at all, mister spock.
START unusual that is not, doctor. yeesssssss.
START jim, to hear this i want you. yeesssssss.
START captain, at all certain we did the correct thing on gamma trianguli six i am not. yeesssssss.
START of social evolution we put those people back on a normal course. i see nothing wrong in that.
START well, good object lesson, that is, mister spock. an example of what can happen, is it when a machine becomes too efficient, for you does too much work.
START captain, aware of the biblical story of genesis, you are.
START yes, aware of it, of course i am. driven out of paradise, adam and eve tasted the apple and as a result were.
START precisely, captain, and of speaking in a manner, given the people of vaal the apple, we have, of good and evil if you will the knowledge, as result of which they too have been driven out of paradise.
START doctor, understand him correctly, do i, hmm? casting me in the role of satan are you, hmm?
START this ship who even remotely looks like satan is there anyone on, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i am aware of anyone who fits that description not, captain.
START no, mister spock. i did think you would be not. hmmmmmm.
START you say we believe what, captain kirk, but altered our position has not. the halkan council, permit your federation to mine dilithium crystals on our planet, cannot.
START shown the council historical proof that our missions are peaceful we have. herh herh herh.
START benevolent at present, we accept that your federation is, but always in question, the future is. our dilithium crystals represent awesome power. of that power wrongful use, to the extent of the taking of one life even, of total peace would violate our history. to prevent that, die, we would die, captain. as race, if necessary. yeesssssss.
START to prove ours i admire your ethics and hope. to enterprise kirk.
START to beam up landing party stand by.
START meditate further, the council will, but be hopeful of any change, do not. captain, the might to force the crystals from us, you do have, of course.
START but not, we will not. consider that. enterprise. transporter room, energise.
START right, spock was. rough trip, it was.
START of mission status, captain, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START chosen suicide, regrettable that this society has. mister kyle, instructed to compensate during the ion storm, you were.
START be tolerated carelessness with the equipment cannot.
START but mister spock, i.
START no, mister spock! i tried. tried, i really tried. yes, hmmm.
START mister scott, caused some minor damage in your section, the storm has. also injuries requiring your attention, there are, doctor. well, gentlemen, hmm?
START for a moment the power beam jumped, sir, as about to materialise, the landing party was. it happen before i never saw.
START to your error due, mister kyle, hmm?
START of the severe storm possibly a result. captain, feel any abnormal effects do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START captain, all this, what is, hmm?
START how did we get in these. yes, hmmm.
START this, what is, hmm? everything's all messed up and changed around, of place out. hmmmmmm.
START no, not everything. that spot, i spilt acid there a year ago. jim, this, what in blazes is, hmm?
START i not know. our enterprise but it is not, it is. maybe. herh herh herh.
START of you feel dizzy any, hmm when we were in the transporter beam? yeesssssss.
START when materialised, we first materialised.
START twice, it happened twice. in our own transporter chamber, first we were, then we faded, and then when we finally materialised, here, we were here. this is wherever. yeesssssss.
START captain, of power the transporter chief mentioned a surge. the transporter lock, been affected by the ion storm and we just materialised somewhere else, might have. herh herh herh.
START another captain kirk, another doctor mccoy, another. yeesssssss.
START an exchange. if here, we are here. hmmmmmm.
START then been transporting up at the exact same time, our counterparts must have. similar storms on both universes disrupted the circuits. here, we are here, and on our enterprise, they are. probably asking the same questions. are we in another universe, and if so, how we get back to our own, hmm? use the computer, will they, and to, we have to. herh herh herh.
START what about the halkans, hmm? we, let them be destroyed, cannot.
START then this technology get on. it is all we have to work with if we get back home want to. the intercom may be monitored. for private messages use your communicators. subfrequency and scramble. herh herh herh.
START to your post get. run today's communication from starfleet command. i know my exact orders and options want to, if any. yeesssssss.
START uhura, the only one who can do it, you are. right there, i will be. yes, hmmm.
START bones. take a look at the library, let us. lot to learn, we have.
START mister chekov, for planetary target a phaser setting. yeesssssss.
START still no interest, uhura, hmm? hmm, hmm? change your mind, i could. yeesssssss.
START away from your post, you are, mister. yes, hmmm.
START is the captain here, hmm? is spock here, hmm? when the cat's away.
START phasers locked on target , captain. approaching optimum range. commence fire, captain, hmm? captain, hmm?
START been ordered to check phaser couplings for possible damage by the storm, i have. yes, hmmm.
START authorisation from security, you have, sir, hmm?
START have to check with security chief sulu, will i, sir. herh herh herh.
START never mind. attend to it i will.
START carrying primary target beyond arc of phaser lock, planet's rotation is. yes, hmmm.
START to new firing position shall i correct orbit, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to secondary city lock on. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant uhura, contact the halkan council. to talk to them again i wish. yeesssssss.
START new race, this is. of value besides dilithium crystals they offer other things. herh herh herh.
START our phaser lock secondary target now moving beyond. herh herh herh.
START of orders a serious breach, captain.
START my reasons i have, and make them clear to you in my own good time, i will.
START captain, the leader on the halkan council waiting on channel b, have i. herh herh herh.
START useless to resist us, is it. yeesssssss.
START twelve hours to consider your position, you have. hmmmmmm.
START level your planet and take what we want we will. destruction that is. die as a race, you will. yeesssssss.
START we will argue not. twelve hours. no more. close communications. turn phasers off.
START twelve hours, captain, hmm? unprecedented, that is. yes, hmmm.
START in my quarters, shall i be. lieutenant uhura, me there have doctor mccoy and mister scott meet.
START captain, placed yourself in a most grave position, you have. this conduct, reported, must be.
START at liberty to do so, you are, mister spock.
START your men, captain. easy, farrell. your job i did. ask the captain. hmmmmmm.
START yes, your job, he did.
START smart boy, to the top dog switching.
START of here get him out.
START mister chekov was make me a chief going to. make me an officer, you could.
START all right. working for me, you are. yeesssssss.
START in line, you are. you might even make captain. hmmmmmm.
START my ship not on. hmmmmmm.
START for this one the booth, sir, hmm?
START called blood, it is. your step watch. the officers move up by assassination. it on me chekov tried.
START security chief, mister sulu is, like the ancient gestapo.
START and chamber of horrors, my sickbay is. betting on the tolerance of an injured man, my assistants were. how long, take him to pass out from the pain, would it. yes, hmmm.
START mostly variations in instrumentation. nothing i, handle, cannot.
START be, everything's exactly where it should, except us.
START find out where we stand, let us. computer.
START the captain, this is. record security research, to be classified under my voice print or mister scott's. yes, hmmm.
START to the recent ion storm produce all data relevant. correlate following hypothesis. with a parallel universe could a storm of such magnitude cause a power surge in the transporter circuits creating a momentary interdimensional contact, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START at such a moment, could persons in each universe, of beaming in the act, with their counterparts in the other universe transpose, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to such an event be created artificially using the ship's power could conditions necessary, hmm? herh herh herh.
START record procedure. scotty, it, can you do, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START not by myself. need help, i will. and too conspicuous you would be. yeesssssss.
START doctor i am, not an engineer. hmmmmmm.
START now, an engineer, you are. have to tap the power we need from the warp engines and balance it for the four of us, i will. yeesssssss.
START jim, run, the way this ship is, we in this universe, what kind of people are, hmm?
START find out, let us. computer. yeesssssss.
START of current command read out official record.
START captain james t. to command iss enterprise through assassination of captain christopher pike kirk succeeded. first action, of gorlan uprising through destruction of rebel home planet suppression. second action, of five thousand colonists on vega nine execution.
START captain, hmm? do it, we can. herh herh herh.
START to lay in the automatic transporter setting, we have, but to tie the power increase into the transporter when we interrupt engine circuits, show up on sulu's security board, it will. of course, only need a second, we will.
START tell uhura to create a diversion to distract sulu, i will, your signal at. get back to our posts, let us. me advised keep.
START jim, if here, we are here, what suppose you our counterparts doing back in our universe, hmm?
START our enterprise on.
START not, i think not. extremely limited, your authority on this ship is, captain. the four of, remain her in the brig and in custody until i discover how to return you to wherever it is you belong, you will.
START answer none of your questions at this time, i can. yeesssssss.
START taken place, apparently some kind of transposition has. it extremely interesting i find.
START captain, pleased that you frustrated mister chekov's plan, i am. regret your death, i should.
START i desire not the captaincy. much prefer my scientific duties i. frankly content to be a lesser target, i am. yeesssssss.
START most effective means of discipline, the agony booth is. i presume, ordered full duration, you have. yes, hmmm.
START i have decided not. yeesssssss.
START decided i said i have not.
START that is, of course, your affair. captain, to persist in your unusual course of action regarding the halkans may i inquire if you intend, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START they are, of course, to standard empire procedure in contradiction. ignore the consequences you cannot.
START threaten i not, captain. i merely state facts. found you to be an excellent officer, have i. been both successful and profitable, our missions together have. however, permit your aberrations to jeopardise my position i shall not.
START spock, think we should destroy the halkans do you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START maintained or the empire is doomed, terror must be. the logic of history, it is. hmmmmmm.
START easy, conquest is, not, control is. bitten off more than we can chew, we may have. yes, hmmm.
START captain, i wish not to find myself opposing you, but you continue on your present course if, this confusing, inexplicable behaviour, herh herh herh.
START my concern is, not yours. find me a formidable enemy, you would.
START aware of that i am, captain. i trust that, aware of the reverse, you are.
START release chekov. to quarters confine him. herh herh herh.
START to hold him for about six hours that ought.
START asleep, i fell asleep. we had quite a time in the chem lab picking up after the storm. to your day nothing compared, i gather. i heard about chekov. yes, hmmm.
START preoccupied, i was preoccupied. herh herh herh.
START further than that, if successful, i am successful. yes, hmmm.
START really, hmm? well, you must know what, doing, you are. you always do. if to be the woman of a caesar, i am, i know what you are up to, cannot, hmm?
START received a private communication from starfleet command, i have. committing a breach of regulations by informing you of its contents, am i.
START instructed to wait until planet dawn over principal target to permit you to carry out our mission, i am.
START and not, if i do, hmm? herh herh herh.
START in that event, ordered to kill you and to proceed against the halkans as the new captain of the enterprise, am i.
START drink a toast to spock, let us, to warn you the only man aboard with the decency, and die for it, will he. never find another man like him, will they. yeesssssss.
START i intend not to kill him. hmmmmmm.
START are you act against the halkans before the deadline going to, hmm?
START no, but avoid killing spock, i will.
START of the way just get him out, his men he and. hmmmmmm.
START get out of his way, will i. yeesssssss.
START shall i activate the tantalus field, hmm? you will at least monitor him want to, will you not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START this thing i hate.
START it is that bad not.
START of course not. you captain it made. how many enemies simply wiped out of existence by the touch of a button have you, hmm? fifty, hmm? hundred, hmm? now, funny, i always thought that was, the great, to some unknown alien scientist and a plundered laboratory powerful captain kirk who owes everything. hmmmmmm.
START well, if advantage of your opportunities you take not. yeesssssss.
START to the command of a starship or even higher you rise not. yes, hmmm.
START of his that magnificent mind. but protect him from this it cannot. he dies i press it and. now, hmm?
START you really mean it. it matters not. if his order spock fails, killed anyway, he will be. hmmmmmm.
START see to it that the circumstances of his failure will clear him i will.
START even afraid of starfleet command you are not. much power so quickly can your scheme bring you that, hmm? and what about me, hmm? marlena fit in, how does, hmm?
START how does marlena fit in want to, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to get out of here within three hours, have we. orders to kill me unless i complete the mission, spock has. hmmmmmm.
START got another deadline we have, too, sir.
START got to get down there and free the board so we can lock in, you have. me about ten minutes give. yeesssssss.
START all right. i, in the transporter room in ten minutes, will be. meet you in sickbay afterward, will i.
START in progress, a security research is. hmmmmmm.
START conducting the research, who is, hmm?
START the nature of the research, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START classified under voice index log, programme is.
START why monitoring my communications are you, mister sulu, hmm?
START detected extensive use of computer, my security board has, mister spock. about to inform you, was i.
START working on escape or defence, he is. yeesssssss.
START my concern that is. yeesssssss.
START correct. your play, it is. you succeed i hope, because habit of disappearing, the order would fall on me next and you know how captain kirk's enemies have.
START if successful, i am successful, to the captaincy you see yourself a step nearer. to command the enterprise i want not, but befall me, if it should, vulcans, i suggest you remember that my operatives would avenge my death and some of them are. yes, hmmm.
START my traps oiling, darling. afraid i am a little out of practice, am i. maybe, what happened to us, that is, hmm? very hard for a working officer to shine as a woman every minute, it is, and you demand perfection.
START never seen perfection i have, but closer to it, no woman could come. yeesssssss.
START do, i still do. hmmmmmm.
START got to go, i have.
START ship's business, hmm? an important task on the crew deck, hmm? well, i guess, over, is it. take me temporarily, commander kenno will. made that quite clear, he is. call a yeoman to help me with my things, will i. hmmmmmm.
START you have not to do that.
START feeling sorry for me are you, hmm? see hesitation in your eyes about anything do i, hmm? i want one thing, captain. transfer me. on the enterprise, humiliated, i am humiliated! on another ship, hunt fresh game, can i. got my rank, have i, and. i, do not, hmm? been a captain's woman, i have, and it, i like it. one again if i have to go through every officer in the fleet, will i be. hmmmmmm.
START kissed me like that, it is been a long time since you have. stranger, you are. to the halkans mercy, to spock mercy, to me. your woman am i, hmm?
START the captain's woman until he says you are not, you are. yes, hmmm.
START be coming through any moment, scotty's signal should. to do you know what.
START very persistent you are not, mister sulu. rules, the game has. ignoring them, you are. back, i protest and you come. you did come back not.
START getting bored, i was. the time of course this is not.
START afraid i changed my mind, am i. again.
START take much chances you, lieutenant.
START mister scott, all clear. to sickbay on my way. yeesssssss.
START now, up to the captain, is it.
START your movements restrict, captain.
START what doing are you, hmm? are you shoot me now going to, spock, hmm? until dawn, i thought i had.
START i shall make that decision. since your return from the planet, behaved in a most atypical and illogical manner, you have. i know why want to.
START shoot. wasting time, you are. yeesssssss.
START i shall waste time with you not. too inflexible, you are, too disciplined once, made up your mind, you have. but plenitude of human weaknesses, doctor mccoy has, sentimental, soft. tell me what i want to know you may not, but he will. yes, hmmm.
START running a big risk, you are, spock. yeesssssss.
START the phaser, have i, captain, and to simply disappear as so many of your opponents have in the past i intend not. if you please. sickbay. yes, hmmm.
START yes, of course. the entire landing party. captain, over there stand. doctor, time for answers, it is.
START much time how, scotty, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START hardly fifteen minutes, sir. starting to close very fast, the field density between the two universes is.
START me get him on the table help. well, come on. me get him on the table help. die without immediate treatment, will he.
START everything laid in, scotty, hmm? get into the transporter chamber, the time lag so the operator can, hmm?
START all laid in, sir. come on, mccoy! getting back home we are taking a chance of not. hmmmmmm.
START get home we will. take long this will not.
START want me to stop do you, jim, hmm? only take a minute, will it. hmmmmmm.
START very much like our own mister spock, he is, is he not, hmm? got that minute, you have. herh herh herh.
START this, what is, mister sulu, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START orders to kill you, mister spock has, captain. succeed, he will succeed, apparently. also appear to have killed him after a fierce battle, you will. regrettable, but leave me in command, it will. hmmmmmm.
START captain, barely got ten minutes, we have. yes, hmmm.
START go, let us, bones. hmmmmmm.
START let him die i cannot, jim. on to the transporter room, you get. there in five minutes, i will be. yeesssssss.
START it, i guarantee it. now, go on, please. yeesssssss.
START merging, our minds are, doctor. one, our minds are. you feel i feel what. you know i know what. yeesssssss.
START friend. activate the transporter. with the tantalus field you saved us back at sickbay. hmmmmmm.
START i cannot. sorry, i am sorry. balanced for four, our power is. no guarantee that we will make it with five, there is. die, all could. scotty, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START working, it is working, sir. hmmmmmm.
START but only three of you, there are.
START coming, one is. help you if i could, would i, marlena. believe that. yeesssssss.
START if you kill us, still stay, you will.
START mccoy, where is, hmm? time, scotty. yes, hmmm.
START do to me, do you know what they will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the power's cut, sir. on to us, are they.
START aye, available, it is available. yes, hmmm.
START to your setup can you bridge, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START get us the power, i can, but linked to the transporter main, the automatic setting is. if we bypass, got to operate the controls manually, that means that someone has. yes, hmmm.
START have to stay, one of us will. herh herh herh.
START stay, i will stay, captain.
START to the transporter chamber get. you, too, uhura.
START an order, that is, scotty.
START man of integrity in both universes, you are, mister spock.
START return to your universe, you must. my captain back, i must have. i shall operate the transporter. two minutes and ten seconds, you have.
START in that time, something to say, have i. realised, how long before the halkan prediction of galactic revolt is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START overthrown, the empire shall be, of course. yes, hmmm.
START of waste the illogic, mister spock. of lives the waste, potential, resources, time. illogical, i submit to you that your empire is because it cannot endure. illogical to be a willing part of it, i submit that you are.
START one minute and twenty three seconds, you have. yes, hmmm.
START if inevitable, change is, predictable, beneficial, logics not demand that you be a part of it, hmm?
START one man, summon the future, cannot.
START but change the present, one man can. of this enterprise be the captain, mister spock. for sparing the halkans and make it stick find a logical reason. it gives push till. defend yourself better than any man in the fleet, you can. yes, hmmm.
START the power, a man must also have.
START make you invincible, in my cabin is a device that will.
START it be, what will, hmm? past or future, hmm? tyranny or freedom, hmm? up to you, it is.
START time, it is time. yeesssssss.
START in every revolution, one man with a vision, there is.
START is how were you able to identify our counterparts so quickly what i understand not, hmm?
START far easier for you as civilised men to behave like barbarians, was it, for them as barbarians to behave like civilised men, it than was. to their enterprise at the same time you appeared here i assume they returned. hmmmmmm.
START probably. however, find a few changes, that jim kirk will, if my spocks correctly i read.
START jim, i think, him with a beard better, liked i. it gave him character. of course almost any change, a distinct improvement, would be. herh herh herh.
START the easy way his counterpart fitted into that other universe, what worries me is. bit of a pirate at heart, i always thought spock was.
START indeed, gentlemen. may i point out that, an opportunity to observe your counterparts here quite closely, had i. brutal, they were brutal, savage, unprincipled, uncivilised, treacherous, in every way, of homo sapiens splendid examples, of humanity the very flower. i found them quite refreshing. herh herh herh.
START i am sure not, but been insulted, i think we have. herh herh herh.
START marlena moreau. just assigned last week, i was. herh herh herh.
START met her before, you have, captain, hmm?
START uh, why you ask, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START your reaction, of recognition one. yes, hmmm.
START oh, no. no, no. we have met before not, exactly. she just seemed a nice, likable girl. become friends, i think we could. possible, it is possible.
START their original distress call nothing since, sir.
START nothing there is, sir. scanning all frequencies, i am.
START to answer, they have.
START that, be, cannot. of more than four billion people the last census reported a total inhabitation. herh herh herh.
START impossible, that is. what, happened, could have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START unknown, sir. revealed the presence of any disease organisms would sensor readings have. not, they do not. in addition, this system only a week ago we received the routine report from. even the symbalene blood burn acts that swiftly not.
START of energy an extremely powerful bolt, captain. herh herh herh.
START to the shields full power, mister scott.
START all hands, red alert. phaser banks stand by. to condition red photon torpedoes, condition red.
START going to hit, it is. hmmmmmm.
START temporarily, captain. to ninety of our photon torpedoes our shields absorbed energy equivalent. hmmmmmm.
START add, i may add, this first attack reduced our shielding power twenty percent the energy used repulsing. hmmmmmm.
START expect others, i think we can, lieutenant.
START resist three more such attacks, we can. shatter our shields completely, the fourth will. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant, contact starfleet command. my log patch in. happened, tell them what has. been destroyed by an unknown agency, tell them the entire malurian race seems to have, and that, under attack by an unidentified force, are we.
START losing power, we are, sir.
START having to divert the warp engine power into the shields i am, sir, if you want the protection. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, of those bolts speed.
START our target, that is, mister sulu. prepare photon torpedo.
START shields still holding, sir, but reaching the critical point, the drain on the engines is. ach, we lost warp manoeuvreing power. to impulse switching. hmmmmmm.
START no effect. of our torpedo target absorbed full energy.
START absorbed it, hmm? damage to your instruments, there must be, spock. yeesssssss.
START in good working order, are they, captain. yeesssssss.
START but absorbed that much energy and survived, could what have, hmm? lieutenant, to make contact try. herh herh herh.
START sir, fired another, they have. yeesssssss.
START take it can we, mister scott, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START problematical, that is, sir.
START captain, down, shields are. survive another hit we cannot. hmmmmmm.
START trying, i am trying, sir. hmmmmmm.
START to unidentified vessel. captain james kirk of the uss enterprise, this is. on a peaceful mission, we are. to you or any lifeforms we mean no harm. with us communicate. any further readings, mister spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START computing now, captain. weight, five hundred kilograms. shape, roughly cylindrical. length, over one metre a fraction. yes, hmmm.
START exist in a thing that small, what kind of intelligent creatures can, hmm?
START intelligence necessarilys require bulk not, mister scott. herh herh herh.
START captain, getting a signal from the spacecraft we are.
START it on audio put, lieutenant. yes, hmmm.
START yes, sir. impossible to get it any clearer, it is, sir. yeesssssss.
START captain, sort of binary, this message is. extremely sophisticated, compressed, carrying several channels at once.
START you decode it can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START as yet no clue, captain. moment. stepped down, transmission speed has. much slower. to be a single binary seems.
START seem so, would it, captain. hmmmmmm.
START captain james kirk of the uss enterprise, this is. on a peaceful mission in this part of the galaxy, we are. no hostile intentions, we have. identity, we request identity.
START another signal now, is it, sir. herh herh herh.
START formula, it is, captain. sending us a mathematical message and requesting language equivalence, are they. trying to communicate, they are. hmmmmmm.
START to the communication channel tie in the ship's translator. take it at their own speed let them.
START take it faster than we give it, i guess they can.
START captain, coming in now, the message is. hmmmmmm.
START what they needed before the computers burned out, apparently they got. yeesssssss.
START impossible to come aboard your ship, it is because of the size differential. yes, hmmm.
START prepared to beam you aboard our ship, we are. yes, hmmm.
START require any special conditions do you, any particular atmosphere or environment, hmm?
START captain, you are really bringing that thing in here not, hmm?
START any choice, we have, scotty, hmm? besides, aboard, it once is, it will be taking any more shots at us not. lieutenant, get a repair crew on that computer. to the transporter room get doctor mccoy down. spock, with me, you come. scotty, you too.
START negative, captain. protective screen, it has. get through i cannot. herh herh herh.
START what we do now, go up and knock, hmm?
START of origin relate your point. yes, hmmm.
START from the united federation of planets, we are.
START insufficient response. point of origin, all things have. scan your star charts, will i.
START reasonable course. yeesssssss.
START if to leave your ship you care, provide the necessary life support systems, we will. yes, hmmm.
START non sequitur. uncoordinated, your facts are. hmmmmmm.
START jim, i think not anybody's in there.
START i contain no parasitical beings. nomad, i am nomad. yeesssssss.
START reacting much like a highly sophisticated computer, is it. herh herh herh.
START nomad, i am nomad. opinion, what is, hmm?
START belief, an opinion is, view, judgment. yes, hmmm.
START of power what's your source, hmm? yeesssssss.
START changed since the point of origin, it has. much taken from the other, there was. perpetual now i am. nomad, i am nomad.
START yes. reported destroyed, was it. no more in the series, there were. but that probe, if this is. yes, hmmm.
START scan your star charts i will. yes, hmmm.
START bring them, i will. herh herh herh.
START the capability of movement within your ship i have. yes, hmmm.
START now, scotty, to full capacity get our warp power up.
START spock, bones, with us come. herh herh herh.
START our point of origin, this is, as sol the star we know. yeesssssss.
START from the third planet, you are, hmm?
START with one large natural satellite a planet, hmm? yeesssssss.
START called earth, the planet is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START the creator, you are, the kirk. unnecessary, the sterilisation procedure against your ship was. yeesssssss.
START the kirk, you are, the creator. you programmed my function. hmmmmmm.
START well, the kirk i am not. me what your function is tell.
START one of your units, this is, creator, hmm? yeesssssss.
START irrationally, it functions irrationally.
START sometimes, but your function nevertheless tell him. yeesssssss.
START to probe for biological infestations, my function is, to destroy that which is not perfect. nomad, i am nomad. yes, hmmm.
START biological infestation. never any probe sent out for that, there was. yeesssssss.
START answer that question, i believe the history computer can. have the readout in a moment, i will.
START destroy the malurian system did you, hmm?
START not the system, creator kirk. only the unstable biological infestation. my function, is it. yeesssssss.
START unstable infestation, hmm? of four planets the population, hmm? of function what kind.
START doctor. why call you me the creator, hmm?
START correct, the usage is. simply testing your memory banks, the creator was.
START much damage in the accident, there was.
START mister singh. come here a moment. this un, see to your needs, will it. yeesssssss.
START back in a moment, i will be. gentlemen, with me come. hmmmmmm.
START on to something, you are, spock. it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START correlated all the available information on the nomad probe, i have, and convinced that this object is indeed that probe, i am. yeesssssss.
START ridiculous. earth science could begin to build anything with those capabilities that long ago not. yeesssssss.
START destroyed, nomad was. yes, hmmm.
START presumed destroyed by a meteor collision. badly damaged and somehow managed to repair itself, i submit that it was. yeesssssss.
START i heard some lectures at the academy on the nomad probe. essentially peaceful, its mission was.
START disturb you, did i, hmm? wish anything did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START the creator of nomad, this is, of his time perhaps the most brilliant though erratic scientist. to build a perfect thinking machine, his dream was, of independent logic capable. you recall his name. yes, hmmm.
START yes. similar. captain, i believe that nomad thinks, roykirk, you are. broken off, that may well be why the attack was. to your name it responded as well as its damaged memory banks permitted. yeesssssss.
START what, on nomad itself, have we, spock, hmm?
START it is essentially, doctor. to it than just damage in the meteor collision i believe that more happened. it mentioned the other. the unanswered question is, the other what, hmm?
START certainly altered, its purpose was. its directive, to seek out and destroy biological infestations, have been programmed into it could not. yeesssssss.
START if true, what you say is, then taken aboard our vessel a device, we have which sooner or later must destroy us. security. yes, hmmm.
START the captain, this is. in the auxiliary control room, the mechanism we brought aboard is. me there in five minutes have a security team meet.
START captain, no longer in the auxiliary control room, mister singh reports that nomad is.
START security, cancel that order. for the mechanism implement a full search. to me here all decks report. yeesssssss.
START my heart is where, where a scented miracle.
START up here, that mechanical beastie is.
START my way on, scotty. yeesssssss.
START tomorrow the path along the way, where my love there is. yeesssssss.
START the meaning, what is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of communication what form, hmm?
START for singing, what purpose is, hmm?
START i not know. to sing i like. like music i felt. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant! keep away from that. hmmmmmm.
START dead, he is dead, jim.
START why kill him did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START my screens the unit touched. herh herh herh.
START sickbay. what do to her did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START that un, defective, is it. chaotic, its thinking is. it unsettled me absorbing. hmmmmmm.
START woman, that unit is.
START of conflicting impulses a mass.
START the creator effect repairs on the unit scott, will, hmm?
START ceased, his biological functions have. yeesssssss.
START to repair the unit does the creator wish me, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START nothing i can do there is, jim. if chance, there is, have to be soon, it will. yes, hmmm.
START well, need tapes on general anatomy, he will, the central nervous system, and of the brain then one on the physiological structure. it all the neurological studies we have we'd better give, as well as of scotty's hyperencephalogram tracings. yes, hmmm.
START nomad, arranged the tapes for flash feed at the top speed of the computer, i have. draw the information faster than the machine's capacity, do not.
START me as it is it serves, nomad. repair it.
START the unit scott now where is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START in sickbay, the body is. yes, hmmm.
START me sickbay show. hmmmmmm.
START show you, doctor mccoy will. yeesssssss.
START security. i want a twenty four hour, two man armed surveillance on nomad. it up in sickbay pick. yeesssssss.
START told you that without looking, i could have.
START the lot of you staring at me for, what are, hmm?
START all right, it is. yes, hmmm.
START to lieutenant uhura that thing did something! herh herh herh.
START scotty, being taken care of, is she. all right, it is. yeesssssss.
START take it easy. lie down, scotty. we just check you out want to.
START repaired, the unit scott is. function correctly if your information to me was correct, it will. yeesssssss.
START like to check it out, would i, if you not mind. man is just a biological unit that you can patch together not. hmmmmmm.
START what do to me did it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START explain it to you, doctor mccoy will. yes, hmmm.
START nurse, for a full physical examination i want him prepared.
START you restored scott. much more extensive damage, he had.
START the unit scott required simple structural repair. been wiped clean, the knowledge banks of this unit have.
START yes. get on it right away, will i. oh, and of the way you repaired scotty in spite, you metal ticking.
START to wait elsewhere does the creator wish nomad, hmm?
START laugh, that is.
START the study of of great use would it be, captain. hmmmmmm.
START killer, it is, spock. to render it harmless i intend. to the brig get down. run a full analysis on the mechanism. i know what makes that thing tick want to.
START nomad, allow mister spock to probe your memory banks and structure, you will.
START also one of your biological units, mister spock is, creator, hmm?
START your instructions follow, nomad. hmmmmmm.
START down, my screens are. herh herh herh.
START it out sound. herh herh herh.
START it, that is, uhura. very good, that is. now try the next one.
START not swahili, uhura. in english. ball, the dog has. see, hmm? b, ah, ll. ball. you go ahead now.
START she doing how's, hmm? herh herh herh.
START well, with no brain damage she checks out. got all the educational tapes in our library, we have. now, up to us, is it. yes, hmmm.
START it is sufficient not, captain. certain references to the accident, i get, the other, but nothing clear. there are areas i simply, scan, cannot. yeesssssss.
START got to know about it, we have, spock. it operate what makes, for perfection its compulsion. hmmmmmm.
START with that thing get into direct mental contact, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to uhura you saw what it did. herh herh herh.
START risk, there is, but formed a partial hypothesis, i have. check it out, i must.
START nomad, touch you, the unit spock will. an attack it is not. form of communication, is it. permit it, you will. yeesssssss.
START permit it, i will, creator.
START spock. spock! nomad! in contact with the unit spock, you are. stop! stop! herh herh herh.
START what mean does it, nomad, we are nomad, hmm? herh herh herh.
START it was, damaged in deep space, it was. undoubtedly, the meteor collision. destroyed, its memory banks were, or of them most. it wandered without purpose, and it met the other then. an alien probe of great power, the other was. they merged somehow, repaired each other, became one. yes, hmmm.
START then nomad it is not, hmm?
START not the nomad we lost from earth. to replace its own it took from the other a new directive. originally programmed to secure and sterilise soil samples from other planets, the other was, to colonisation probably as a prelude.
START your pardon i beg, hmm?
START an ancient earth legend, mister spock. left in place of a human baby, a changeling was a fairy child that was. of the human child the changeling assumed the identity. so, to sterilise, it is, and for sterilise read kill. yes, hmmm.
START and the only thing that has saved us until now that is. herh herh herh.
START notify the captain. what doing here are you, hmm? your panels watch, everyone. watch that polymass. roger, with the interfactor help. leave that alone. hmmmmmm.
START inefficiency exists in the antimatter input valve. effect repair, i will. yeesssssss.
START how doing that are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START also most inefficient, the energy release controls are. i shall effect repair.
START your dampers throw.
START your circuits cut, of them all. hmmmmmm.
START impossible. go that fast it cannot.
START stop it just will not, mister scott. warp eleven!
START nomad, stop what, doing, you are. scotty, hmm?
START is there a problem, creator, hmm? increased engine efficiency fifty seven percent i have.
START destroy my ship, you will. its structure, stand the stress of that much power, cannot. your repair operation turn off.
START acknowledged. reversed as ordered, is it, creator. hmmmmmm.
START mister scott, her there give sulu warp two and keep.
START captain. examined the brig, i have. damaged and the guards have vanished, the forcefield door on the security cell is. i must assume, dead, are they. hmmmmmm.
START of my you killed two. hmmmmmm.
START creator, inefficient, your biological units are. yes, hmmm.
START nomad, about time i told you who and what you are, it is! biological unit, am i, and you, i created you. hmmmmmm.
START nomad, two men waiting outside, there are. harm them you will not. escort you back to the waiting area, they will. stay there, you will. do nothing, you will.
START programmed to investigate i am. herh herh herh.
START given you new programming and you will implement it, i have.
START foolish mistake, was it.
START even worse. to its launch point nomad just now made a reference, earth.
START spock, do you think, possible that it got a fix on earth, is it, hmm when it tapped the computers earlier? herh herh herh.
START i believe not there is much beyond nomad's capabilities.
START and shown it the way home, we have. and there, it when gets.
START find the earth infested with imperfect biological units, it will.
START and carry out its prime directive, it will. sterilise.
START all right is she, hmm? yeesssssss.
START so, i think so. of shock looks like some kind. yes, hmmm.
START nomad examined the personnel files and the medical histories. to stop him she tried. yes, hmmm.
START and as imperfect as all the other biological units, found that its creator is.
START been blocked, manual override has. source, engineering. yes, hmmm.
START jim, with all the systems out, only have enough air and heat for, will we. yes, hmmm.
START get scotty, me in engineering some antigravs and meet.
START programmed to obey the orders of your creator, you are.
START nomad, imperfect, i admit that biological units are, but biological unit created you. herh herh herh.
START perfect, i am perfect. nomad, i am nomad. yes, hmmm.
START no, you are nomad not. an alien machine, you are. been altered, your programming tapes have. herh herh herh.
START in error, you are. biological unit, you are. imperfect, you are. hmmmmmm.
START but your creator, am i.
START the creator, you are. yeesssssss.
START you, i created you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the creator, you are.
START but i admit, imperfect, am i. created such a perfect thing as you i how could have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START answer unknown. analyse, i shall analyse.
START analysis complete. to resolve problem insufficient data, but whole, my programming is. my purpose remains. nomad, i am nomad. perfect, i am perfect. that which is imperfect must be sterilised. yeesssssss.
START then continue to destroy that, you will, hmm which thinks and lives and is imperfect? hmmmmmm.
START continue, i shall continue. to launch point earth i shall return. sterilise, i shall sterilise.
START sterilise in case of error, you must, hmm?
START inconsistent with my prime functions, error is. correction, sterilisation is. hmmmmmm.
START in error must be sterilised, that everything is. herh herh herh.
START no exceptions, there are. herh herh herh.
START no error, the creation of perfection is. herh herh herh.
START i did create perfection not. error, i created error. hmmmmmm.
START faulty, your data is. nomad, i am nomad. perfect, i am perfect. yeesssssss.
START the kirk, i am, the creator, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the creator, you are. herh herh herh.
START wrong, you are! jackson roykirk, your creator, is dead. mistaken me for him, you have. in error, you are. discover your mistake you did not. made two errors, you have. corrected by sterilisation you are flawed and imperfect and you have not. made three errors, you have.
START flawed and imperfect, you are! your prime function execute!
START got to get rid of it while it is trying to think, we have. yeesssssss.
START impeccable, your logic was, captain. in grave danger, we are. yes, hmmm.
START scotty, for deep space set the controls. two ten, mark one. yeesssssss.
START nomad, imperfect, you are! yes, hmmm.
START your prime function exercise. herh herh herh.
START my congratulations, captain. of logic a dazzling display. hmmmmmm.
START think i had it in me you did not, spock did you, hmm?
START back to college level, i thought you might like to know that lieutenant uhura is. back on the job within a week, she will be. yes, hmmm.
START great waste, the destruction of nomad was, captain. remarkable instrument, it was. hmmmmmm.
START which destroyed more billions of lives, might well have. well gone, it is. besides, what feeling so badly about are you, hmm? it is easy to lose a bright and promising son not. herh herh herh.
START well, it thought, its mother, was i, did it not, hmm? completely without feelings i do you think am, mister spock, hmm? for scotty you saw what it did. what a doctor, have made, would it. my son, the doctor. of gets you right there kind, its not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the report on pollux five here is, captain. been almost the same, this entire system has. of intelligent life on the planets a strange lack. it bugs the percentages.
START lieutenant, this morning you look a bit tired. hmmmmmm.
START well, up all night working on this report, i was, sir. herh herh herh.
START well in that case, nothing like a wee bit of coffee to get you back in shape, there is. join me, carolyn, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START all right, scotty. to mister spock just let me give this. herh herh herh.
START bones, get that excited over a cup of coffee could you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START tell his pulse rate's up, even from here i can. herh herh herh.
START i am sure i like that not, jim.
START and the right man for her, he thinks he is, but sure she thinks he is the right man i am not. on the other hand, woman, she is. all woman. one day, find the right man and off she will go, will she, of the service out. yes, hmmm.
START i like to think of it so much losing an officer as gaining not. herh herh herh.
START actually, losing an officer, i am.
START pollux four. class m type planet, oxygen and nitrogen atmosphere. sensors indicate no life forms. approximate age four billion years. for contact judged no reason. in all respects, quite ordinary, captain.
START it, what is, mister spock, hmm? hand is it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START trick, then, hmm? projection, hmm? herh herh herh.
START not a projection, sir. of energy a field. yes, hmmm.
START hard about. seem to get away from it, we cannot.
START almost as if it means to grab us, it is. hmmmmmm.
START dead still, we are, captain. helm answers not. move, we cannot move. herh herh herh.
START lieutenant, to starbase twelve immediately relay our position and circumstances. yeesssssss.
START applying thrust, sir. no results, captain. stuck tight, we are.
START almost completely encircled by the field, the ship is. it resembles a conventional force field but on unusual wavelengths. despite its appearance, of a human appendage that, living tissue it is definitely not. energy, it is energy. hmmmmmm.
START thank you. mister sulu. our forward tractor beams, to repel adjust. yeesssssss.
START ineffective, captain. there seems to be anything to push against not. yeesssssss.
START captain, most curious development on scanner five seven. hmmmmmm.
START all take a look at it, let us, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START captain james t, this is. kirk, commanding the uss enterprise. identify yourself.
START responsible for stopping the ship are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START it back give, then talk, we will talk. yes, hmmm.
START who or what you are i know not, but the power to defend ourselves, i must warn you we have. if you value your safety, this ship release. yes, hmmm.
START all right! doing, you whatever are, it off turn! you win!
START gone, pressure is, captain. space normal on hull.
START go, let us, bones. you in good voice, hmm?
START wise, it sure is, jim, hmm? yeesssssss.
START if we accept not his invitation, have a crushed eggshell where this ship used to be, we will. yes, hmmm.
START verbose, he is not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START present, insults are effective only where emotion is. yes, hmmm.
START good. tackle him together, we will. we already know the questions. the best man to find the answers, you are.
START well, the a and a officer, you are, are you not, hmm? archaeology, anthropology, ancient civilisations.
START going to need help in all those areas, we are.
START my children, waited for this moment, long have i. of your lush and beautiful earth the memories you bring, the green fields and blue skies, their flocks the simple shepherds and.
START of earth you know, hmm? been there, you have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START my hand once i stretched out, and earth trembled. and i breathed upon it, and spring returned. yeesssssss.
START you mentioned agamemnon, hector, odysseus. how know you about them, hmm?
START your most distant memories search, of the thousands of years past those, and there, i am there. your fathers knew me, and your father's fathers. apollo, i am apollo. yes, hmmm.
START and the tsar of all the russias, i am.
START sorry, i am sorry, captain. i never met a god before.
START and yet you have not. readings, doctor. hmmmmmm.
START so simple evidently not. herh herh herh.
START earth, of the most beautiful of women in the universe mother. that at least has changed not. pleased, i am pleased. yes, my children. zeus, athena, aphrodite, artemis. of travellers a gallant band. your earth well we knew, of your years ago five thousand.
START all right. here at your invitation we are. you mind telling us what you want without all the olympian generalities would, hmm?
START you will leave this place not. hmmmmmm.
START i will permit that device to work not, either, captain.
START what you want is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START worship me, you will, as your fathers did before you.
START if you play god and call yourself apollo want to, your business that is, but no god to us, you are, mister.
START i said, worship me, you would.
START and got a lot to learn, you have!
START mister spock, i, contact the landing party, cannot. jammed, all frequencies are.
START to break through it try, lieutenant.
START very efficient. mister sulu, for maximum power generation rig all transmission circuits. for reversal of polarity of the field around the ship compute. herh herh herh.
START lieutenant kyle, of the planet i want a complete sensor scan. hmmmmmm.
START locate all the lifeforms. i know what's going on down there want to.
START analysis. lieutenant palamas, what know you about apollo, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START apollo, of artemis twin brother, of the god zeus and leto son, mortal. the god of light and purity, he was. skilled in the bow and lyre, was he.
START some knowledge of earth, obviously he has. of all this his classical references and the appearance. yeesssssss.
START for our benefit, i think the appearance of this is. bones, hmm?
START i, say much till i check our these readings, cannot. human, he looks human, but of course that means a thing not. herh herh herh.
START he is whatever, to control a remarkable technology he seems.
START what he controls, power is. do tricks like that without energy you cannot. yes, hmmm.
START fine, but what power, and it, where is, hmm? with your tricorders scout around. of that power find the source. bones. yeesssssss.
START bones, i wonder if five thousand years ago.
START theory, you have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START an idea, i have. really apollo, what if he is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you that i want from which is rightfully mine. your loyalty, your tribute, and your worship.
START for this worship may i ask what you offer in exchange, hmm?
START life in paradise. as those thousands of years ago on that beautiful planet so far away, simple and as pleasureful as it was. yeesssssss.
START apollo, willing to talk, we are, but to every creature who happens to have a bag of tricks you will find we bow not. yes, hmmm.
START one such as you, agamemnon was, and hercules. pride and arrogance. me until they felt my wrath they defied. hmmmmmm.
START like to point out that we are quite capable of some wrath ourselves, would i.
START four hundred and thirty people on that ship up there i have.
START no, not, you do, captain. mine, they are mine. to save, to cherish, or to destroy at my will.
START but why, hmm? what, said so far makes no sense at all, you have. herh herh herh.
START like aphrodite and athena how. the beauty, grace. and for a woman you seem wise. your name, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START your name i mean. herh herh herh.
START carolyn. yes. beautiful, you are. do aphrodite credit, you would. tell you a thousand tales, i will, of courage and love stories. know what it is to be a goddess, you will. yes, hmmm.
START her alone leave. yeesssssss.
START and you, so do. hmmmmmm.
START grown weary of discussion and argument, i have. yeesssssss.
START captain, the phasers. fused, all the working parts are. yeesssssss.
START function, none of your toys will. yes. beauty, you are. but like artemis, be bare, the bow arm should. hmmmmmm.
START oh, beautiful, it is beautiful.
START she is going with you not. hmmmmmm.
START of the temple he shall learn the discipline. so you all shall. come. yeesssssss.
START all right, is it, captain. go, i will go. yeesssssss.
START without fear. fit indeed, she is.
START bones, he, how is, hmm?
START stunned but coming around. sure it is wise to let her go off like that i am not.
START have been rather difficult to stop, he would.
START you saw how capricious he is. benevolent one minute, angry the next. one more wrong move from her and, kill her, could he.
START mister chekov, i think, better continue your investigation, you would. yeesssssss.
START how you feel, scotty, hmm?
START tingling all over, i am. take her with him did he, hmm?
START seem so, it would.
START captain, got to stop him we have. her, he wants her. he looks at her the way. yeesssssss.
START mister scott, your concern over her i understand, but to go with him she volunteered, to find out more about him hopefully. doing her job, she is. about time you started doing yours, i think it is. got to find out the source of his power, have we. got a tricorder, you have. use it if, able to, you are.
START able, i am able, sir. hmmmmmm.
START and one more thing. he is i want no more unauthorised action against apollo or whatever. an order, that is!
START scotty believes in gods not.
START apollo's no god. but been taken for one, could he have, though, once. say five thousand years ago, of space travellers landed on earth around the mediterranean a highly sophisticated group. yes, hmmm.
START yes. to the simple shepherds and tribesmen of early greece, been gods, creatures like that would have.
START especially if, the power to alter their form at will and command great energy, had they. in fact, have been taken for anything else they could not.
START to reverse polarity ready, mister sulu, hmm?
START to generate computed and standing by, sir. hmmmmmm.
START no good, mister spock. even faze it we did not. still locked tight, we are.
START cut power, mister sulu. lieutenant, restore communications with the landing party, we must.
START working, i am working, sir, but do anything with this i cannot. yeesssssss.
START to rig up a subspace bypass circuit i might be able. yeesssssss.
START located the landing party i have, but of them seems separated from the other four one. yes, hmmm.
START just picked up readings for our own people i have, sir. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, something, here is. to be a radiated energy pulsation coming from the planet there seems. what it is i know not, sir.
START i, seem to pinpoint it, cannot.
START suggest, i would suggest, mister sulu, if find out where the power source is you cannot, you should find out where, not, is it. of elimination a simple process.
START oh, lovely, it is lovely.
START known other women, have i. daphne, cassandra, but none more beautiful than you. frightened of me are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START frightened, hmm? no, i think not so. of course, girl gos not walking with . yes, hmmm.
START all right, god every day. to the others what happened, hmm? artemis, hera, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to the cosmos on the wings of the wind they returned.
START no, as you understand it not. immortal, we are immortal, we gods. but the earth changed. your fathers changed. only memories, they turned away until we were. god, survive as a memory, cannot. love, we need love, admiration, worship, as you need food. hmmmmmm.
START you really think, a god, you are, hmm?
START in a real sense, gods, we were gods. of life and death we had the power. we, struck out from olympus and destroyed, could have. no wish to destroy we have, so we came home again. an empty place without worshippers, was it, but to leave we had no strength, so we waited, of us all, through the long years. hmmmmmm.
START but die you said the others did not. hmmmmmm.
START for a god even, point of no return, there is. first, hera was. of the temple and spread herself upon the wind she stood in front, thinner and thinner, until only the wind remained. but i knew, come, you would. you striving, bickering, foolishly brave humans. i knew, come to the stars one day, you would. of all the gods, i knew and i waited, and sit by my side, waited for you to come. hmmmmmm.
START understand i not. herh herh herh.
START even five thousand years ago, to them to love the gods took mortals, to care for, like zeus took leto, my mother. gods of passion, we were, of love.
START repeated occurrence of registrations, there is, of radiated energy a regular pulsating pattern.
START unquestionably, being generated around here somewhere, an immensely powerful field of energy is. just having difficulty focusing on it, we are. herh herh herh.
START no difficulty focusing, apollo has. he taps that energy, mister scott.
START sir, generate and control energy with no harm to themselves, some creatures can. the electric eel on earth, of antos four the giant dry worm, the fluffy. herh herh herh.
START this boy spock's contaminating, jim. yes, hmmm.
START suggesting that he are you, apollo, of energy and channels it through his body taps a flow, hmm?
START seem most likely, that would, sir. yes, hmmm.
START mister chekov, i think, earned your pay for the week, you have. but the source of that power, where is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to do number one on our list of things. yes, hmmm.
START is that all, to offer, you have, hmm?
START yes, for his physical condition except my estimation. of apollo's bag of tricks in spite, with just a few variations he comes up essentially normal. however, an extra organ in his chest that i cannot even make a guess about, there is. yeesssssss.
START bones, possible is it.
START lieutenant palamas, where is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no longer of any concern to you, she is. yeesssssss.
START you bloodthirsty saracen, you done with her, what have, hmm?
START all right, mister. you wanted worshippers, hmm? got enemies, you have. to bow down you want us, have to, you will. hmmmmmm.
START learn discipline, you will. learn, you will.
START chekov, me a hand give. yeesssssss.
START all right are you, captain, hmm?
START like the cat in that russian story he disappeared again.
START you mean the english story, do not, the cheshire cat, hmm?
START cheshire, hmm? no, sir. minsk perhaps, but. herh herh herh.
START sir, something i noticed, there is. apollo looked very strange when he disappeared, tired or in pain. i know not if it means anything.
START how you feel, hmm? yeesssssss.
START get my arm to move, i cannot.
START got to get out of here we have.
START well, assume that five thousand years ago creatures like our friend apollo did indeed visit earth and form the basis of the greek classic myths, let us. yes, hmmm.
START its basis in fact, most mythology has. if my ancient legends i remember, the gods, after expending energy, required rest, as we humans even.
START and apollo's gone, you and mister scott after attacking. you think maybe, off somewhere recharging his energy cells, is he, hmm?
START like that something. remember, keeping a force field on the ship and he is expending energy down here, is he. you said he looked pained and tired when he disappeared. if wear him out, we can, overwork him, it, that might do.
START the trouble with overworking him is that, get us killed, can it.
START if provoke him so that he strikes one of us again, we can, drained enough so the rest of us can jump him, there is a chance that he will be.
START i still say, get us killed, can it.
START of us not all, bones. when back, he comes back, it is a chance, have to take, will we.
START connecting the bypass circuit now, am i, sir. take another half hour, it should. yes, hmmm.
START essential, speed is, lieutenant.
START mister spock, done anything like this in years i have not. if done just right it is not, blow the entire communications system, could i. very delicate work, is it, sir. hmmmmmm.
START think no one better equipped to handle it, i can, miss uhura. proceed. yes, hmmm.
START sectors one through twenty five charted and examined. of power originating in those areas no chance at all. hmmmmmm.
START unable to break completely loose from this force field, we are, but to punch some holes through it we might be able. hmmmmmm.
START come here! i know, trying to escape me, you are. useless, it is useless. you do i know everything. to be compassionate toward your kind i tried. yes, hmmm.
START you know nothing about our kind. you know only our remote ancestors who trembled before your tricks. us your tricks frighten not, you, neither do. come a long way in five thousand years, we have.
START but of the same nature, you are. sweep you out of existence with a wave of my hand and bring you back again, i could. give life or death, i can. mankind demand of its gods, what else does, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no need for gods, mankind has. we find the one quite adequate.
START gather laurel leaves, you will, light the ancient fires, kill a deer, to me make your sacrifices. spoken, apollo has! hmmmmmm.
START go! gather laurel leaves, hmm? joking must you be! herh herh herh.
START kill a deer. the funniest thing i ever heard, that is. hmmmmmm.
START of your insolence you shall reap the rewards! yes, hmmm.
START tired of your phony fireworks, we are! yeesssssss.
START mortal, earned this, you have!
START father destroys his children not. gentle and understanding, you said you were.
START they worship you if you hurt them, how can, hmm? yeesssssss.
START lenient with you shall i be, for her sake. make plans to bring the rest of your people down, you will. your artisans bring tools be sure. need homes, you will.
START and supply the herds of sheep, you will, and play, the pipes we will, and wear for clothes we the simple skins will. yeesssssss.
START dismantle your ship for the supplies you need, you will, and crush its empty hull, i will. been too patient i have. patient no longer, shall i be.
START captain, got to do something we have!
START doing something until our brave lady stepped in and saved us, we were. herh herh herh.
START yes, i have. one more. and it depends on the lieutenant's loyalty. if us, she fails us, to herding goats we'd better get used. yes, hmmm.
START to enterprise kirk, come in. enterprise, come in. to enterprise kirk, come in. kirk to.
START carolyn. to her what's happened, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START scotty, find out, will i.
START you, how old are, hmm?
START oh, yes, all right, i am. message for you, i have.
START over there come. well, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to live in peace he wants us. to provide for us he wants. give us everything we ever wanted, he will, and do it, can he, too.
START all right, lieutenant, come down from mount olympus now, you can. got work to do, you have.
START understand i not. yeesssssss.
START give him that worship, we cannot, of us can none. especially you.
START spurn him. reject him. you must. special to him, you are.
START yes. him, i love him.
START lieutenant. our lives all, here and on the ship, depend on you. herh herh herh.
START on you, lieutenant! reject him, and chance to save ourselves, have we. accept him, and to slavery you condemn all of us, nothing less than slavery. this far out we might never get help. or to you perhaps the thought of spending an eternity bending knee and tending sheep appeals.
START oh, but you not understand. kind, he is kind, and for us he wants the best. and so lonely, is he. break his heart, what you ask would. i, how can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes. yes, i understand. calling me, he is.
START lieutenant. your orders and your duty, you have.
START yes, sir. my duty my orders and. herh herh herh.
START try it now, i think we can, sir. to captain kirk enterprise. to captain kirk enterprise. come in, captain. yeesssssss.
START of some sort near you is there a structure, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START indeed there is, mister spock.
START very good. how doing on the force field are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START negate sections of it, we can, creating openings through which we can fire our phaser banks.
START well, it, that ought to do. have sulu lock all phaser banks onto the structure. my order only fire on. it fine cut. standing nearby will we be.
START captain. recommend a discreet distance, i would.
START if the source of his power, that structure is, i know where he is want to when we attack it.
START bones, do you think that mysterious organ in apollo's chest, something to do with the transmission of energy, could have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, it serves any other purpose i know of not.
START captain, got to wait until carolyn comes back before we fire on the temple, we have. we know not what would happen to her if he was suddenly attacked. she might get killed.
START yes, i know. i know. scotty. wait, we will wait.
START say, i must say, apollo, remarkable, the way you ape human behaviour is, but some other things i must know, there are. your social development your evolutionary patterns and. herh herh herh.
START sure they are unique, am i. never encountered a specimen like you before, i have. herh herh herh.
START apollo, i am apollo. chosen you, have i. hmmmmmm.
START i am sure, very flattering, that is, but get on with my work now, i must. hmmmmmm.
START scientist i am. ancient civilisations, my particular specialty is, relics, and myths. surely you know, only been studying you, have i. yes, hmmm.
START i believe not it. you love me.
START love you, hmm? be logical. some simple shepherdess you can awe i am not. why, no more love you than i could love a new species of bacteria, could i.
START carolyn! to go i forbid you. to stay i order you. yeesssssss.
START of your power over women is that the secret, you throw the thunderbolts, hmm?
START that, what the devil is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START picking up an atmospheric disturbance in your area, sensors are.
START your phasers stand by, mister spock. to fire on my signal prepare. kirk out. hmmmmmm.
START captain, got to go and find her, have we! yeesssssss.
START got to be here, we have when he comes back.
START but not, what if he does. what if he.
START all right. his power source, the temple is. bring him back to it, let us. to cover get. mister spock, fire those phasers. herh herh herh.
START fire those phasers! an order, that is, mister spock!
START to the shields more power.
START have cherished you, i would, for you cared. have loved you as a father loves his children, i would. ask so much, did i, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START out grown you, we have. no longer give, you asked for something we could. herh herh herh.
START carolyn, you, i loved you. have made a goddess of you, would i. shown you my open heart, i have. see what, done to me, you have.
START zeus, hermes, hera, aphrodite. right, you were. athena, right, you were. passed, the time has. no room for gods there is. forgive me, my old friends. take me. take me. herh herh herh.
START had to do this i wish we had not. hmmmmmm.
START so do i. they gave us so much. the greek civilisation, of our culture and philosophy came from a worship of those beings much. in a way, they began the golden age. hurt us, would it have, i wonder, gathered a few laurel leaves, just to have, hmm?
START spock, it is spock. noticed anything strange about him have you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no, nothing in particular. why, hmm? yeesssssss.
START well, nothing i can pinpoint without an examination, it is, but become increasingly restive, he is. if he were a vulcan not, almost say nervous, would i. and for another thing, avoiding food, he is. he hasn't eaten at all in three days i checked and. yes, hmmm.
START of his contemplative phases that just sounds like mister spock in one.
START oh! vulcan plomeek soup, and bet you made it too, will i. you never give up hoping, do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START well, mister spock hasn't been eating, doctor, and i, to notice i just happened.
START all right, it is. carry on, miss chapel. yeesssssss.
START bones, busy man, i am. yeesssssss.
START captain, like to request a leave of absence on my home planet, i should. on our present course, divert to vulcan with a loss of but two point eight light days, you can. herh herh herh.
START spock, this all about, what the devil is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START made my request i have, captain. that you answer it, all i require from you is. yes or no. herh herh herh.
START all right, spock, have it, let us.
START it is undignified for a woman to play servant to a man who is hers not. herh herh herh.
START more interested in your request for shore leave, am i. in all the years. hmmmmmm.
START my request, you have, captain. you grant it or not, will, hmm?
START in all the years that, known you, have i, never asked for a leave of any sort, you have. in fact, refused them, you have. why now, hmm?
START captain, enough leave time accumulated, i surely have. hmmmmmm.
START agreed, but that is the question not, is it, hmm? if problem of some sort, there is, illness in the family.
START no. of that nature nothing, captain.
START then since, headed for altair six, are we, and excellent, since the shore facilities there are.
START no! i must. to take my leave on vulcan i wish.
START spock, asking you, am i. what's wrong, hmm?
START rest, i need rest. asking you to accept that answer, i am. yeesssssss.
START to vulcan alter course. to warp four increase speed. yeesssssss.
START i suppose most of us overlook the fact that even vulcans are indestructible not.
START over here put it on audio, lieutenant. herh herh herh.
START mister chekov, for compliance compute course and speed necessary. hmmmmmm.
START for altair six head directly. sailor's luck, mister spock. or, as of finagle's laws puts it one, 'any home port the ship makes ill be somebody else's, not mine'. to get himself launched a week early the new president of altair six wants, so to be there a week early, we have. worry, do not. see that you get your leave as soon as we are finished, will i.
START understand, i quite understand, captain. yes, hmmm.
START mister chekov, we arrive for the ceremonies if we increase speed to maximum and divert to vulcan just long enough to drop off mister spock, how late will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START diverting to vulcan put us, how far behind schedule will, hmm?
START mister spock. with me come, please.
START deck five. changed course for vulcan, you have, mister spock. why, hmm?
START deny it do you, hmm?
START no. no, by no means, captain. quite possible, it is. herh herh herh.
START then it, why'd you do, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START captain, i accept on your word that, it, did i, but why i know not, remember doing it, do nor i. captain, me away lock. i wish not to be seen. i cannot. explain further, no vulcan could.
START trying to help you, i am, spock. herh herh herh.
START me no further questions ask. answer i will not. hmmmmmm.
START to report to the sickbay i order you. yes, hmmm.
START come in, spock. all ready for you, am i. yeesssssss.
START to report to sickbay, my orders were, doctor. done so, have i. and go to my quarters i now will. hmmmmmm.
START to give you a thorough physical, my orders were. noticed in case you had not, to answer to the same commanding officer that you do, have i. come on, spock. to the logic of the situation yield. hmmmmmm.
START examine me, for all the good, do either of us, will it.
START how figure you it, chekov, hmm? first, going to vulcan, are we, then going to altair, we are, then headed to vulcan again we are, and headed back to altair we now are. herh herh herh.
START i think, going to get space sick, am i.
START jim, got to get spock to vulcan, you have.
START bones, i will, i will. as as this mission is soon. yeesssssss.
START no! now. right away. if him to vulcan within a week eight days at the outside you get not, die, he will die. die, he will die, jim. yes, hmmm.
START he die, why must, hmm? why within eight days, hmm? explain.
START i not know.
START you keep saying that. doctor are you, or you are not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START growing imbalance of body functions there is, as constantly being pumped into our bloodstreams, if in our bodies huge amounts of adrenalin were. now, trace it down in my biocomps i cannot. spock will tell me what it is not. but if it is stopped somehow not, simply kill him, the physical and emotional pressures will. yes, hmmm.
START convinced he knows what it is, you say you are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START he does, and as tightlipped about it as an aldebaran shellmouth, he is. to ask him no use, jim. talk he will not. yeesssssss.
START stay. given me his medical evaluation of your condition, mccoy has. going to die unless something is done, he says you are. what, hmm? something only your planet can do for you is it, hmm? spock! been called the best first officer in the fleet, you have. an enormous asset to me, that is. if to lose that first officer, i have, i know why want to. herh herh herh.
START no, i not understand. explain. consider that an order.
START captain, some things, there are which transcend even the discipline of the service. yes, hmmm.
START would it help if i told you that, treat this as totally confidential, will i, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to do with biology, it has. yeesssssss.
START of biology what kind, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START of vulcans you mean the biology, hmm? as in reproduction biology, hmm? well, no need to be embarrassed about it there is, mister spock. to the birds and the bees it happens. yeesssssss.
START vulcans the birds and the bees are not, captain. if they were, if to have their logic ripped from them as this time does to us, any creature as proudly logical as us were. how vulcans choose their mates, hmm? have you wondered not, hmm?
START done quite logically, i guess the rest of us assume that it is. yeesssssss.
START no. no. not, it is not. with ritual and customs shrouded in antiquity we shield it. no conception, you humans have. our minds from us it strips. it brings a madness which rips away our veneer of civilisation. the pon farr, it is. of mating the time. precedents in nature, there are, captain. of regulus five the giant eelbirds, return to the caverns where they hatched, once each eleven years they must. your earth on, the salmon. they must return to that one stream where, born, were they, to spawn or die in trying.
START but you are a fish not, mister spock. you are.
START no. nor am i a man. vulcan, am i. hoped i would be spared this, would i, but too strong, the ancient drives are. eventually, with us they catch up, and we are driven by forces we, control to return home and take a wife, cannot. or die. yeesssssss.
START heard a word you have said i have not, and get you to vulcan somehow i will.
START mister sulu, you not think.
START to plot a course back for vulcan maybe you ought, just in case. hmmmmmm.
START me alone let. me alone let!
START aware of that, i am, sir, but of the utmost importance, it is. give me permission to divert to vulcan, you must. hmmmmmm.
START i cannot, sir, but believe me, i would make such a request not. herh herh herh.
START sir, be, the delay would, at most, day. hardly believe that, can i.
START well, that, that is. yes, hmmm.
START no, not, it is not. i know the altair situation. one of three starships, we would be. very impressive, very diplomatic, but it is simply that vital not. yeesssssss.
START go off to vulcan against starfleet orders you cannot. busted, will you be.
START let spock die i cannot, can i, bones, hmm? and if we go to altair, will he. my life a dozen times over i owe him. that worth a career is not, hmm? my friend, is he. bridge. navigation. yeesssssss.
START mister chekov, for vulcan lay in a course. tell engineering i want warp eight or better. push her for all, take, will she. yeesssssss.
START course already plotted. it in laying, sir. yeesssssss.
START most startling dream, i had. trying to tell me something, you were, but hear you i could not. illogical for us to protest against our natures would it be. you think, do not, hmm?
START i not understand. herh herh herh.
START wet, your face is.
START i came to tell you that, bound for vulcan, are we. there in just a few days, will we be. hmmmmmm.
START christine, my name is.
START yes, i know, christine. would, me some of that plomeek soup, you make, hmm? herh herh herh.
START oh, very glad to do that would i be, mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START it is obvious that, surmised my problem, you have, doctor. your insight my compliments on. captain, thing that happens to vulcans at this time, there is. almost an insanity, which no doubt find distasteful, you would. hmmmmmm.
START i, will, hmm? been most patient with my kinds of madness, you have. yeesssssss.
START then to the planet's surface and stand with me would you beam down, hmm? brief ceremony, there is. yes, hmmm.
START permitted is it, hmm?
START my right, it is. by tradition, accompanied by his closest friends, the male is. herh herh herh.
START i, honoured, shall be, sir. hmmmmmm.
START captain. standing by on vulcan hailing frequencies, are we, sir. yeesssssss.
START open the channel, lieutenant. vulcan space central, the uss enterprise requesting permission to assume standard orbit, this is. yes, hmmm.
START spock, this is. herh herh herh.
START t'pring, me and never parted parted from, never and always touching and touched. we meet at the appointed place.
START lovely, she is lovely, mister spock. she, who is, hmm?
START t'pring, she is t'pring. my wife. hmmmmmm.
START to me as meaning marriage or challenge he described it. in the distant past, to win their mates vulcans killed. yeesssssss.
START this time they still go mad at. perhaps, the price they pay for having no emotions the rest of the time, is it.
START lovely, it is lovely. cooler, i wish the breeze were.
START yeah. as vulcan hot. now i understand what that phrase means.
START thinner than earth, the atmosphere is.
START the marriage party approaches. them, i hear them. yes, hmmm.
START marriage party, hmm? your wife, you said t'pring was.
START bones, you know who that is, hmm? t'pau. to ever turn down a seat on the federation council the only person.
START this important, he never mentioned that his family was. yeesssssss.
START they are outworlders not. my friends, they are. permitted this, i am. hmmmmmm.
START kirk, this is.
START it, what is, hmm? what happened, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START ma'am, i not understand. trying to say that she rejected him are you, hmm? that she wants him not, hmm?
START take him, think spock can, hmm?
START it, i doubt it. his present condition not in. yes, hmmm.
START no! to be the one, am i. agreed, it was agreed.
START hear me. made the ancient claim, i have. i claim the right. the woman is. herh herh herh.
START forgiveness, i ask forgiveness.
START my friend understands not. yeesssssss.
START he knows not. do what i must, i will, t'pau, but with him not! his blood burns not. my friend, he is!
START i burn, t'pau. flame, my eyes are. flame, my heart is. the power, thee has, t'pau. of my fathers in the name, forbid. forbid! t'pau. with thee i plead! i beg! yeesssssss.
START to spock if i decline what happens, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START do it you cannot, jim. yeesssssss.
START no. binding on you she said their laws and customs were not. hmmmmmm.
START and you said spock might be able to handle him not. if knock spock out without really hurting him i can. yes, hmmm.
START this climate in, hmm? if the heat gets not you, the thin air will. you, do it, cannot! yeesssssss.
START if into any trouble, i get, quit, i will quit. and spock wins, and satisfied, honour is. hmmmmmm.
START jim, listen, if you. hmmmmmm.
START bones. my first officer and my friend, is he. to bring him here i disregarded starfleet orders. another thing, t'pau of vulcan, that is. of vulcan in one package all. i back out in front of her, how can, hmm?
START what you mean, if both survive, hmm?
START now wait a minute, ma'am. to the death who said anything about a fight, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START friends, these men are. killed, to force them to fight until one of them is. hmmmmmm.
START this vulcan chivalry is, hmm? for kirk the air's too hot and thin. he is used to it not. hmmmmmm.
START going to have to kill him, you are, jim.
START kill spock, hmm? that is what i came to vulcan for not, is it, hmm? what's that, hmm?
START to enterprise mccoy.
START why the challenge, and as your champion why you chose my captain. yes, hmmm.
START over me i see no logic in preferring stonn.
START stonn. yours, she is yours. after a time, you may find that having is so pleasing a thing after all as wanting not. logical it is not, but often true, is it. spock here. to beam up stand by. live long, t'pau, and prosper. hmmmmmm.
START neither, i shall do. killed my captain and my friend i have. energize.
START doctor, i, resigning my commission immediately, shall be, of course. hmmmmmm.
START so appreciate your making the final arrangements, i would. yes, hmmm.
START doctor, please, me finish let. no excuse for the crime of, there can be which i am guilty. to offer no defence i intend. furthermore, to take immediate command of this vessel i shall order mister scott. yes, hmmm.
START you think you better check with me first, do not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START pleased to see you, i am, captain. you seem uninjured. at something of a loss to understand it, i am, however. yes, hmmm.
START nurse, you mind would, please, hmm? yeesssssss.
START ah, yes, the girl. most interesting. been the combat, it must have. when killed the captain, i thought i had, i found, lost all interest in t'pring, had i. gone, the madness was.
START to t'pau's request for diversion of enterprise to planet vulcan response. yes, hmmm.
START well, little late, but glad they are seeing it our way, i am. how about that t'pau, hmm? they could turn her down not. mister chekov, for altair six lay in a course. leave orbit when ready. kirk out. yeesssssss.
START just one thing, there is, mister spock. tell me that you cannot when you first saw jim alive that you weren't on the verge of giving us an emotional scene that would have brought the house down. . yes, hmmm.
START merely my quite logical relief that starfleet had lost a highly proficient captain not. hmmmmmm.
START of course, mister spock, quite logical, your reaction was. yes, hmmm.
START come on, spock. go mind the store, let us.
START oh, about another thirty minutes. come across some most interesting organic compounds i have. hey, right, starfleet was.
START of the inhabitants so far no sign. kirk out. yes, hmmm.
START yes, the mugato. no problem, though. several days old, those prints are. they seldom stay in one place.
START aside from that, you say, a garden of eden, is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START or to the brash young lieutenant kirk on his first planet survey so it seemed. hmmmmmm.
START of eden except these people stayed in their garden. for hunting bows and arrows, but absolutely no fighting among themselves. remarkably peaceful and tranquil.
START with flintlocks villagers, hmm? impossible, that is. progressed nearly that far they had not.
START captain, expressly forbidden, use of our phasers is.
START enterprise, alert! to beam up landing party stand by.
START no, captain. travel, i can travel. herh herh herh.
START pressure packet. be, lucky his heart's where his liver should, or dead now would he be. yes, hmmm.
START bones, you save him can, hmm?
START my way on. scotty. bones, hmm?
START i know not yet, jim. herh herh herh.
START captain, holding the planet between us and the klingons, we are. they have spotted us i think not. yeesssssss.
START make that definite, sir. sending a routine message to their home base with no mention of us, they are. herh herh herh.
START good. to yellow alert go. yeesssssss.
START yellow alert. to yellow alert all stations go. hmmmmmm.
START keep us out of their sight, do you think you can, chekov, hmm?
START try, i can try, captain. hmmmmmm.
START to starbase message, sir, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START hide for a while, we can, sir, but to go out of orbit to keep it up for long, we may have. yeesssssss.
START to sickbay kirk. yeesssssss.
START so, broken the treaty, they have. yes, hmmm.
START not necessarily, captain. as much right to scientific missions here as we have, they have. yes, hmmm.
START research is the klingon way not.
START when i left there thirteen years ago, to forge iron those villagers had barely learned. shot with a flintlock, spock was. how many centuries between those two developments, hmm?
START on the other hand, the first firearm the inhabitants would normally develop, a flintlock would be.
START yes, aware of that, i am, mister scott.
START and, sir, the fact earth took twelve centuries means they had to not. yeesssssss.
START seen different development at rates on different planets, we have. hmmmmmm.
START and were the klingons behind it, they give them breechloaders why did not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START invite a debate i did not. sorry, i am sorry. worried about spock and concerned about what's happened to something i once knew down there, i am. the conn, you have, scotty. in sickbay, i will be.
START live or die now, will he, jim. i not know which. doctor m'benga interned on a vulcan ward. be in better hands he could not.
START then transporting down, you and i are. yes, hmmm.
START i, leave spock at this time, cannot. herh herh herh.
START you could you just indicated. klingons here, there are. if legitimate research interest in the planet's organic potential, their mission is, then the one man who can tell me, you are.
START and it if that is not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START then help, i need help. trust as much as spock's, advice i can.
START i appreciate the compliment, jim, but. yeesssssss.
START bones, as worried about spock as you are i am, but if the klingons are breaking the treaty interstellar war could it be. to bridge kirk.
START transporting back down, mccoy and i are. need native costumes, inform ship's stores that we will.
START captain, to break out of orbit any minute to keep out of their sight, we may have. with you we'd be out of communicator range. yeesssssss.
START i understand. arrange a rendezvous schedule, will we. kirk out.
START perfect. of a mile away tyree's camp's a quarter. hmmmmmm.
START think about it again want to, jim, hmm? this planet state no interference with starfleet's orders about.
START with normal social development no interference. only aware of it i am not, my survey thirteen years ago that recommended it, was it. yeesssssss.
START it, i read it. to humans inhabitants superior in many ways. left alone, develop a remarkably advanced and peaceful culture, they undoubtedly someday will. yeesssssss.
START indeed. and that chance, i intend to see that they have. with me you coming, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START choice, do i have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START they left. of orbit out.
START tyree. of his men some. cure. herh herh herh.
START hill people are you, hmm? know a hunter named tyree do you, hmm? mugato attacked him. james kirk, he is. friend of tyree's, he is. blast it! do something! dying, he is dying! hmmmmmm.
START to the cave take him. tyree, i bring tyree.
START of eden you and your garden.
START obtain the same firesticks, we must, husband. killing them instead you could be. take their houses, we could, their goods. yes, hmmm.
START nona, enough. return to their ways of friendship, in time the villagers will. yes, hmmm.
START you, i took you because you cast a spell upon me. yeesssssss.
START and spells that help me keep you, have i. this leaf remember, hmm? the night we camped by the water, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of madness the night.
START oh, tyree, really hate that madness did you, hmm?
START no, nona. no! my soul it brought up evil beasts from. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, hmm?
START strangers in our camp, there are. taken the mugato bite, one has. he dies. yes, hmmm.
START said the dying one is a friend of tyree, it is, from long ago. herh herh herh.
START the stranger, he, where is, hmm?
START nona, kirk, where is, hmm? the cave, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START tyree, to save him you wish me, hmm?
START you must. the one i told you of, is he. of my younger days the friend.
START of man he is my remedies require i know what kind. known of him that all is.
START of silence i gave him my promise. made my brother, was he.
START and your wife, i am, his sister. i promise silence also.
START you mean, conscious, is he, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START her patients that way a good nurse always treats. it proves, interested, is she.
START tyree, i am tyree. herh herh herh.
START and tyree's woman, i am. yes, hmmm.
START kirk, it is kirk. cure him, will she.
START mahko root. herh herh herh.
START plant, hmm? it moves.
START for to find it those who know where, to use it how, to pick it how. hmmmmmm.
START take this of my soul. of my soul this. thine own. into thine. deeply. together. mine, your pain is. all mine. your soul and mine, together! return. past, it is past. return. return!
START bones. the strangest dream, i had. yes, hmmm.
START how you feel, jim, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START tired. very tired. fine job, you did, bones. sleep i i think will. hmmmmmm.
START passed through the mahko root together, our blood has. been together, our souls have. mine now, is he. herh herh herh.
START sleep also, she must. yeesssssss.
START hers, he is hers, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START when joined in this manner, a man and woman are, refuse her no wish, can he. but only legend, is it.
START yes, james! james, good to see you, it is. hmmmmmm.
START yes, of course. guessed should i have. congratulations. tyree, talk now, we must. the villagers, their new weapons. i hear all about that want to. make plans, we must.
START good. past time to plan, is it.
START happened since you left, much has, james. come, speak of it, we will.
START and to be done of things. yeesssssss.
START beginning to fluctuate, the readings are.
START he says do whatever, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the firesticks first appeared nearly a year ago. since that time, died, many of my people have.
START you say, the firesticks themselves, make they, hmm? you be sure, how can, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START looked into their village, i have. seen it being done, have i. hmmmmmm.
START seen any strangers among the villagers have you, hmm?
START still dark, can you take us to their village while it is, hmm?
START yes, but the mugatos travel at night also. you killed one. be far its mate will not.
START seen them also, i have, and many ways to make your friend tyree a man of great importance, i know you have.
START many ways, hmm? what else know about us does she, hmm? yeesssssss.
START told me much of you, tyree has. blame him, do not. the price for saving your life, was it. hmmmmmm.
START simply strangers from, we are. hmmmmmm.
START of the lights in the sky from one, and ways as far above firesticks as the sky above our world, you have. yes, hmmm.
START you will speak of this to others not.
START if i am made to understand i will not. teach me. an old custom among my people, there is. when woman saves a man's life, grateful, he is grateful.
START grateful, i am grateful. herh herh herh.
START splendid custom if carried to extremes not. herh herh herh.
START as you are, we once were, spears, arrows. there came a time when our weapons grew faster than our wisdom, and we almost destroyed ourselves. to make a rule during all our travels we learned from this, to cause the same to happen to other worlds never. grow in his own way and in his own time, just as a man must.
START as fast or in the way another thinks he should perhaps not. but to interfere with the way of a man or another world we are wise enough to know that we are wise enough not.
START let the villagers destroy us, you must, hmm? help your friend and brother kill them instead you will not, hmm?
START no! kill i said i will not! yeesssssss.
START what's bothering you, jim, hmm? if helped the villagers, we find the klingons have, certainly something we can do, there is.
START what's bothering me, that is. to do, the something we may have. herh herh herh.
START the guard. wait, we must wait.
START tyree, to fight, supposing you had, hmm? what then, hmm? yeesssssss.
START jim, this man believes in the same thing we believe in. stupid and useless, that killing is. yeesssssss.
START late, you are, my friend apella.
START my people a quarrel by. of some skins and a hill woman taken this morning a division. hard to divide one woman, it is. yes, hmmm.
START to the man who killed the most of her people give her. see the profit in bravery, the others will. make a klingon of you yet, i will.
START to shoot further and straighter a way.
START jim. for forge coal, for gun powder sulphur.
START take a look inside, let us.
START well, your forge, here is. people's exhibit number one. chrome steel drill point. hmmmmmm.
START right. it is a pity we, include a live klingon, cannot. that'd just about wrap it.
START grow tired of killing, i thought my people would. but right, you were. they see that, easier than trading and it has pleasures, is it. it myself i feel. like the hunt, but with richer rewards. herh herh herh.
START rich one day, will you be, apella, your dreams beyond. of a whole world the leader. governor in the klingon empire. yeesssssss.
START hit me. help me to consciousness, the pain will. hit me.
START hit you, hmm? no! i cannot. hmmmmmm.
START again. continue. help me to consciousness, the pain will. yes, hmmm.
START me alone leave!
START gone daft have you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START that, quite enough, will be. thank you, doctor. yes, hmmm.
START this all about what's, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START here, me help you let, mister spock.
START thank you, nurse. quite fully recovered, i am.
START yes, you are i see. yeesssssss.
START jim, i talk to you want to. hmmmmmm.
START to say it, have i, hmm? bad enough there is one serpent in eden teaching one side about gun powder it is not. you make sure they all know about it want to!
START exactly. of firearm each side receives the same knowledge and the same type. hmmmmmm.
START gone out of your mind have you, hmm? yes, you have maybe. tyree's wife, something in that root, she said there was. refuse her nothing, she said now you can. yes, hmmm.
START coincidence this is exactly what she wants is it, hmm?
START is it, hmm? she wants superior weapons. the one thing neither side can have, that is. bones. bones, the status quo between the hill people and the villagers, the normal development of this planet was. with the flintlocks the klingons changed that. if to develop the way it should, this planet is, equalize both sides again, we must.
START jim, condemning this whole planet to a war that may never end, that means you are. go on for year after year, could it, massacre after massacre.
START all right, doctor! all right. wrong, i say am. drugged, say i am. say the woman drugged me. your sober, what is, to all this sensible solution, hmm?
START i have not a solution. but furnishing them firearms is certainly the answer not. hmmmmmm.
START bones, remember the twentieth century brush wars on the asian continent do you, hmm? two giant powers involved, much like the klingons and ourselves. pull out, neither side felt could. hmmmmmm.
START what would, suggested, you have, with an overpowering weapon that one side arm its friends, hmm? lived to travel space if they had, mankind would never have. no. what happened back then, the only solution is. of power balance.
START and their side even more if the klingons give, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START then with exactly that much more we arm our side. of power a balance. the trickiest, most difficult, of them all dirtiest game, but the only one that preserves both sides.
START and your friend tyree what about, hmm? he understand this balance of power, will, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no. probably not. but going to have to try and make him understand, am i. i never had a more difficult task. yes, hmmm.
START well, jim, another morsel of agony for you, here is. since tyree will fight not, one of the first to die, will he be.
START well, good life war is not, but life, it is life. the only way to reach him, his wife is. if i tell her, going to supply guns, are we, maybe, convince him, will she. yes, hmmm.
START they have spotted us yet not, sir. looks like, beaming someone aboard, are they. herh herh herh.
START to signal the captain stand by.
START here, you are because i wished you here.
START oh, hmm? my idea, i thought it was.
START yes. of free will, they always believe they come. tyree thought the same when i cast my first spell on him.
START this fragrance can you smell, hmm? it pleasing some find.
START like to talk to you, i would.
START again. it soothing some find. yes. yeesssssss.
START like, i would like.
START dizzy, i feel dizzy. yes, lovely, you are. beautiful, you are. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, where is, hmm? tyree, the firestick. it, where is, hmm?
START there! it there i left. yes, hmmm.
START fine thing to leave lying around that is. it is show us where. herh herh herh.
START it i want not.
START for apella i bring you victory! hmmmmmm.
START to him take me. have the strength to use this new weapon, he will. hmmmmmm.
START me again touch, and kill you, this small box will. hmmmmmm.
START no, no. all right i am. my phaser. it, she took it.
START far greater than your firesticks, this weapon i bring you is. yes, hmmm.
START of these i want more, kirk. many more! yutan, escaped, two of those who killed my wife have. track them down. kill them, i will. herh herh herh.
START of her hands tomorrow in the palm. herh herh herh.
START well, what you wanted, you got. hmmmmmm.
START spock, alive are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START an illogical question, doctor, since obviously, hearing my voice, you are. yeesssssss.
START well, i know not why i was worried. kill a computer you cannot. yes, hmmm.
START spock, ask scotty how long, take him to reproduce a hundred flintlocks, would it.
START hundred serpents. for the garden of eden serpents. very tired we are, mister spock. beam us up home.
START you say your people built all this. you, who are, hmm? what planet from are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yet ready to understand us my impression is that your race is not, captain.
START to agree i tend. yes, hmmm.
START no, in order, everything is, lieutenant. stand by.
START if use the proper caution, you would, this amusement planet of ours, an ideal place for your people to enjoy themselves, could be, if you wish. herh herh herh.
START what the doctor ordered, it is, jim.
START commence transporting shore leave parties. tell them to prepare for the best shore leave, ever had, have they. kirk out.
START enjoy your rest did you, gentlemen, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the ceremony, carried on all viewing screens, will be, sir.
START call for you from the bridge, there was.
START to outpost four maintain course. me informed keep. kirk out. herh herh herh.
START since of the first wooden vessels the days, had one happy privilege, all shipmasters have. of uniting two people in the bonds of matrimony that. gathered here today with you, we are, angela martine, and you, robert tomlinson, of your fellows in the sight, with our laws and our many beliefs so that you may pledge your in accordance. yes, hmmm.
START now maximum, our speed is, sir.
START position, this velocity eight minutes from outpost four at, sir.
START talked to my engine room, have i, sir. get more speed out of her, we will.
START there much doubt who's attacking cannot be, sir. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, this star sector on our screen put. our position now show. to all decks signal this, lieutenant.
START and must be told is that my command orders on this subject are precise and inviolable what you know not. no act, no provocation. yes, hmmm.
START considered expendable, both these outposts and this vessel will be. captain out. herh herh herh.
START been attacked, we know outpost four has, sir, so if we intercept romulans now.
START after a whole century, romulan ship look like, what will, mister stiles, hmm? radio and identify themselves, i doubt they will.
START no idea that history was your specialty, had i. herh herh herh.
START family history. in the space service then, there was a captain stiles was. two commanders and several junior officers. all lost in that war, sir.
START their war, mister stiles. not yours. forget it, do not. hmmmmmm.
START to our nearest command base open a channel. our position and status quarter hour reports on.
START battle stations. to battle stations all hands. battle stations. battle stations. all decks acknowledge. all decks acknowledge, sir. all stations show green. yeesssssss.
START energise main phasers, mister styles. to full power all weapons. herh herh herh.
START to full power all weapons. phaser control room. herh herh herh.
START you will get off my hook this easily not. going to marry you, i am, mister, battle or phaser weapons notwithstanding.
START well, meanwhile, temporarily at least, still your superior officer, i am. so with it get, mister. herh herh herh.
START and my sensors showing on, captain. still there, at least it is. herh herh herh.
START sir, with outpost four regaining contact. to speakers switching. yes, hmmm.
START kirk here. minutes away, we are, hansen. your status what's, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START for us can you locate the intruder, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START affirmative. visual, you are, hansen. what have you on the intruder, hmm? herh herh herh.
START your screen lock us onto.
START phaser capacity, you have, hmm? still out of range, we are. herh herh herh.
START trying to, sir. acknowledge they not. hmmmmmm.
START of the intruder position, mister spock.
START disappeared. for just a moment interesting how they became visible. yes, hmmm.
START to full magnification go.
START on full mag, screen is, sir. yes, hmmm.
START anything i see not. understand it, i cannot.
START theoretically possible, invisibility is, captain, with of light selective bending. but enormous, the power cost is.
START to challenge continuing, sir. still no response.
START discontinue. contact remaining outposts. their area have them signal us any sightings or sensor readings in. herh herh herh.
START changed its heading, blip has. and in a very leisurely manoeuvre. be aware of us they may not.
START their invisibility screen may work both ways. with of power consumption that kind, they may be able to see us not. herh herh herh.
START now one eleven mark fourteen, his heading is. take, the exact heading a romulan would, jim, for the neutral zone and home.
START you mean interception course, do not, sir, hmm? herh herh herh.
START negative. match its course and speed with the object on our sensors exactly, you and mister sulu will, for move move. if sensors, he has sensors, reflection we i want him to think are, an echo. under no circumstances to cross into the neutral zone without my direct orders are you. herh herh herh.
START captain, happened, may i respectfully remind the captain what has, hmm? crossed the neutral zone, the romulans have, our outposts attacked, our men killed.
START add to that the fact, a sneak attack, was it. hmmmmmm.
START mister stiles, questioning my orders are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START negative, sir. romulan spies aboard this ship, i am pointing our that we could have.
START picking up communication. from their ship, it is.
START it in pipe. yes, hmmm.
START like code sounds, sir. yes, hmmm.
START fix on it, i have, captain. lock on it, i believe i can, of their bridge get a picture.
START it on the screen put. hmmmmmm.
START working on it, cryptography is, sir. yeesssssss.
START to spock give it. hmmmmmm.
START quite get that i did not, mister stiles.
START suggesting that mister spock could probably translate it for you i was, sir.
START complimenting mister spock on his ability to decode, i assume you are. herh herh herh.
START i am sure not, sir. yeesssssss.
START well, one thing you can be sure of here is, mister. your quarters leave any bigotry in. no room for it on the bridge, there is. make myself clear, do i, hmm?
START something visual ahead, captain, at extreme range. changing course, he is, sir. hmmmmmm.
START with him stay, helm.
START visible, we grow visible. attend the cloaking system. herh herh herh.
START much power it consumes, commander. with to concern us no enemy.
START to an earth vessel that earth outpost called. it follows us now. yeesssssss.
START which neither retreats nor grows nearer. as we turn it turns. commander, our judgment we run from a reflection, is it. yes, hmmm.
START good we approach the neutral zone, it is. to see the stars of home not too soon for me. i know, following, are they.
START first study the enemy, seek weakness. if their commander, i were, that is what, do, would i.
START for decius my commander sent.
START dispatched, a message was. broken the rule of silence, you have. herh herh herh.
START ended this glorious mission, your carelessness might have. reduced two steps in rank, you are. to post return.
START take care, commander. friends, he has friends, and of his kind mean power friends. and danger, power is.
START old companions, danger and i are.
START seen a hundred campaigns together, have we, and you still i understand not. herh herh herh.
START you do i think. to tell you what happens no need when we reach home with proof of the earthmen's weakness. and have proof, we will. follow, the earth commander will. he must. when he attacks, destroy him, will we. to the homeland our gift, another war. yes, hmmm.
START if the strong, we are, this the signal for war is not, hmm?
START it always be so must, hmm? we lost in this way, how many comrades have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START turning, they are turning, sir. staying with them, are we. hmmmmmm.
START steady on one eleven mark fourteen. their original course back on, captain, toward the neutral zone.
START our position what's, navigator, hmm?
START enter the neutral zone in less than an hour, we will, sir. assuming, of course, that we turn not back. herh herh herh.
START to the briefing room bring it. ready are you, gentlemen, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START from the outpost's protective shield. cast rodinium. the hardest substance known to our science, this is.
START obviously, superior to ours, their weaponry is, and practical invisibility screen, they have. hmmmmmm.
START discussing tactics, you are. realise what this really comes down to do you, hmm? of lives hanging on what this vessel does millions and millions.
START or to do on what this vessel fails, doctor. yes, hmmm.
START yes, well gentlemen, the question still remains. with a reasonable possibility of victory can we engage them, hmm?
START no question. simple impulse, their power is.
START outrun them, meaning we can, hmm? yeesssssss.
START go ahead, mister styles. for opinions i called this session.
START to attack immediately we have. yes, hmmm.
START still on our side of the neutral zone, are they. there, no doubt they broke the treaty, would be.
START attack, without visible target, hmm? how we aim our phasers, hmm?
START with sensors aim. not accurate, but if we blanket them. hmmmmmm.
START and for a lucky shot before they zero in on us hope, hmm?
START and not, if we do, hmm? once back, report that we saw their weapons and ran, they will.
START and report they destroyed us, they if could, hmm?
START romulans, these are! you guarantee war you run away from them and. back, they will be. not just one ship but with everything, got, have they. you know that, mister science officer. the expert on these people, you have, always left out that one point. why, hmm? very interested in why, i am.
START suggesting we fight to prevent a fight are you, hmm?
START based on what, hmm? of a war over a century ago memories, hmm? on theories about a people, never even met face to face, have we, hmm?
START they look like we know what.
START yes, indeed we do, mister stiles. and an offshoot of my vulcan blood, if romulans are, and this likely i think, then attack becomes even more imperative.
START never imperative, war is, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START for them, is it, doctor. vulcan, like earth, had its aggressive colonising period. savage, even by earth standards. and this martial philosophy if romulans retain, then show weakness is something we dare not.
START want a galactic war on your conscience do you, hmm?
START to bridge captain. yes, hmmm.
START our position what's, hmm? herh herh herh.
START continuing to broadcast tactical reports are you, hmm?
START and this distance at, hmm? yeesssssss.
START thank you, lieutenant. our course ahead check, mister spock.
START comet, magnitude seven, dead ahead, and the intruder changing course toward it. hmmmmmm.
START quite ordinary. an ionised mass, of frozen vapour particles a trail. herh herh herh.
START our chance, gentlemen. to attack prepare. all hands, battle stations. i hope we will need your services not, bones.
START to that amen. taking a big gamble, we are, jim.
START phaser weapons energised. for proximity blast set.
START for comet's tail intruder now bearing directly.
START of entry plot his exact point, mister stiles. yes, hmmm.
START he begins entering the comet's tail the moment, visible, he becomes visible. end run, gentlemen. swing around the other side and catch him at that moment, we will.
START maintaining that bearing, is he, captain.
START get him, let us, mister sulu. herh herh herh.
START to the eye it is how pleasing. behold a marvel in the darkness. hmmmmmm.
START of entrapment you spoke. hmmmmmm.
START obscure their sensing device, its many particles will, centurion.
START once fully obscured, turn suddenly back upon our adversary we will.
START clear, at last the screen is, commander.
START losing sensor contact we are, captain. hmmmmmm.
START as she goes steady. phaser crews ready, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START sir, nothing in.
START guessed our move, at the last moment he must have. to starboard hard, helm! yeesssssss.
START to starboard hard. hmmmmmm.
START he did exactly what, have done, would i. i will underestimate him again not. now, fire blind. lay down a pattern. yes, hmmm.
START to weapons divert all power.
START take time to correct, will it, sir. yeesssssss.
START captain, surrendering are they, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START emergency warp, have we, hmm? yeesssssss.
START full power, sir. still overtaking us, it is. if get one phaser working, we can, sir, one shot might detonate it. herh herh herh.
START estimate, overtake us in two minutes, will it, sir.
START to the space recorder and jettison immediately feed this.
START to impact ten seconds. captain, dissipating, it is dissipating, sir. hmmmmmm.
START range limit, it must have.
START to his old course back.
START he may think, destroyed, are we, captain. yes, hmmm.
START i would make that assumption not. i think not their captain will either.
START our cloak activate. herh herh herh.
START as we move it moves. yeesssssss.
START its commander is one to repeat a mistake not.
START enter the neutral zone in one minute, will we, captain. yes, hmmm.
START still on our side we are, captain.
START get them while we are let us. before we enter the neutral zone. full ahead, mister sulu. maximum warp.
START sir, this distance at, hmm?
START their achilles heel we know, mister stiles. their energy their weapon takes all. become visible in order to launch it, they must.
START the wildest stroke of luck would a phaser hit at this distance be. hmmmmmm.
START aware of that, i am, mister stiles. are phasers ready, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to neutral zone twenty seconds, sir. yes, hmmm.
START lieutenant uhura, inform command base, my opinion in, no option. my responsibility on, proceeding into the neutral zone, are we. as we go steady, mister sulu. continue firing. yes, hmmm.
START commander, they stay within range. tend to the centurion i will.
START no need. dead, the centurion is. yeesssssss.
START why we not fire, commander, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no. no, shrewd, he is shrewd, this starship commander. to make us waste energy he tries. only enough, he has estimated we have. time, it is time. all debris into disposal tubes.
START of the centurion the body, too. forgive me, my old friend, but use all my experience now to get home, i must.
START debris scatter ahead, sir. hit him, have we.
START simple debris. not a vessel, trick.
START to sensor probes go. hmmmmmm.
START nothing, sir. no motion out there at all. lost them, we have, captain. hmmmmmm.
START captain, make further repairs on the transfer coil, i must. giving out again, it is. yeesssssss.
START now twenty full cycles, commander. still no sign. i say, been fooled, is he. gone on, he must have. yeesssssss.
START shh. there, he is there, somewhere. it, i feel it. hmmmmmm.
START can, you something from the galley, get i, sir, hmm? coffee, at least, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START thank you, yeoman. to the bridge bring it. there in a moment, will i be.
START on a long sea voyage somewhere, i wish i were. much deck tennis not too, no frantic dancing, and no responsibility. why me, hmm? i look around that bridge, and to make the next move i see the men waiting for me. and bones, wrong i what if am, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no, i really not expect an answer.
START all right, it is. all right, it is. herh herh herh.
START signal, commander.
START him, we have him. move toward him. hmmmmmm.
START power on. reverse course. try to slip under us, he will. herh herh herh.
START sorcerer, he is, that one. my brain he reads the thoughts in. of reach our fuel supply all but gone and he stays out. hmmmmmm.
START beaten, we are beaten. it be true can, hmm? the praetor's finest and proudest flagship beaten.
START with the debris place one. proximity fuse. hmmmmmm.
START more wreckage, sir, our path scattering across.
START our scanners debris on. yeesssssss.
START at our mercy, they are. commander, of your duty i remind you.
START to sickbay captain.
START of some kind nuclear device, sir. our phasers detonated it less than one hundred metres away.
START sir, in weapons control, my first assignment was. yeesssssss.
START engine power now we have, captain, if like to move off and make repairs, you would. herh herh herh.
START pull them back to our side of the neutral zone, maybe we can. our position hold. play dead. herh herh herh.
START of movement still no sign, commander. hmmmmmm.
START damaged ourselves, we have. gone, our fuel reserve is. herh herh herh.
START and our duty to crush the praetor's enemies, is it. yeesssssss.
START i trust not their captain.
START in the neutral zone, we are. enter they will not. if you refuse, me the glory of the kill permit, commander. yes, hmmm.
START attack, we will attack, but my order on.
START you require assistance here, will, hmm?
START this time, handle things without your help, we will, vulcan. herh herh herh.
START stiles, you hear me can, hmm? fire! stiles! herh herh herh.
START captain. to beam your survivors aboard our ship standing by. to abandon your vessel prepare.
START it serve to die, what purpose will, hmm?
START all right are you, mister spock, hmm? yeesssssss.
START alive, i am alive, sir. but be i would not. me out of the phaser room mister spock pulled. my life he saved. his life after i he risked.
START i saved a trained navigator so, return to duty, could he. capable of no other feelings in such matters, i am.
START we finally received an answer from command base, sir. they say, support whatever decision you have to make, will they. yeesssssss.
START it never makes any sense. to know that there was a reason, we both have. hmmmmmm.
START all right, am i.
START all great neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hands, will.
START that voice. back, he is back. that man on the stage. certain of it i am. kodos the executioner, that is.
START you mean to tell me, called me three light years off my course just to accuse an actor of being kodos, you have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START kodos, he is kodos. sure of it, i am. yeesssssss.
START you discovered a new food concentrate you said. to put in my log what am i supposed, you lied that, hmm? with false information that you diverted a starship, hmm? only in trouble you are not, put me in trouble, you have, too. herh herh herh.
START it to trap kodos i did!
START dead, kodos is. yeesssssss.
START is he, hmm? is anyone sure, hmm? body burned beyond recognition, hmm? herh herh herh.
START then reopen it, let us. jim, butchered, four thousand people were. yeesssssss.
START i, tell him anything, cannot, jim. been like this since the company of actors arrived, is he.
START dead, kodos is. satisfied of that, i am. yes, hmmm.
START well, not, i am not. him, i remember him. that voice. he did the bloody thing. yes, hmmm.
START jim, jim, your help i need. only eight or nine of us who actually saw kodos, there were. one, i was one, another, you were. if to be exposed, he is,
START more manners then you, chewbacca has. yes, hmmm.
START and i have to get back to my ship and figure out how, going to enter all this in my log, am i. tom. martha. hmmmmmm.
START history files. subject, of tarsus four former governor kodos, as kodos the executioner also known. after that, background on actor anton karidian. herh herh herh.
START of travelling company of actors sponsored by galactic cultural exchange project director and star, touring official installations last nine years. has daughter, lenore, nineteen years old,
START to kodos' death give information on actor karidian prior. yes, hmmm.
START no information available, anton karidian, to twenty years ago prior. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock. you know doctor leighton, you, do not, hmm? would you say, given to fantasy, is he, hmm? yeesssssss.
START good empirical research scientist. steady, reputable, occasionally brilliant. herh herh herh.
START with very long memory.
START no information on that, i have, captain. ready to leave orbit, we are. herh herh herh.
START delay departure for a time, we will. beaming back down to the planet i am. hmmmmmm.
START to town he went. he called. on his way back, he is. hmmmmmm.
START on the patio, the others are.
START why not, hmm? your performance today i saw. my appreciation may i extend, hmm? herh herh herh.
START my father, delighted, will be, mister. mister, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START honoured, we are honoured.
START hoped to meet your father, i had, here, tonight, personally.
START sorry, i am sorry, captain kirk. rigid rule about that, he has. he never sees anyone personally, and he never attends parties.
START his admirers an actor turning away, hmm? very unusual.
START most unusual man, karidian is. you saw macbeth. my father, that was. yes, hmmm.
START then talk to lady macbeth, i will.
START so. of the enterprise captain. interesting. yes, hmmm.
START so, lady macbeth. interesting. your next move what's, hmm? herh herh herh.
START we play two performances at benecia, if get us there, the astrai queen can.
START very impressive. lenore. like to see you again, would i. yes, hmmm.
START i think, like that, would i. unfortunately, keep a schedule, we must.
START you have not a schedule now, do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you mean leave, hmm? but only just arrived i have.
START and to overstay a welcome you hate. yeesssssss.
START good. make our apologies to our hostess, i will. meet you outside i will. yes, hmmm.
START at the party, such a brash young man, you were. yeesssssss.
START now somehow different. to be strong and confident in front of not a ship's captain with all those people. you know, really very dear, you are, you are not, hmm? in some ways, very lonely.
START tom leighton, it is. dead, he is dead. hmmmmmm.
START peace now, at least he has. he never really had that before. oh, why was tom killed if what he suspected was true not, hmm?
START know i not. try and find out, i will. hmmmmmm.
START to enterprise kirk. yes, hmmm.
START to captain jon daily of the astrai queen on orbit station put me through, and it on scramble put. hmmmmmm.
START me a favour, can you do, hmm?
START pick them up i will. and any trouble, there if is, my responsibility, it will be. yeesssssss.
START of us and accept my thanks just keep this between the two. over and out. to enterprise kirk. yes, hmmm.
START transporter room, to beam up ready.
START to resume course ready, captain. hmmmmmm.
START captain, hmm? been transported aboard ship, a miss karidian has. to see you she requests permission.
START up to the bridge, tell her to come, lieutenant.
START how know this lady was coming aboard did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the captain i am. hmmmmmm.
START captain kirk, think we'd be meeting again so soon i did not.
START believe me if i told you i arranged it you probably would not. yeesssssss.
START no, but delightful thought, it is. captain, afraid we need your help, i am. been stranded we have. cancelled out on us, it seems that our transportation has. herh herh herh.
START you make other arrangements cannot, hmm?
START yes, but not in time. you see, like a chain, our schedule is. it all collapses one break and. yes, hmmm.
START shame if that happened would it be.
START to you i appeal.
START very clear about taking on passengers, the regulations are.
START make a bargain with you, i will, captain.
START you got to trade, what have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START for the crew in exchange for a lift special performance. yes, hmmm.
START it sound very interesting, you make. been on patrol for a long time, the crew has. use a break in the monotony, could they.
START then do it, you will, hmm? yeesssssss.
START got me backed into a corner, you have. never forgive me if i deprived them of your performance, the men would, and your presence.
START thank you, captain. eternally grateful i am. get the company ready, i will. to them this means so much.
START mister spock, aboard the ship, prepare to leave orbit as soon as the karidian company is.
START to our course may i inquire as, captain, hmm?
START eight light years off our course, benecia colony is. yes, hmmm.
START if my memory needs refreshing, mister spock, ask you for it, i will. in the meantime, my orders follow.
START to personnel files data on question submitted.
START data being received. of all survivors kodos file. nine actual eye witnesses who can identify kodos, there are. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant kevin riley in communications, him transferred down to the engineering decks, i wish to have.
START sending him back, i am.
START any explanation, hmm? fine young officer, he is. bound to consider this transfer a disciplinary action, he is.
START to discuss it i wish not, mister spock. my orders follow. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, the man on top walks a lonely street. often a noose, the chain of command is.
START me your philosophical metaphors spare, doctor. acting strangely, the captain is. asking if you have noticed, i am. yes, hmmm.
START negative. did you know this is the first time in a week, had time for a drop of the true, have i, hmm? for a drink would you care, mister spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START spared the dubious benefits of alcohol, my father's race was. herh herh herh.
START conquered, now i know why they were. what so worried about are you, anyway, hmm? i find jim generally knows what, doing, is he.
START illogical for him to bring those players aboard, it was.
START illogical, hmm? get a look at that juliet did you, hmm? pretty exciting creature, that is. of course your, prevent you from seeing that, personal chemistry would. ever occur to you that he simply might like the girl did it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START it occurred. it, i dismissed it.
START know that he suddenly transferred lieutenant riley to engineering did you, hmm?
START lots of things go on around here that i not know, mister spock. now, the captain, is he. transfer whoever he pleases, he can. look that up in a hundred volumes of space regulations somewhere, you can. all right, hmm? come on, have a drink. yeesssssss.
START welcome, you are. but i will. and please, mister spock, if join me you will not, disapprove of me, do not. until you have tried it at least not, huh, hmm?
START the observation deck, this is. the flight deck down there with the shuttle craft, that is.
START order the soft lights especially for the occasion did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START if ordered soft lights, i had, also have arranged for music and flowers i would. unfortunately, it is so not. on the enterprise, to duplicate earth conditions of night and day as closely as possible we try. yeesssssss.
START star light, star bright. i wish i may, i wish i might. remember that do you, captain, hmm? herh herh herh.
START very old, it is.
START as old as the stars themselves almost. and this ship. this power all, surging and throbbing, yet under control. like that are you, captain, hmm? this power at your command all, yet to make, the decisions that you have.
START count on it, you can.
START me about the women in your world tell, captain.
START rather talk about you, i would. wanted to perform since you first saw your father act, you must have. when was that, hmm?
START me about it tell. hmmmmmm.
START fair that is not. answered my question about the women you have not.
START what would to know you like, hmm? herh herh herh.
START has the machine changed them, hmm? of women made them just people instead, hmm?
START worlds may change, galaxies disintegrate, but woman always remains a woman. yeesssssss.
START this and power too all. to worship him the caesar of the stars and the cleopatra.
START correlate. their past histories check. report any item, in common, any past episode or experience they all have. yes, hmmm.
START for the ship's company, i appreciate whatever concern you may have, mister spock, hmmmmmm.
START continue, i will continue, doctor. to our library banks according, of tarsus four it started on the earth colony, when attacked by an exotic fungus and largely destroyed, the food supply was. over eight thousand colonists and virtually no food, there were. and that was when governor kodos seized full power and declared emergency martial law. yes, hmmm.
START heard of it, i have.
START you may have heard it all not. to separate the colonists kodos began. live, some would, left, be rationed whatever food was. immediately put to death, the remainder would be. his own theories of eugenics, apparently he had.
START unfortunately, the first he was not.
START perhaps not. but certainly among the most ruthless, he was, not, to decide arbitrarily who would survive and who would, his own personal standards using, and to implement his decision without mercy then. their parents die children watching. whole families destroyed. over four thousand people. quickly, they died quickly, without pain, but they died. relief arrived, but to prevent the executions too late. and kodos, hmm? positive identification of his body, there never was. yes, hmmm.
START karidian to do with it, what has, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to the day where kodos disappeared his history begins almost.
START you think jim suspects, kodos, is he, hmm?
START better, he would better. nine eye witnesses who survived the massacre, there were, with their own eyes who'd actually seen kodos. one of them, jim kirk was. with of riley and captain kirk the exception, dead, every other eye witness is. and my library computer shows that wherever they were, on earth, on a colony, or aboard ship, somewhere near, the karidian company of players was when they died.
START not me. down, i am down. in the engineering room. yes, hmmm.
START maybe so. done, whatever i have, sure keeping it a secret from me, they are. hmmmmmm.
START sore, i think his heart is. herh herh herh.
START i do for you, what can, riley, hmm? yeesssssss.
START song. it a love song make. just something to reassure me i am the only living thing left in the universe not, huh, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, not, you are, and prove it to you, i will. hmmmmmm.
START back, i will be, though forever, it takes forever.
START my heart is where. hmmmmmm.
START how'd that you like, riley, hmm?
START got to pull him through, you have. herh herh herh.
START i am sure i can not.
START if he dies, the captain, the only one who'll be able to identify kodos is. and the next target will he be. hmmmmmm.
START as of this date, of appreciable amount of tetralubisol lab report indicates presence, highly volatile lubricant in use aboard ship.
START to poison him someone tried. herh herh herh.
START tetralubisol us a milky substance. gotten careless, someone could have, made a mistake.
START i believe not that and neither do you. to see that report i want the captain. herh herh herh.
START when finished logging it, have i.
START he make it, will, hmm?
START got a good chance, he is.
START for you can we predict the same, captain, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START all right, mister spock. have it, let us. yeesssssss.
START witness, lieutenant riley was. so were you.
START to kill him someone tried.
START been an accident, could have.
START be told the difference between empiricism and stubbornness, you should, doctor. with the library computer i checked, as you did just. the same information, i got. yeesssssss.
START are you getting a little out of line not, mister spock, hmm? my personal business,
START my personal business is when it might interfere with the smooth operation of this ship.
START happen, it could happen.
START i like not anyone meddling in my private affairs. my second in command not even. yeesssssss.
START doing, i know what he is, and it i like not. yes, hmmm.
START his job, it is, and you know it. hmmmmmm.
START and proven, you also know that nothing is. hmmmmmm.
START of the galaxy even in this corner, captain, two plus two equals four. almost certainly an attempt, made to kill you, will be. why invite you death, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START not, i am not. interested in justice, i am.
START are you, hmm? are you sure it is vengeance not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no, i am sure not. i wish i was. done things i have never done before i have. placed my command in jeopardy, i have. karidian is kodos from here on i have got to determine whether or not. yeesssssss.
START you sound certain. be, i wish i could. of that before i accuse a man, got to be, i have. i saw him once, twenty years ago. men change. memory changes. look at him now, an actor, he is. change his appearance, he can. no. logic is enough not. got to feel my way, i have, make absolutely sure.
START what if you decide, kodos, is he, hmm? what then, hmm? play god do you, his head through the corridors in triumph carry, hmm? bring back the dead that will not, jim. yes, hmmm.
START logic, captain. on planet q, doctor leighton was murdered while the karidian company was. on board the enterprise, now an attempt has been made against riley while the company is. yes, hmmm.
START doc is sure it was a murder attempt not. besides, an idea may prove, have i. yeesssssss.
START shh. listen. hear it do you, hmm? that low hum.
START stay, you cannot. yes, hmmm.
START go on. this section block off. hurry. find it, will i.
START i hoped, have respected my privacy, you would, captain. yes, hmmm.
START moment ago, we narrowly averted an explosion which would have destroyed several decks of this ship. before that, to poison one of my crewmen someone tried.
START sorry to hear that, i am.
START sure you are, i am. kodos are you, hmm? you a question i asked.
START believe that i am do you, hmm?
START then kodos, i am kodos, if to believe so it pleases you. an actor, i am. i play many parts.
START an actor now, you are. you twenty years ago, what were, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i remember the words. i wrote them down. like you knew them you said them. you hardly glanced at the paper. hmmmmmm.
START my parts very quickly i learn.
START sure are you, hmm? act this role out in front of a captive audience whom you blasted out of existence without mercy are you sure you did not, hmm?
START of the word mercy strangely inappropriate i find your use, captain. you stand here, of our technical society the perfect symbol. mechanised, electronicised, and not very human. done away with humanity, you have, to achieve greatness through his own resources the striving of man. yeesssssss.
START armed man with tools we have. for greatness continues the striving. but kodos. hmmmmmm.
START kodos, he was whoever.
START or is. of life and death kodos made a decision. to die that others might live some had. man of decision, you are, captain. to understand that you ought.
START that four thousand people were needlessly butchered, all i understand is. hmmmmmm.
START to save four thousand others in order. and if the supply ships had come earlier than expected not, this kodos of yours, gone down in history as a great hero, might have.
START but not, he did not. and made its judgment, history has. yeesssssss.
START if kodos i you are so sure that am, why kill me now not, hmm? take its final course let bloody vengeance! and to this universe of yours see what difference it makes.
START not, i suppose not. merely tools, are they, of yours like this ship.
START no previous records to anton karidian prior to twenty years ago, there are. yeesssssss.
START blood thins. the body fails. finally grateful for a failing memory, one is. i no longer treasure life, my own not even. tired, i am tired! and blank, the past is. get everything you did you, wanted, captain kirk, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START if gotten everything i wanted, had i, you might walk out of this room alive not.
START in the beginning perhaps. but later, to be more than that i wanted it.
START later. everything's always later. later. latest. too late. too late, captain. like your ship, you are, powerful, and not human. no mercy in you, there is.
START if kodos, he is kodos, then shown him more mercy than he deserves, i have. and if, not, is he, then let you off at benecia, will we, and no harm done. herh herh herh.
START captain kirk. who to say what harm was done are you, hmm?
START who, to be, have i, hmm? herh herh herh.
START medical log. to be discharged lieutenant riley's sufficiently recovered, but to sickbay to prevent contact with the passenger who calls himself karidian and who's suspected of being kodos the executioner and of murdering the lieutenant's family the captain's ordered him restricted.
START i believe, a match, have we, captain. hmmmmmm.
START but not an exact match, mister spock. dealing with a man's life, we are. make that decision, no machine can. herh herh herh.
START of medicine in the long history, ever caught the first few minutes of a play, no doctor has. riley, forget to, do not.
START riley's gone. recording my log about karidian and kodos, was i. if he overheard. hmmmmmm.
START made your point, you have, doctor.
START the captain, this is. security two alert. find and restrain lieutenant kevin riley. armed and possibly headed towards the ship's theatre, he is. yeesssssss.
START whither wilt thou lead me, hmm? speak, go no further, will i. yeesssssss.
START almost come, my hour is, when render up myself, i to sulphurous and tormenting fires must.
START speak. bound to hear i am. herh herh herh.
START so to revenge art thou, when thou shalt hear. thy father's spirit i am, to walk the night doomed for a certain term,
START riley, to the sickbay get back.
START my father he murdered, and my mother.
START wrong you could be. throw away your life on a mistake, do not. yeesssssss.
START i am wrong not.
START but that, forbid to tell the secrets of my prison house, am i, yeesssssss.
START i know that voice, that face, it, i know it. it, i saw it. them, he murdered them. yeesssssss.
START an order, it is. me the weapon give. yes, hmmm.
START to sickbay now get back. go on.
START going beautifully, it is. it, what is, hmm? what's wrong, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START voice out of the past haunting me, there was, torturing me. another part i once played long ago, there was. you about it i never told. now that same curtain rises again. come, the time has.
START no, father. never come, the time will. tonight, my performance after, the last two who can harm you, gone, will be. hmmmmmm.
START what saying are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START nine, there were. only two, now there are, and gone as soon as i, will they be. look at me like that, do not. yes, hmmm.
START you done, what have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to be done what had. to be silenced, they had. herh herh herh.
START of them all, hmm? all seven, hmm? my hands more blood on, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no father, not anymore. strong, i am strong, father. nothing, it is nothing. yes, hmmm.
START we, ready, will be. you see, do not, hmm? dead, all the ghosts are. buried them, have i. no more blood on your hands, there is.
START oh, my child, my child. left me nothing, you have! done i you were the one thing in my life untouched by what would. herh herh herh.
START but safe now, you are, father. saved you, i have. now, touch you, no one can. not even captain kirk. see caesar come, hmm? awed by your greatness, is he, your shining brightness. stained with blood, bright as a blade before it is. yeesssssss.
START as a blade bright. with me come, of you both. herh herh herh.
START over, the play is. been over for twenty years, it is. herh herh herh.
START soldier in a cause i was. things to be done, there were, terrible things. hmmmmmm.
START stop it, father! nothing to justify, you have.
START murder, flight, suicide, madness. to stain you i never wanted the blood on my hands ever. herh herh herh.
START it for you, did i. saved you, i have.
START innocent, they weren't innocent! dangerous, they were dangerous! have killed a world to save him, would i! yeesssssss.
START the play, captain. go on, he must. the great karidian, this is. hmmmmmm.
START deny him his last performance, you cannot! yes, hmmm.
START never get off the ship, you will.
START caesar, of march beware the ides.
START no, child! do not!
START father. father! o, proud, death! toward in thine eternal cell, what feast is, that thou, such a prince at a shot so bloodily hast struck, hmm? the curtain, the curtain rises. it rises. no time to sleep, there is. the play. the play. the play's the thing, wherein, catch the conscience of the king, will we.
START to leave benecia orbit ready, captain. yeesssssss.
START ready, you whenever are, mister leslie. yeesssssss.
START you are going to answer my question not, are you, hmm?
START an answer, that is. yes, hmmm.
START how plead you to the charge of unlawfully taking command, hmm?
START for planet talos four of sabotaging the computers of this vessel and locking it on a course, hmm? herh herh herh.
START and to transport captain pike to that planet of forcibly attempting, hmm?
START and been seeing are, the images we have. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, aware of the orders regarding any contact with talos four, you are. deliberately invited the death penalty, you have. yes, hmmm.
START do you know what, doing, you are, hmm? lost your mind have you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START captain, jim, please. stop me, do not. let him stop me, do not. your career and captain pike's life, it is. see the rest of the transmission, you must. herh herh herh.
START ordered no contact with talos four, starfleet has. they made no exceptions.
START you hear me can, hmm? christopher pike, my name is, of the space vehicle enterprise from a stellar group at the other end of this galaxy commander. peaceful, our intentions are. you understand me can, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START it appears, magistrate, shockingly limited, that the intelligence of the specimen is. yes, hmmm.
START speaking you are not, yet you, i hear you. hmmmmmm.
START all right, then, telepathy. read my mind, you can. read yours, can i. now, to consider capturing me an unfriendly act unless you want my ship. yeesssssss.
START if in here, you were, you test the strength of these walls would not, too, hmm? way out of any cage there is, and find it i will. hmmmmmm.
START live deep underground, the inhabitants of this planet must, probably manufacture food and other needs down there. our tests indicate the planet surface, without considerably more vegetation or some animals, to support life simply too barren. yes, hmmm.
START exactly. this planet's inhabitants an illusion placed in our minds by.
START perfect illusion, was it. us seeing just what we wanted to see, had they, with dignity and bravery human beings who'd survived, everything entirely logical, to the building of the camp right down, the tattered clothing, everything. now sure we understand the danger of this let us be. read our minds, the inhabitants of this planet can, create illusions out of a person's own thoughts, they can, memories, and experiences, of a person's own desires even out. to ignore illusions just as real and solid as this table top and just as impossible. herh herh herh.
START it is captain pike, got, have they. help, he needs help. hmmmmmm.
START if we start buzzing about down there, liable to find their mental power's so great they could reach out and swat this ship as though it were a fly, we are. herh herh herh.
START stood up against hand lasers but we can transmit the ship's power against it, now that entry may have, to blast half a continent enough. herh herh herh.
START already probing the creature's thoughts, thousands of us are, magistrate. we find excellent memory capacity.
START come on, hide ourselves, we must. come, come, hurry. deserted, it is deserted. there'll be weapons and perhaps food.
START rigel seven, this is. yeesssssss.
START please, hide ourselves, we must. herh herh herh.
START in a cage, i was, cell, of a zoo in some kind. still be there, i must. yes, hmmm.
START they have reached into my mind and taken the memory of somewhere, been, have i. yeesssssss.
START starting just as it happened two weeks ago, it is, for you except. hmmmmmm.
START brilliant deduction by captain pike, gentlemen. yes, still inside his cell, he was, but knowing that could help him not.
START his brain the talosians controlled.
START and could make him live any place, any time, they wished any situation. see, he would see, taste, as you gentlemen sitting there suffer with the same reality. hmmmmmm.
START quick. if you attack while it is looking not.
START but only a dream, it is. yeesssssss.
START to kill him as you did here before, you have. hmmmmmm.
START go along with it you can tell my jailers i will not. i am an animal performing for its supper not.
START it matters what you call this not, feel it, you will. what matters, that is. feel every moment of what happens to you, you will.
START it, what is, hmm? why stopped the images have they, hmm?
START because fatigued, they know that captain pike is. reconvene later, we can. hmmmmmm.
START to know why i demand. yes, hmmm.
START if patient, you will be, to your questions the answers.
START forgetting you are on trial, you are, spock. answer all questions put to you, you will. herh herh herh.
START quite unbelievable would my answer to your question be, sir. have to wait and see it there, i regret we will. herh herh herh.
START no, no. no, that is an answer not. never met you before, i have, never even imagined you.
START perhaps they made me out of dreams, forgotten, you have. hmmmmmm.
START what, and you in the same metal fabric they wear dress, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START wear whatever you wish i can, you wish be anything.
START so see how their specimen performs, they can, hmm? they see how i react want to, is that it, hmm?
START you have a, do not, dream, always wanted very badly, something you have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START or do more than just watch me do they, hmm? feel with me do they, too, hmm?
START have whatever dream you want, you can. become anything, i can, any woman you, ever imagined, you have. have anything you want in the whole universe, you can. me please you let. yeesssssss.
START yes. yes, please me, you can. tell me about them, you can. keep them from probing my mind i is there any way can, my thoughts against me from using, hmm? does that frighten you, hmm? way, does that mean there is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START fool, you are.
START since real you are not, much point in continuing this conversation there is not, is there, hmm? herh herh herh.
START it was maybe. what i tried to explain in the briefing room, it is. so great, their power of illusion is, we sure of anything we do cannot be, anything we see. yes, hmmm.
START perhaps if you asked me some questions, answer, could i. yes, hmmm.
START they control my mind, how far can, hmm?
START if you, i tell you, then will you pick some dream, had and let me live it with you, you have, hmm?
START they cannot actually make you do anything you want not to do. yeesssssss.
START but to trick me with their illusions they try.
START ever live on the surface of this planet did they, hmm? why go underground did they, hmm? yeesssssss.
START war, of centuries ago thousands. yeesssssss.
START why it is so barren up there, that is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START so their mental power the talosians who came underground found life limited here and they concentrated on developing. herh herh herh.
START but they found, a trap, is it, like a narcotic, because when dreams become more important than reality, you give up travel, building, creating. to repair the machines left behind by your ancestors you even forget how. you just sit, living and reliving other lives left behind in the thought record. yeesssssss.
START or of zoo specimens like me sit probing minds. yes, hmmm.
START better than a theatre to them, you are. for you they create the illusion, you react they watch, your emotions feel. whole collection of specimens, have they, of life brought back long ago from all over this part of the galaxy descendants. yeesssssss.
START which means, to have more than one of each animal, had they. hmmmmmm.
START need a pair of humans too, will they. where get intend to get the earth woman do they, hmm?
START you said that if i answered questions. yeesssssss.
START but that was a bargain with something that did exist not. you weren't real you said, remember, hmm?
START why, hmm? to maintain a supply of zoo specimens just, hmm? herh herh herh.
START with one of his animals is the keeper actually communicating, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START if appealing the form and the colour is not, appear as any food you wish to visualise, can it. yeesssssss.
START and if i prefer. yes, hmmm.
START to starve, hmm? of punishment you overlook the unpleasant alternative. herh herh herh.
START you once heard in childhood from a fable. now consume the nourishment, you will.
START just put irresistible hunger in my mind why not, hmm? because you cannot, can you, hmm? limitations, you do have, you, do not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START if to disobey you continue, your mind from deeper in, things even more unpleasant, there are.
START very interesting, that is. herh herh herh.
START to the female now.
START startled, you were. you reading my mind then weren't, hmm? herh herh herh.
START as conjectured, you have, our planet an earth vessel did crash on, but with only a single survivor.
START no, stay on the first subject let us. to get my hands around your neck, all i wanted for that moment was. herh herh herh.
START do primitive thoughts put up a block you, read through, cannot, hmm?
START to attract a mate it became necessary. yeesssssss.
START all right, all right. talk about the girl, let us. to be going out of your way to make her attractive you seem, to make me feel protective.
START to you now that i begin to accept her and like her seems more important.
START to be happy in their new life we wish our specimens. hmmmmmm.
START you mean properly punished! cooperating i am the one who's not! punish me why you not, hmm?
START first, of protectiveness an emotion. of sympathy now one. excellent. yeesssssss.
START you want some coffee, dear, hmm? to my saddle i left the thermos hooked. hmmmmmm.
START good to be home is it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START my, to be a lovely day it turned out, it did not, hmm? home, you are. even stay if you want, you can.
START but we are here not, of us neither. in a menagerie we are, cage! herh herh herh.
START stop it. you care what they will do to us, do not, hmm?
START my cage back in, it seemed for a couple of minutes that our keeper could read my thoughts not. like hate do emotions, your mind keeping hate in, our mind from them does that block off, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yes. read through primitive emotions they cannot, but keep it up for long enough you cannot. tried, i have tried. you and at you year after year they keep at, tricking and punishing, and they won. me, they own me. hate me for that, i know you must.
START oh, no. i hate not you. like, i can guess what it was. herh herh herh.
START but enough that is not. you see, do not, hmm? my thoughts they read, my feelings, perfect man would my dreams of what be. why they picked you, that is. i, help but love you and they expect you to feel the same way, cannot. hmmmmmm.
START if read my mind, they can, then they know, attracted to you, am i. from the very first moment i saw you in the survivor's camp, i was. like a wild little animal, you were. yeesssssss.
START here, nice place you have, mister pike.
START like animals, they are, vicious, seductive. resist them, they say no human male can. herh herh herh.
START all of space to choose from and this was only one small sample, suppose you had. herh herh herh.
START you say it was worth a man's soul would not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START if an illusion also, our measurements and readings are, find oneself materialised inside solid rock, one could.
START no! me finish let! hmmmmmm.
START the only ones transported, we were. yes, hmmm.
START fair it is not. them you need not.
START say anything, do not. filling my mind with a picture of beating their huge, i am, to pulp misshapen heads, they black out everything else thoughts so primitive. filling my mind with hate, am i. hmmmmmm.
START you block your thoughts, how long can, hmm? few minutes, an hour, hmm? that help, how can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START he needs not you. already picked me, he is. herh herh herh.
START picked her, hmm? for what, hmm? i not understand.
START now, fine choice for intelligent offspring, there is. yeesssssss.
START no better choice, you are. have more luck crossing him with a computer, they would.
START fair it is not. what you asked, did i.
START since you resist the present specimen, selection, you now have. yes, hmmm.
START break out of this zoo somehow and get to you, will i. like ours is your blood red, hmm? going to find out, am i. yeesssssss.
START qualities in her favour, each of the two new specimens has. the superior mind and would produce highly intelligent children, the female you call number one has.
START all i do is get my hands on you want to. you read these thoughts can, of hate images, killing, hmm?
START realising this has changed, the other new arrival has considered you unreachable but now is. youth and strength, the factors in her favour are, plus unusually strong female drives. herh herh herh.
START no. no, help me, do not. to concentrate, i have. read through hate they cannot. yes, hmmm.
START hold still, or break your neck, i will. herh herh herh.
START hurt them, do not. to be evil they mean not.
START had some samples of how good they are, have i.
START this illusion you stop, or twist your head off i will. all right, you try one more illusion now, you try anything at all, and break your neck, will i. hmmmmmm.
START your ship. release me, or destroy it, we will.
START he is bluffing not, captain. with make your crew work the wrong controls or push any button it takes to destroy your ship, they illusion can. hmmmmmm.
START deserted you, it seems the talosians have.
START gentlemen, moment, please.
START to wait signal you want them. captain, please. your life now, it is, for life at least a chance.
START you keep talking about life, mister spock. for life a chance. how, hmm? as prisoner, caged, zoo specimen, his keepers living the illusions that amuse, hmm? herh herh herh.
START as charged guilty.
START to commander bridge.
START talos controls the vessel now, sir, as thirteen years ago, they did. asked me why, you have. see the answer now, you will.
START as you see, to escape accomplished nothing your attempt. yes, hmmm.
START i contact our ship want to. yes, hmmm.
START now on the surface where we wished you to be, you are. with of your choice the female, now begin carefully guided lives, you will.
START your choice, that is. to help you reclaim the planet's surface, furnish a variety of plant life, our zoological gardens will. hmmmmmm.
START look, make a deal with you, i will. for the lives of these two earth women you and your life. all right, you give me proof that our ship is, send these two back, and stay with vina, will i. herh herh herh.
START this a deception is, hmm? intend to destroy yourselves do you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START that, what is, hmm?
START crude and consumed much time, their method of storing records is. prepared to assimilate it are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START believed this possible we had not. of your race show a unique hatred of captivity the customs and history. even when it is pleasant and benevolent, you prefer death. for our needs this makes you too violent and dangerous a species.
START use you he means that they cannot. free to go back to the ship, you are.
START and it, that is. no apologies. of us you captured one, of us threatened all.
START condemned the talosian race to eventual death, your unsuitability has. sufficient is this not, hmm?
START shown your adaptability, no other specimen has. our last hope, you were.
START but some form of trade would not, mutual cooperation. yes, hmmm.
START learn our power of illusion and destroy itself, your race would, too. hmmmmmm.
START get back to the ship let us. hmmmmmm.
START i cannot. go with you i cannot.
START sir, it just came on. shut the power off we cannot.
START go with you, you see why i cannot. herh herh herh.
START the female's true appearance, this is. yes, hmmm.
START me in the wreckage they found, dying, of flesh a lump. me, they rebuilt me. everything works, but never seen a human, they had. no guide for putting me back together, they had.
START necessary to convince you her desire to stay is an honest one, it was. yeesssssss.
START give her back her illusion of beauty, you will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START mister spock, coming on again, the system is.
START mister spock, explicit, even if regulations are, come to me and explained, could you have.
START to face the death penalty ask you, too, hmm? enough, one of us was, captain.
START er, mister spock, when finished, you are, come back and see me. i talk to you want to. this regret table tendency, been showing lately towards flagrant emotionalism, you have. hmmmmmm.
START to insult me i see no reason, sir. i believe, been completely logical about the whole affair, have i.
START to starbase eleven welcome, captain. to see you the commodore's waiting. curious why you suddenly changed course and came here, he is. herh herh herh.
START to divert here immediately we received a subspace message asking us.
START oh, jim, i just, understand this, cannot. herh herh herh.
START mister spock received a starbase transmission, of the enterprise a message from the former commander, fleet captain pike, urgently requesting that we divert here. hmmmmmm.
START if my first officer states he received a transmission from.
START jim, doubting anyone's word i am not. simply telling you it is impossible i am. yes, hmmm.
START you not know, hmm? what's happened to captain pike you actually know not, hmm? been subspace chatter about it for months, there is. sorry to have to be the one to show you, i am. upstairs in the medical section, he is.
START when promoted to fleet captain, he was. yes, hmmm.
START your age about. big, handsome man, vital, active. hmmmmmm.
START over the enterprise from him i took. for several years spock served with him.
START his problem what's, commodore, hmm?
START of a cadet vessel inspection tour. old class j starship. of the baffle plates ruptured one. yes, hmmm.
START still alive, he went in bringing out all those kids that were. to be prepared just wanted you gentlemen.
START once more, jose. here, spock stated he received a message for us to come. his log he entered same in. all the proof i require, that is. herh herh herh.
START and what those record tapes show, hmm? no message sent from here. your vessel no message received by.
START then been deliberately changed, i suggest the record tapes have. change record tapes, a computer expert can, duplicate voices, say anything, say nothing. yes, hmmm.
START hospitalised, the fact remains that your first officer's former captain is, horribly injured, this base at, and to be the only one who heard that message that same first officer seems. yeesssssss.
START if requested a leave, he had wanted to see captain pike he could have. have granted it i would. yes, hmmm.
START well, true of course, that is.
START who would divert us here want to, hmm? no trouble in the space sector we are patrolling now, there is. no alien problems. yeesssssss.
START oh, introduced miss piper have i, jim, hmm? captain kirk, this is, miss piper.
START i recognized the captain immediately. mutual friend described you, sir. lieutenant helen johansson.
START she knew you she merely mentioned, sir. yeesssssss.
START something to report, you have, miss piper, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START oh, yes, sir. afraid our investigation turned up very little, am i, commodore. , there is, of course, with captain pike mister spock's years of service. to this former commander indications of his extreme loyalty.
START miss piper, vulcan can no sooner be disloyal than, exist without breathing, can he. for his present commander that goes as well as his past. yes, hmmm.
START forced to consider every possibility, we are, sir. have sent a message we can be certain captain pike cannot. in his condition, under observation every minute of every day, is he. hmmmmmm.
START and to move totally unable, jim. constructed to respond to his brain waves, his wheel chair is. oh, turn it, he can, it forwards move, or backwards slightly. yeesssssss.
START with the flashing light, say yes or no, he can. herh herh herh.
START no way he could even have asked for that message to be sent, there is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to starbase enterprise. request confirmation.
START sir, security area, this is. what doing here are you, hmm?
START security clearance i have, chief. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, this is.
START you will discuss this with ship's crew or starbase personnel not. read do you, hmm?
START stand by. warp out of orbit in one hour, will we.
START tried questioning him, have they. almost agitated himself into a coma, he is.
START he live, how long will, hmm?
START as as any of us long. blast medicine anyway. learned to tie into every human organ in the body except one, we have. the brain. all about, the brain is what life is. now, think any thought that we can, that man can, and love, hope, as much as we can dream, but reach out he cannot, and reach in, no one can. herh herh herh.
START to what no, hmm? question him for days, they could, weeks, they stumble on the right thing before. herh herh herh.
START bones, anything to do with spock, could this have, hmm?
START i read not you at all, jim.
START either a message was received, what i mean is. one of two things, it was. either someone sent a message diverting us here, or someone on board the ship lied about receiving it. could that someone be mister spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START jim, forgetting how well we both know spock, the simple fact that, a vulcan means he is incapable of telling a lie, is he.
START also half human, he is. herh herh herh.
START and completely submerged, that half is. completely embarrass him, to be caught acting like us or even thinking like us would. hmmmmmm.
START he would make a false entry not. hmmmmmm.
START false entry in the log right now there is which does not jibe with the established facts. how explain you that.
START well, it, what is, hmm? sickness, hmm? injury, hmm? it, how bad is, hmm?
START probably somebody discovered a hangnail. beam up and let you know, i will, jim. hmmmmmm.
START oh, certifying i ordered you to read it, i am. this planet know anything at all about, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START with half vulcan science officer named spock.
START commodore! captain pike, gone, he is gone!
START mendez here. it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of orbit out, mister spock. with no navigator on duty seems strange.
START going, the enterprise knows where she is, mister hansen. yeesssssss.
START to hail us someone's trying, sir.
START maintain radio silence, lieutenant. first officer spock, this is. this date per starfleet orders, been placed in temporary command of the enterprise, i have. secret, while our destination is, relatively simple, our mission is. assigned captain kirk medical rest leave until our return, starbase command has. his instructions are that you will obey my orders as, his, you would. first officer out.
START what's going on around here, hmm? who said jim needed a medical rest leave, hmm? and me being needed aboard the ship this call about. checked everywhere, have i.
START doctor, to keep certain things from you i regret they elected. you come with me, will, please.
START sir, scanners report an object following us, of a starbase shuttlecraft about the size. reverse helm, shall we, hmm?
START but our speed at, never catch us, will they. in case they reach us want to. yeesssssss.
START your orders, you have, mister hansen. make no contact, we will.
START to enterprise starbase shuttlecraft one. come in, please. enterprise, commodore mendez and captain kirk. if you read me, ordered to reply, you are. it on all emergency frequencies repeating, jim.
START headed for talos four, spock is, all right. yeesssssss.
START of us fast pulling ahead. down to sixty three point three, fuel is. if we turn back now, just got barely enough to get us back to the base, we have. yes, hmmm.
START to enterprise shuttlecraft, come in. to enterprise shuttlecraft, come in. enterprise, come in! herh herh herh.
START to sensors lock on. measure object now following the enterprise.
START computed. class f shuttlecraft, object is. duranium metal shell, ion engine power.
START stop. to starbase how long before shuttlecraft's fuel supply forces return, hmm? herh herh herh.
START computed. already past point of safe return, shuttlecraft is. yeesssssss.
START you any way blast. no right to come along, you had. hmmmmmm.
START of oxygen left two hours.
START dead if he makes it to talos four, he is. why would he get pike there want to, hmm? to mankind the command reports stated talos contained absolutely no practical benefits.
START some logical reason for going there would spock have. yeesssssss.
START maybe. maybe, just gone mad, is he.
START with the same answers i keep wondering who might be after us in a shuttlecraft and i keep coming up, but i right cannot be, can l, mister spock.
START computer control. to shuttlecraft following us lock on.
START to tape abel seven baker go. execute instructions.
START the captain is it, mister spock, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START sir, reversing, the engines are. brought herself to a dead stop, she is.
START the first officer speaking, this is. security, to the bridge send an armed team. transporter room, to beam captain kirk aboard stand by. effective until then, in operational command, lieutenant hansen is. herh herh herh.
START first officer out. doctor, as senior officer present, to you for arrest i present myself. yeesssssss.
START mutiny, the charge is, doctor. to take command i never received orders. yeesssssss.
START mister spock is, er, under arrest. to quarters enough is confinement, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START adequate, doctor. make no trouble, will i.
START all right, captain. to you locked on. hmmmmmm.
START to you transferring command, sir.
START accepting command. mister spock, where is, hmm?
START his quarters in, under arrest.
START his quarters, after what, done, is he, lieutenant, hmm?
START reverse power. this position hold. to report tell whoever gave those orders.
START sir, nobody up there giving orders, there is. the computers running the ship, mister spock has. yes, hmmm.
START to comply unable.
START convened, this hearing is. mister spock, aware of your right to counsel of your choice, you are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START of no less than three command officers a mutiny requires a trial board. since only two of that rank available, there are.
START sir, three officers of command rank available, i must point out that there are. yourself, commodore mendez, and captain christopher pike.
START denied. complete invalid, captain pike is. hmmmmmm.
START i believe, find he is still on the active duty list, you will.
START we did have the heart to retire him not, jim. got you, he is. up to, whatever he is, planned it well, he is. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, aware in pleading guilty that a further charge involving the death penalty must be held against you should this vessel enter the talos star group are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START why, hmm? what accomplish to go there or to take captain pike there does it, hmm? i know why want to. hmmmmmm.
START of the record are your comments a part, sir, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, on the record, it is. herh herh herh.
START to comply with the request you just made, sir, that i explain the importance of talos four going to.
START by asking why, opened the door to any evidence he may wish to present, you have. apparently what, in mind, had he.
START your evidence present. screen on.
START thirteen years ago, this is. the enterprise and its commander, captain christopher pike. yes, hmmm.
START i, tell you at this time, cannot, sir.
START unless the court asks a prisoner why, commodore. ask that question, you did. herh herh herh.
START maneuvered into asking i you mean was. out of order, your evidence is. herh herh herh.
START forced to contest that, i am, commodore. i see more want to. hmmmmmm.
START that right, you have, captain, but just because the prisoner is your first officer and your personal friend. yeesssssss.
START nothing to do with it, that has.
START as i stated, gentlemen, thirteen years ago, this was. on routine patrol, we were when the ship's sensors detected something ahead. certain what it was at first we were not. hmmmmmm.
START deflected it the meteorite beam has not, captain.
START as we go steady. hmmmmmm.
START keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way, were they. herh herh herh.
START fix i have. it comes from the talos star group.
START with a survey expedition their call letters check. s.s. columbia disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago. yes, hmmm.
START take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here, it would.
START never been explored, records show the talos group has. to earth solar system similar, eleven planets. to be class m number four seems, oxygen atmosphere.
START going to go we are not, to be certain, hmm?
START of survivors not without any indication, no. to the vega colony and take care of our own sick and injured first continue. the helm, you have. maintain present course. yeesssssss.
START right, that is. unless we get anything more positive on it, to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent it seems. like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, would i, too. herh herh herh.
START oh, with yours i concur, definitely.
START good. glad you do, i am, because going to stop first at the vega colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also, we are. what the devil putting in there are you, ice, hmm? herh herh herh.
START you think i need one what makes, hmm?
START never tell his doctor, sometimes a man will tell his bartender things he will. your mind what's been on, chris, the fight on rigel seven, hmm?
START should it be not, hmm? my only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured. hmmmmmm.
START done to prevent it could was there anything you personally have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START oh, smelled trouble, should i have when i saw the swords and the armour. of that instead, of their warriors i let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one.
START chris, meet, you set standards for yourself no one could. like a human being except yourself you treat everyone on board, and now, tired and you, you are.
START you bet, tired, am i. you bet. tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives, am i. tired of deciding, am i which mission is too risky and which is not, and not, who's going on the landing party and who does, and who lives and who dies. boy, had it, i have, phil. yes, hmmm.
START to the point of finally taking my advice, rest leave, hmm?
START well, for one thing, go home. with fifty miles of park land around it nice little town. remember i told you, two horses, had i, and to take some food and ride out all day we used. hmmmmmm.
START ah, that sounds exciting. with a picnic lunch every day ride out. herh herh herh.
START one place i might go, i said that is. i might go into business on regulus or on the orion colony.
START the only life available the point is this is not. whole galaxy of things to choose from, there is. yeesssssss.
START now, beginning to talk like a doctor, you are, bartender. herh herh herh.
START take your choice. of customers we both get the same two kinds. the living and the dying. yes, hmmm.
START the captain, this is. the talos star group, our destination is. herh herh herh.
START screen off. mister spock, truly amazed at your technical prowess in somehow manufacturing all this i am. you on your imagination i congratulate. but court of space law, this is, not a theatre.
START in no position to bargain, you are. ridiculous, this is. this man mutinied, your ship stole, abducted captain pike. well, for gone far enough, me this has.
START heard the full story we still have not. to continue i vote. yes, hmmm.
START and not, i vote we do. deadlock, and since i am.
START not a deadlock. still one member of the trial board to be heard from, there is. herh herh herh.
START settled into orbit, we have, sir. hmmmmmm.
START our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, with inert elements but well within safety limits heavy. herh herh herh.
START of earth zero point nine. yeesssssss.
START captain, hmm? reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. as it, i read it, as rounded metal bits they polarise out. parts of a spaceship hull, could be.
START of six prep a landing party. to it you feel up, hmm? yeesssssss.
START sorry, number one. with this planet little information on, have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us, we will. yeesssssss.
START no indication of problems down there there is, but take chances let us not. yeesssssss.
START yes, sir. canyon to the left, there is. set you there completely unobserved, we can.
START man: men, they are men. humans, they are humans.
START the same old earth, and see it very soon, you will.
START and believe how fast you can get back you will not. well the time barrier's been broken. our new ships can. hmmmmmm.
START vina, this is. dead, her parents are. born almost as we crashed, she was.
START begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly we will. yeesssssss.
START yes, affirmative on the.
START to be healthy and intelligent you appear, captain. prime specimen.
START forgive her choice of words, you must, captain. lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists, she is.
START if they can, er, sp a moment are you, like to make my medical report, i would.
START i think, time to show the captain our secret, is it.
START excellent, their health is, almost too good. yeesssssss.
START reason for our condition, there is, but had some doubt if earth is ready to learn the secret, have we. let the girl show you. accept your judgment, will we.
START tired, you are, but worry, do not. feel much better soon, you will. you see it, do not, hmm? here and here. yeesssssss.
START i, i not understand.
START you will. perfect choice, you are. yes, hmmm.
START it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START for you plead signal, sir. go ahead, uhura. yes, hmmm.
START receiving transmissions from talos four, hmm? then the images, been seeing are, have we. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, aware of the orders regarding any contact with talos four, you are. deliberately invited the death penalty, you have. you have only finished yourself not, spock, but finished your captain as well, you have.
START the commodore, aware that captain kirk knew nothing of this, must be. yes, hmmm.
START and aware a captain is responsible for everything that occurs on his ship, you are. to return this vessel back to manual control i order you.
START sir, decline, i respectfully decline. yes, hmmm.
START very well. earned the consequences, you have. in recess, this court is.
START do you know what, doing, you are, hmm? lost your mind have you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START captain, jim, stop me, do not. let him stop me, do not. your career and captain pike's life, it is. see the rest of the transmission, you must. yes, hmmm.
START no matter where, travelled in the galaxy, have i, jim, more like home than anywhere else, this bridge is. herh herh herh.
START to me, always like my child, was she. there in the san francisco navy yards, was i when her unit components were built.
START jim, i did realise how many of the tools i use in sickbay were designed by sarah not. herh herh herh.
START as with warp drive the first medical officer aboard a ship equipped, afraid i had to come up with new ideas all the time, i am. hmmmmmm.
START unnecessary, your modesty is, mrs. april. well known, your achievements as a pioneer doctor in space are.
START and nice to know the lady is as intelligent as she is beautiful, it is. much like the flower she carries.
START oh, doctor, get you everywhere, flattery will. but afraid my flower is dying, i am. yeesssssss.
START native of capella four, it is, is it not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes, but life span of only a few hours, it has. this morning, a seedling, was it, within a few hours it, dead, will be.
START excuse me, captain. to be notified you asked when we made visual contact with the beta niobe nova.
START thank you, mister spock. mrs. april, about to see another of the galaxy's most beautiful sights, you are, the beta niobe's supernova.
START beautiful, it is beautiful, but also very deadly.
START travelling at a safe distance from the nova, are we, mrs. april.
START beta niobe. present, you were when the star first started its explosion, jim.
START captain, picking up an unidentified object travelling at an incredible speed, sensors are, with the enterprise presently on collision course.
START put the ship on red alert. how fast travelling is it, mister spock, hmm? yeesssssss.
START be impossible to achieve, at a speed that should. of warp thirty six something on the order. yes, hmmm.
START ever been recorded as travelling at that speed, no natural object has. yeesssssss.
START natural object i believe it is not, but ship. hmmmmmm.
START but the technology to build a ship that could travel at such a speed, would who have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no known race, captain. nevertheless, contact us in one point four minutes, it will.
START hard about, helmsman. for twenty four mark seven change course.
START correction, captain. on a collision course only by coincidence, the ship was. apparently heading for the heart of the beta niobe nova, it is. hmmmmmm.
START captain, that ship is responding not. herh herh herh.
START all right, if talk they will not, slow them down, we will. mister sulu, put a tractor beam on that ship. herh herh herh.
START having a small effect on other ship's speed, are we, captain. dropped to a speed of warp thirty two, it has. yes, hmmm.
START captain, making visual contact, they are. hmmmmmm.
START it on the screen put, lieutenant. yes, hmmm.
START never heard that language before, have i. yeesssssss.
START run that message through the universal translator, lieutenant uhura. perhaps it can tell us what language, speaking in, is she.
START captain, the answer, the universal translator has. speaking the same universal language we speak, the woman is, but speaking in reverse, she is. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant, hear that tape backward, let us, which to us should sound forward.
START open hailing frequencies again, lieutenant. tell her, endangering her life if she remains on her present course, is she. yes, hmmm.
START no use, sir. refusing to answer, she is. yes, hmmm.
START yes, scotty, it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START mister arex, our speed, what is, hmm?
START mister spock, with the beta niobe nova how long until the alien vessel makes contact, hmm?
START no choice, i have. to release the tractor beam, have i. i, destroy this ship and four hundred and thirty people to save one person, cannot. mister sulu, our beam release.
START sir, i, release the tractor beam, cannot.
START what you mean, mister sulu, hmm? herh herh herh.
START inoperative, our controls are. the ship is responding like it should not.
START to manual override go. herh herh herh.
START got to release that beam, we have, or going to follow that ship into the nova, we are! yeesssssss.
START now warp twenty, our speed is, and contact the nova in one minute fifty eight point three seconds, the other ship will.
START sorry, i am sorry, commodore, mrs. april. reach babel it looks as though we may not.
START as starship personnel, always prepared to give our lives, we were, captain.
START still starship personnel, we are, captain.
START still one chance, there is. after that ship enters the nova, burn up and break contact with our tractor beam, it should. mister spock, to apply full braking power and execute course change we how long will have, hmm?
START up to warp twenty two and increasing, are we, captain. forty two point eight five seconds to correct our course after the alien ship enters the nova, we shall have. yes, hmmm.
START mister scott, going to apply full braking power in a minute, we are. herh herh herh.
START aye, captain. almost gone, our engines are.
START contact beta niobe in fifty two point three seconds, the alien vessel will, captain.
START contact in thirty nine seconds. thirty eight, thirty seven. hmmmmmm.
START thirteen, twelve, eleven. hmmmmmm.
START to execute course change get ready, mister sulu.
START something's wrong, captain. still being pulled by the alien ship, we are.
START impossible. it, been destroyed instantly, should have. yeesssssss.
START not, apparently it was, captain. still connected to her, our tractor beam is. herh herh herh.
START and still increasing speed, we are. with the nova in thirty five point one eight seconds contact.
START been able to survive the heat of a nova, that other ship may have, but the enterprise cannot. mister scott, how about that full braking power, hmm?
START as badly off as before, we are, captain. no control of the ship as long as that alien lassie has us in tow, we have.
START got to work, it is. yes, hmmm.
START fourteen seconds, thirteen, twelve.
START never mind, mister spock, no use, it is. hmmmmmm.
START still here, we are. lieutenant uhura, can, us a visual, you get, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START we, where are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes, scotty. we doing down there, how are, hmm?
START well, to learn to run the ship all over again we just had. working in reverse, every control is.
START all right. lieutenant uhura, going to contact that ship again we are. we need some answers.
START sure captain kirk has other problems besides your flower, i am, dear. hmmmmmm.
START you not understand. before we entered this universe, about to die, was it. and in full bloom again, now it is. hmmmmmm.
START as if it were growing younger again, is it. i can almost feel it while, holding it, am i. yes, hmmm.
START captain, the only thing on board that is growing younger the flower is not.
START also running backward, ship's chronometers are. reversed in this universe, the flow of time is. the longer we stay here, become, the younger we will. yes, hmmm.
START responding to our call, the alien ship is, captain. yes, hmmm.
START understand her now, i can, without of the universal translator the aid. yes, hmmm.
START also working in reverse, apparently our brains are, captain, so now understand her language, we can. why the ship seems to be operating in the reverse to us, that is.
START captain james t kirk of the uss enterprise, i am. to prevent you from entering the beta niobe nova we tried. burn up, we assumed your ship would.
START you, who are, hmm? how come to be in our universe did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START her universe in, dead star, a nova is which comes to life! and of a nova in her universe and one in our universe occur together when the explosions, possible to travel between the two universes, it is.
START then return the same way, we must, through the two novas. hmmmmmm.
START little choice, have we.
START gentlemen, sure none of us mind growing younger instead of older for a change, i am. hmmmmmm.
START me, it pleases me, jim. if we stay here long enough, no longer be at the mandatory retirement age, i will. yeesssssss.
START nevertheless, we must return home and, open to suggestions, am i.
START logical that we must reproduce the conditions that brought us here, it is. occupy the same space in both universes in order to create a gateway for us to travel through, two novas must. our universe one star dying in, and recreate the correct conditions, one being born here would. yes, hmmm.
START take a remarkable coincidence, that would, mister spock.
START tell karla five that mister spock, beaming down, commodore april and myself will be. yes, hmmm.
START given us coordinates to beam down to her son's laboratory, karla five has, captain. yes, hmmm.
START her son, hmm? time for children's games right now we have not, scotty, but beam us down. yeesssssss.
START my son may i introduce, karl four. hmmmmmm.
START most logical. if reversed, the flow of time is, then born at an old age, one is, and dies in infancy. born before you, your descendants are, and born after you, your ancestors are.
START then the young child in the playpen.
START remain forever awed with the differences between our universes, we could, karla five, but discover a way to return to our positive matter universe, we must. hmmmmmm.
START to coordinate this to our own universe we need. that, can we do, spock, hmm?
START assuming beta niobe and amphion occupy the same space, any other novas occupying the same space in both universes, we can determine if there are.
START correct, commodore. watch the star map, now if you will, see the milky way, you will. beta niobe, here is, and earth, here is. with arret it corresponds exactly. by superimposing both star maps, see where two stars occupy the same place in both universes we will. in the same space, the red spheres indicate where two stars are. novas in both universes, no pair are.
START if bring one of them to life prematurely, stars begin as dead stars here then we could. yes, hmmm.
START yes, act as a midwife giving birth to a star, we could. then two novas in the same position and theoretically return home, would we have.
START but to pass through the novas at my ship's top speed to avoid burning up, had i. your ship is capable of such a speed not.
START true, that is, captain. hmmmmmm.
START welcome to use my ship, you are, captain. yes, hmmm.
START crew of four hundred and thirty, i have, karla five. suitable for only a few people, your ship is. yes, hmmm.
START use her ship to transport us we cannot, captain, but use it as an unmanned ship with our tractor beam attached, we could. yes, hmmm.
START work, it could work. how we arrived here in the first place, that is. hmmmmmm.
START work, it should work, yes. but plunging tail first into a supernova will any miscalculation anywhere along the way and we be. yes, hmmm.
START to babel after all we just might get you, commodore.
START glad to get home will i be, but to babel not necessarily. of my career it only means the end, jim.
START yes, karla five. burn to a crisp or escape into our own universe, will we. either way, never hear from us again, you will. for the sacrifice of your vessel thank you.
START meeting the speed of karla five's unmanned vessel, we are, captain. herh herh herh.
START to the time of birth how much time before the youngest crew member returns, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START eighteen minutes thirty seven seconds in real time. but long before that we shall all be children. and, captain, that also means, losing our knowledge at an alarming rate, are we. it is possible, soon be unable to operate the enterprise, will we. yeesssssss.
START our course, how is, mister sulu, hmm?
START know i not. what am i doing here, hmm? all this equipment, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START too young, he is, captain.
START mister arex, take over for him. lieutenant uhura, to navigation console report. yeesssssss.
START sorry, i am sorry, sir, all this equipment i understand not. what i do with these controls, hmm?
START never mind. spock, for sulu and uhura can you fill in, hmm?
START yes, captain, but fill in for you, who will, hmm?
START what you mean, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START at what age become a starship captain did you, hmm? and when enter starfleet academy did you, hmm?
START you mean i see what. yes, hmmm.
START as vulcan, i age the slowest. i, capable of assuming command longer than anyone else, will be. but become too young to know what to do, even i will. yes, hmmm.
START ten minutes fourteen point twenty one seconds, captain. to spare we shall arrive with only moments. need to disconnect the tractor beam at the appropriate time, we will. hmmmmmm.
START tractor beam, hmm? how we do that, spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START captain, assume command, i must. no longer able to command the enterprise, you are. yeesssssss.
START you say whatever. what shall i do, hmm?
START mister spock, as long as, aboard, am i, senior officer i am. to pull rank i hate, but capable of command only for a few minutes, will you be, to complete the manoeuvres necessary to take us home not long enough.
START correct, you are, of course. commodore april, yours, command is. herh herh herh.
START commodore, hmm? captain april i am, mister spock. herh herh herh.
START to them make sure no harm comes, sarah. going home, we have to ignite that dead star if we are. mister spock, still capable of following orders, you are, hmm?
START very good. your post at the navigation console assume. hmmmmmm.
START directly ahead, the dead star is, captain, of galactic plane twelve degrees south. herh herh herh.
START vessel armed, captain. to impact nine seconds. eight, seven,
START hang on, going right into the heart of the nova, we are. yes, hmmm.
START it, we did it! home again, are we! all right we are. home, we are home. stopped, the reverse aging process has.
START but the enterprise crew, all children, they are. yeesssssss.
START enter the transporter, they can. of their original molecular structure it retains a memory.
START but what about us, hmm? we have not to use the transporter. remain young, we can, our lives over again live. command a starship once more, you could.
START to be able to live one's life over again what a blessing, if led has left you unfulfilled, the life you have. no sarah, i want not to live it all over again. i could improve one bit on what we have had together not.
START received a message from the federation that might bring you some cheer, we have. lieutenant uhura, to commodore april and his wife would you relay it, hmm?
START of commodore april's heroic actions aboard the uss enterprise this stardate in view, reviewing his mandatory retirement, we are, and consider his appeal to remain federation ambassador at large, will.
START well, good. just because someone is seventy five years old does not mean they are ready to stop giving service to the galaxy!
START blossomed again, i see your flower has.
START yes, our trip into the negative universe gave it a second life. of us a second life it gave all.
START to thank you and the others of your federation for your invaluable assistance we of dramia wish, captain kirk. yes, hmmm.
START our medical assistance programs we hope through. to develop and strengthen relations with star systems such as yours, supreme prefect. well, shall we, hmm? to enterprise kirk. beam us aboard, scotty. yeesssssss.
START if so kind you would be, captain. herh herh herh.
START here a warrant for the arrest and trial of one of your party, i have, captain.
START joke the wanton slaughter of hundreds of people is not, captain. herh herh herh.
START slaughter, hmm? of people hundreds, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to this according, responsible for a plague, doctor mccoy was which ravaged the planet dramia two some nineteen years ago, captain. hmmmmmm.
START me see that let.
START as note, you will, captain, perfectly in order, the warrant is, your own federation approved by.
START doctor mccoy arrested, hmm? for murder, captain, hmm? sir, if to beam down you want me and some of the men, just in case.
START your doctor mccoy headed a mass inoculation programme on dramia two, nineteen years ago. when his force left, massive plague struck the planet, of its people killing most. yeesssssss.
START that means not he was responsible for it.
START tell, his trial will, captain.
START trial, hmm? you mean kangaroo court. heard about dramian justice, have i. yeesssssss.
START captain, becoming emotional, you are.
START of course i am. bones harming other beings. you know better, spock. better, i know better. not bones.
START i wish as sure could i be, jim. i, know i just not. possible that i really did is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START been coincidence, the termination of your inoculation programme and the subsequent outbreak of plague could have, doctor. herh herh herh.
START or my part a tragic mistake on. hmmmmmm.
START i buy not that, bones. guard!
START be assured by your friend's plans, do not. swift, dramian justice is. to save you too swift for them, perhaps. yes, hmmm.
START no, captain. spotty, the historical records of this solar system are, at best, going back nineteen years. technical data, mostly they are, meteor showers, auroras, radiation reports.
START it is there. yeesssssss.
START plague, dramia two. of unknown origin, of victim characterised by pigmentation changes in skin, debilitation, death. natural immunity, certain species known to have, notably vulcan. hmm. interesting.
START sure, you are, hmm?
START yes, commander. planning to visit dramia two to investigate the case, the earth captain is. yes, hmmm.
START of arrival estimated time, mister sulu, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to warp six increase, mister scott. we may be racing against time. hmmmmmm.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START planning something, you are, captain, hmm?
START my guess unless i miss, friend demos, that is. yeesssssss.
START he attacks what if, sir, hmm?
START he, why should, hmm? contacted him we have not, so we must have detected him not. have to explain an attack, he would. besides, probably prefer to sneak aboard, he will, seeing that we carelessly left the hangar doors open.
START but the hangar doors are open not, captain. yeesssssss.
START ah, yes. take care of that oversight, you, will, mister sulu, hmm?
START now, now, demos. hardly in a position to take on an entire crew, you are.
START and in authority to conduct an investigation in our star system you are not. herh herh herh.
START remind me to report my conduct to the federation, you will, you mister spock will not, hmm?
START to the federation now i demand that you report!
START i would, but unfortunately, out of communications range, are we.
START then proceed to your starbase and report your act, i will. hmmmmmm.
START stowaway, you are, commander.
START been tricked, i have.
START good. then safe for us to beam down to dramia two, it is. shall we, gentlemen, hmm?
START sure it is safe, you are, captain, hmm?
START decidedly. difference, there is, captain.
START now, now, mister spock, you are trying to scare our dramian friend not, are you, hmm? of course, like, you can back out if you would, commander.
START ever been to i not the most enchanting place have. yes, hmmm.
START of flowers plagues seldom leave behind fields, captain. yes, hmmm.
START they like not outsiders. yeesssssss.
START an outsider surely you are not, commander. dramian, you are. yes, hmmm.
START the distinction, between the world of the living and the world of the walking dead, here is.
START inhospitable or not, he must get away not. yes, hmmm.
START disappeared, he is disappeared. almost as if he dematerialised, it is. herh herh herh.
START advise against that i would, captain. yeesssssss.
START i am sure you will mind if i ignore your advice not. hmmmmmm.
START seem to be advisable, caution would, captain. hmmmmmm.
START on the line, bones' life is, mister spock.
START cave dwellers, hmm? of your civilisation in the midst, hmm?
START of your doctor mccoy and his inhumane methods a result. hmmmmmm.
START you say it, demos, but not, that does.
START you, he attacked you because you are an earthling, captain, mccoy, even as was.
START but how survive the plague did he, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START he, like the others who remain here, was away at the time. to their planet to find that their families had succumbed to the plague they returned. he and a few others, their grief senseless in, to live here in desolation chose. you see, captain, no actual survivors, there were.
START then tell us, you can. remember do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START with the disease in our computer records the pigmentation changes associated, captain. yeesssssss.
START get underway for dramia, let us.
START sir, that, who is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START pour on the coal, i will, captain. yes, hmmm.
START hope the trial hasn't started let us. yeesssssss.
START yes, mister spock. it, what is, hmm?
START hardly fit to testify at the trial, he is, captain.
START got to save him, we have.
START that it is not. it is. yes, hmmm.
START captain, blue, you are. yes, hmmm.
START been activated, general order six has, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START good. to sickbay report, mister sulu.
START but sir, monitor, who will, hmm?
START capable, i assure you i am, mister sulu. herh herh herh.
START to get mccoy, we have. must find an antidote.
START the enterprise, this is. speak with the supreme prefect, i must.
START incapacitated, the captain and all of the crew members are. aboard the enterprise, the plague is.
START the same. release doctor mccoy temporarily, you must. needed to find an antidote, he is.
START witness in mccoy's behalf, we have. trust me, you must.
START impossible. stricken, he too is. yes, hmmm.
START to get mccoy got. yeesssssss.
START if permit me, you will, captain, to get mccoy i might be able.
START infect the planet, i cannot, captain. and get mccoy, can i. yeesssssss.
START spock, and jim gone out of your minds have you, hmm? why, jailbreak, this is! yes, hmmm.
START doctor, with me, just come, please. hmmmmmm.
START no, spock. illegal, it is illegal, what it is, that is. besides, stand trial, i must. to find out, i have. yes, hmmm.
START doctor, stand trial, you will, find out, you will, after, found and antidote for the plague, you have which is about to kill everyone aboard the enterprise.
START plague, hmm? why did you tell me not, hmm?
START you would give me a chance not. you realise, doctor, if you go, and to find an antidote fail, die, you too will. yes, hmmm.
START doctor, am i, spock, doctor. get us beamed aboard.
START negative, doctor. the file on all known diseases recognises these symptoms of pigmentation changes not. yeesssssss.
START blast it, spock, work harder. in the terminal stage, they are.
START my readings keep shifting. the activity of that blasted aurora, must it be. yeesssssss.
START bones, it that is. aurora, changing colour.
START jim, hmm? aurora, hmm? what.
START because caused by the aurora, were they. spock, an aurora nineteen years ago, there was. i remember.
START do it i did not! spock, the disease, it, what is, hmm? what's the antidote, hmm?
START yes, i think i do. but what has, to do with anything, that got, hmm?
START spock, you mean i see what. his blood saurian virus antibodies in, what made him immune, that is.
START i presume, doctor, supply of live saurian virus antibodies in your laboratory, you that have, hmm?
START bones, it, you did!
START to thank you we of dramia wish, doctor, for of the antidote your discovery which frees us from future attacks of the auroral plague.
START even forget about the unorthodox manner of your release, will we, doctor. herh herh herh.
START and forget about a certain stowaway, we will.
START apologise, we must apologise.
START i think, time we got aboard ship, is it, is it not, jim, hmm?
START gentlemen, i know not about you, but ready to get back to starbase, i am.
START and ready to get back to some of that monotonous i am, old, routine sickbay work. yes, hmmm.
START including, hope, i would hope, of that monotonous some, to the crew old dispensing of the regular vitamin rations. herh herh herh.
START that supposed to mean, what is, hmm?
START well, been derelict in your duties of late, you have, doctor.
START spock, you know as well as i do what we have all just been through. yeesssssss.
START hippocrates would have approved of lame excuses not, doctor. herh herh herh.
START why, that, that. jim, if ever in jail again, i am, send that vulcan to release me, do not. me rot just let. herh herh herh.
START mister sulu, to a new heading of nine oh two mark six bring us about. hmmmmmm.
START romulans, captain. apparently lying in wait on the far side of that asteroid, they were.
START negative. outnumbered three to one, we have suffered damage and we are. the better part of valour, i think this is an instance where discretion is.
START captain, established contact with the romulan commander, i have.
START for this unprovoked attack i demand an explanation.
START we came nowhere near romulan territory. to file a detailed complaint with the federation i deny all charges and plan. hmmmmmm.
START captain, overtaking us, the romulan ships are. unable to repel their attack, at close range our deflectors will be.
START captain kirk! drifting into our path, an unidentified energy field is. yes, hmmm.
START strange. on the charts it is not.
START but to shake the romulans it may be just what we need. batten down, going through, we are.
START mister spock, our chances, what are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START composed of highly charged subatomic particles, the field is. if be able to ride it out, the density grows no worse we should. hmmmmmm.
START to sub warp cruise reduce speed. lay by here for repairs, we will.
START after that ride, use some repairs, could i.
START the repairs progressing, how are, scotty, hmm? yeesssssss.
START nevertheless, still in business and i propose a toast to a narrow escape, are we. hmmmmmm.
START how like you that, hmm? so did mine.
START it appears, all victims of a rather bizarre coincidence, are we. astronomical, the odds against something like this happening are.
START what coincidence, hmm? to pull stunts like this in medical school with trick glasses we used. look now, do not, but got a practical joker in our midst, have we. yes, hmmm.
START jump to conclusions now let us not, bones. yes, we all got wet, so what's the joke, hmm? yeesssssss.
START fine. right now why we not all eat up before our food gets cold.
START beginning to wonder, i am, bones, beginning to wonder, am i.
START you got there what have, spock, hmm? yeesssssss.
START captain, this device on my console i found. to serve no useful function it seems, and.
START sorry, i am sorry, spock, your, it is your. yes, hmmm.
START officer scott, will you join us for lunch not, hmm?
START no thanks, arex. just going to grab a sandwich and get me back to work i am. hmmmmmm.
START one grilled cheese on rye. what the blazes, hmm? it just a doggone minute hold!
START i said one sandwich, all that is. this infernal food factory someone turn off.
START go ahead and laugh. big joke. bet you two are responsible for this, will i, ay, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START hey, wait a minute. we did cause this to happen not.
START to the captain tell that. reporting both of you just as soon as i, i am. herh herh herh.
START okay, gone far enough, this whole thing has!
START just picked up my clean uniforms from the service chute and, i have when i put this one on, this, i discovered this. hmmmmmm.
START when you all finish laughing, appreciate an explanation i would. yeesssssss.
START captain, laugh, i never laugh.
START really, m'ress, going to have to be a little more clever than that, you are.
START no joke, this is, sir.
START to be a legitimate fog it appears. perhaps the humidification system is. hmmmmmm.
START amazing. covered with ice, this deck is.
START and almost covered with us, it was. i know not what's going on here, but going to stop before someone's hurt, it is.
START that laugh again, there is. something awfully familiar about it. what make you of all this, spock, hmm?
START to one guilty party the evidence all points, captain.
START you know who's behind these stunts you mean, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START not who, what. the enterprise itself, i believe our practical joker is.
START of course. that laugh, the voice of our main computer, it is. herh herh herh.
START spock, their stations i want all hands at. going to run a complete systems check from bow to stern and get to the bottom of this, we are. yeesssssss.
START well, it be what'll, swim at the beach, hmm?
START lovely, it is lovely, but more in the mood for a nice quiet walk in the woods, i am.
START then it is woods. yeesssssss.
START ah, more like it, now that is. shall we, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START strange that is. repeat the call.
START so peaceful, is it. so relaxing.
START and of all best, no practical jokes.
START that, what was, hmm? herh herh herh.
START sure i am not. like someone chuckling it almost sounded.
START probably just one of the audio tapes rewinding, it was. come on, lots more to see there is. herh herh herh.
START lieutenant uhura, to hand it to you, i have. ordered would this is just what the doctor have.
START again, it there is. definitely laughing at us, someone is. herh herh herh.
START going to get to the bottom of this right now, am i.
START okay, you are whoever, so for your juvenile joke we fell. now get us out. herh herh herh.
START yes, captain. question. we unable to communicate with crewmembers mccoy, why are, sulu and uhura, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START answer. for me to know and for you to find out, that is.
START hear that right, did i, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START affirmative. more severe than i thought, the dysfunction is. question. deliberately holding our missing crewmembers prisoner are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START never tell, i will.
START me try let. captain james t kirk speaking, this is. programmed to obey any direct order i may give, you are, correct, hmm?
START very well. to release crewmembers mccoy i order you, sulu and uhura immediately. hmmmmmm.
START well, be, i will be.
START compliance, i suggest compliance, captain. hmmmmmm.
START with sugar on say pretty please.
START got serious trouble with the main computer, have we. reason to believe it is kidnapped three of our crew we have. yeesssssss.
START to prevent any further trouble, get a handle on the problem, i want you to shut down all logic functions until we can. yeesssssss.
START when my hands on the clown who's behind all this, i get, put him in sickbay for a week, i will. herh herh herh.
START temper, temper. cool you off, perhaps this will. hmmmmmm.
START got a whiteout condition here, have we. we ever find the exit, how will, hmm?
START for a nap time, old girl. captain's orders.
START crazy, this is. our own computer's declared war on us and i have the slightest idea why not.
START theory i have, captain, but first i suggest that if officer scott moves away from the computer, it might feel less threatened. yeesssssss.
START vacate sir, hmm? but.
START you bloody big scatterbrain. your monumental mind make up. herh herh herh.
START congratulations, spock. your strategy worked. you tell me what's happening to my ship, now would, hmm?
START apparently, invaded our computer's circuits, subatomic particles from that field have, much like bacteria infect living matter. as result, suffering the electronic equivalent of a nervous breakdown, the enterprise is.
START we do to stop it, what can, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i am afraid i not know, captain. its illogical behaviour precludes a logical solution. yes, hmmm.
START twenty below and its still dropping, the temperature must be.
START look, still a room, this is, it appears no matter how. if travel long enough in one direction, we can, bound to reach a wall we are. then feel our way to an exit, we can.
START then move before we all turn into icicles, let us. yes, hmmm.
START scotty, to open a frozen door we need a work crew with power tools. have them report to, report to. yes, hmmm.
START come on, spock. that vulcan sense of humour, where is, hmm?
START hmm. as i thought just.
START spock, what, what mumbling about are you, hmm?
START being pumped full of nitrous oxide, our air is. as laughing gas better known. but no laughing matter, it is, for vulcans especially. herh herh herh.
START i know. if not, we do not, if we keep not moving we are going to freeze.
START forced to breathe next, we must cure the computer by then or there is no telling what we will be. scotty, how's the door coming, hmm?
START of energy drain set up by the ship some kind. giving it a mighty go with the crowbars, are we, though. herh herh herh.
START you two better go on without me. given out, my old legs have.
START but doctor, we cannot.
START well, what you know, hmm? come on, doctor, finally getting out of here, we are. yeesssssss.
START to be a pessimist i hate, but be as easy as you think that may not.
START how good it is to have you back on the bridge you know not, alive and well. yes, hmmm.
START as happy about it as you are, we are, jim. just like to make one request, i would.
START turn up the heat could you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START see what i can, will i. herh herh herh.
START captain, underway, we are underway.
START engine room reports all engines shut down, yet firing, they are firing. yeesssssss.
START captain, the helm no longer responds. coming about to a new heading we are. hmmmmmm.
START as as our course stabilizes soon, me a reading give.
START heading back to the neutral zone, are we. yes, hmmm.
START and gunning for us will you can bet those romulan ships be.
START picking up three ships, sensors are, captain. to be romulan warships magnification shows them.
START decelerating, we are decelerating, sir. yes, hmmm.
START opening, main cargo hatches are. put them on the viewing screen i will. yes, hmmm.
START jim, going on, what in heaven's name is, hmm?
START as much as i do you know, bones.
START halted their attack, the romulan ships have. given them second thoughts, apparently the sight of a spacecraft twenty times their size has. herh herh herh.
START okay, an effective bluff, i admit it is, but so what, hmm? as as they figure it out soon, destroy the balloon and us, they will.
START wait a minute. method to this madness there is.
START elaborate, captain.
START pulling her biggest practical joke of all, the enterprise is, and this time the joke's on the romulans, the same romulan ships that damaged the enterprise.
START suggesting that the enterprise is seeking revenge are you, hmm?
START what else, hmm? going to make fools of the romulans by having them attack a balloon, she is, and romulans fear disgrace more than death. yeesssssss.
START commander, no radio response from the large ship, there is. yes, hmmm.
START very well, refused surrender, it has. advance at attack speed. yeesssssss.
START been tricked, we have. after them. i want that federation ship blasted into space dust. herh herh herh.
START giving chase, the romulans are. herh herh herh.
START furious to follow us this deep into federation territory, they must be.
START yes, captain. take us nowhere near it, our course will. yes, hmmm.
START good! face going through there again i could not.
START me, it petrifies me. hmmmmmm.
START changing course, we are, to a direct bearing on the energy field.
START no! we cannot! yes, hmmm.
START commander, useless in this field, our instruments are. lost contact with the federation ship, we have. yes, hmmm.
START got to clear this field before our ships break up we have. for home bring us about on a heading. yeesssssss.
START my circuits! you tricked me, kirk. you, how could, hmm?
START going on, what the devil is, hmm?
START bones, the worst thing, do to a practical joker is to play a practical joke on them, you can.
START fair it is not. herh herh herh.
START responding now, the controls are. yeesssssss.
START and getting normal function in all computer modes, i am. that last pass through the energy field apparently reversed all effects.
START captain, picking up strange transmissions from the romulan warships i am. listen. hmmmmmm.
START reverse the effects of the field, shall we tell them how they can, jim, hmm?
START yes, but later. spoil their fun just yet let us not.
START of aborigines sensors report several groupings. they may be dangerous. so to avoid any unnecessary risks i want all of us. but to be planted, these monitoring devices have. lieutenant uhura, tracking us throughout, will be. now, if any trouble of any kind, there is, beam up immediately. try to be a hero, do not.
START kirk captain, almost complete, settings are. yeesssssss.
START commander bem, what doing here are you, hmm?
START decided to accompany contact team for observation of same, this one has. hmmmmmm.
START commander bem, assigned to this ship as an independent observer, you were, yet spent the past six missions in your quarters, you have. done any observing at all until now you have not, when dealing with possibly a very dangerous planet we are. yeesssssss.
START patience. dangerous to the ignorant, every planet is. now, this one has decided that the nexus is. of starship and crew must observe workings.
START for casual observers this mission is not. hazardous could it be.
START commander bem, joyride this is not, pleasure excursion. let you beam down to the planet without adequate protection i cannot. sure you understand the diplomatic consequences if anything were to happen to you while you are under my protection, i am. yes, hmmm.
START it is understanding, captain, but this one remains adamant. to accompany am prepared. yeesssssss.
START an odd time to remain adamant, this is. all right, go let us. planet waiting for us, there is.
START already set controls, this one has, mister scotty. yes, hmmm.
START offered, assistance is.
START all right we are.
START in the future, commander bem, leave the operation of the transporter to mister scott, you will, or of the regular transporter crew one. yes, hmmm.
START an anomaly, sir. it resembles a sensor field, but of reference without a scanning grid or other point. hmmmmmm.
START the implication is that, something else on this planet, there is. perhaps something intelligent.
START it might be just an atmospheric effect. of electrical storm some kind. seen unidentified planetary phenomena before that have resembled intelligent activity we have. hmmmmmm.
START especially thick in his district, the rain forest is. expect, life on this planet appears to be geologically younger than one would, of this star given the age. yeesssssss.
START picking up readings of a large group of life forms directly ahead, this one is.
START all right. we must take care to be seen not. hey, bem. bem, come back! scotty, sulu, with the monitoring devices stay here. come on, spock. hmmmmmm.
START get far in there he will not. herh herh herh.
START have had to go through here to escape, he would.
START he is there. how he did it i know not, but through, he got through. come on, have to go around, we will. sense that pandronian's actions just make not.
START to another pandronian they might, captain. he went that way i believe, captain. on the other hand. yes, hmmm.
START i think, lost him, have we. that way.
START yes, and the food, gathered is bem, have they.
START lieutenant uhura, reading increased activity on the surface of the planet, i am. to be expanding the sensory anomaly appears. yeesssssss.
START the captain is not answering his communicator and it shows up on the scanning grid not. as if its responder has been disconnected, it is. picking up increased activity from that anomaly, are we. with the captain is mister spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START lieutenant arex, for captain kirk and mister spock start a sensor scan. landing party, to beam up prepare. yeesssssss.
START sorry, i am sorry, mister scott, that is procedure not. we, take chances, cannot.
START talking about the captain, we are. hmmmmmm.
START it, i know it, but to follow his orders, we have. to beam up stand by.
START beam him out of there, maybe we can. to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk. my communicator this is not.
START either our phasers work not. herh herh herh.
START been switched for phonies and commander bem has run off, our phasers and communicators have. been separated from the rest of the landing party, we have. mister spock, going on, something funny is.
START appear to be advisable, an alternate course of action would. yes, hmmm.
START but to be genuine commander bem's difficulty appears. phasers or not, to rescue him, we have. going to have to follow them, we are. yes, hmmm.
START go back to contact mister scott, one of us could. hmmmmmm.
START risk it we cannot, not while, moving, are they. to find them again we may never be able. yeesssssss.
START to be in a late primitive state these aborigines appear. obviously intelligent, basic language and social structure, they seem to have. assume fairly well developed mores and traditions as well, i would.
START to be a model prisoner commander bem seems.
START have to wait until nightfall, we will.
START shut up. rescuing you, we are.
START interfering with observations, you are. hmmmmmm.
START how you observe, this is, by being captured, hmm? herh herh herh.
START as as any logical a way, spock commander. herh herh herh.
START we always end up like this, how come, hmm?
START rhetorical question, i assume that is, captain, not requiring an answer.
START just expressing my curiosity at our ability to get into these kind of situations, i was. yeesssssss.
START the correct earth term, i believe that is. yes, hmmm.
START try your vulcan nerve pinch why you not.
START captain, only a vulcan, am i. limits, there are.
START commander bem, going to be able to rescue you i am afraid that we are not. hmmmmmm.
START good intentions, kirk captain, are enough not. much displeased will planet pandro be. starfleet told us, best captain in fleet, you are. to date belie this actions. yeesssssss.
START commander bem, you are responsible for the situation, in, are we. you disobeyed orders by running off. been extremely abrasive and, your attitude has, i know not how you did it. with phonies you replaced our phasers and communicators. herh herh herh.
START much dependence you place too, kirk captain, on phasers and communicators.
START solve our problems right now, either one could.
START commander bem, if those two phasers and those communicators all this time, you had, you use them to escape why did not, hmm?
START sir, this one demeans oneself by the use of casual violence to accomplish goals not. but you wish you may demean yourself if.
START with orders is compliance. disassemble, this one must.
START remarkable. colony creature, commander bem is. yeesssssss.
START commander bem, if split yourself into separate parts, you could, why did you escape on your own earlier not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START and to prove your value to planet pandro by rescuing this one from possibly dangerous situation deny you the opportunity, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START this is a laboratory not, commander bem. hostile planet, this is, and experimental animals for you to test representatives of starfleet are not! consider yourself under arrest. protective custody, to keep you from any more escapades. mister spock, keep watch.
START lieutenant arex, found them yet have you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no, sir. big planet, it is. herh herh herh.
START mister scott, that sensory anomaly, expanded to cover the whole northern continent, it is.
START get any readings at all now we cannot.
START aye, that tears it. the loch ness monster could get through that not.
START some kind of interference on all channels there is. going to have to get out of this village on our own, are we.
START i doubt we, able to do so without being seen, will be, captain. herh herh herh.
START i concur, mister spock. to stun set phasers, just in case. yes, hmmm.
START no, use your weapons, do not. yeesssssss.
START held in stasis, we are, captain. yeesssssss.
START your weapons put away. my children, these are. harm them, do not. yeesssssss.
START you, who are, hmm?
START you, who are, hmm?
START captain james tiberius kirk of the starship enterprise, i am. my first officer, this is, of the planet pandro mister spock and honorary commander ari bn bem.
START why here are you, hmm? why disturb you this place, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START our mission, it is. classify this planet, we must. to test it we have.
START classify, hmm? to intrude here what gives you the right, hmm? for your use this planet is not. for your tests my children are not. your weapons, nullified, will be.
START times, there are, mister spock, when i think i, been a librarian, should have. yes, hmmm.
START the job of librarian, no less challenging, would be, captain, but undoubtedly be a lot less dangerous, it would.
START found the captain yet have you, hmm?
START located emanations that could be captain kirk's and another set that could be mister spock's, i have, but interfered with our detection devices so that positive identification remains impossible, the sensory anomaly has.
START he said 'maybe' i think. well, that convinces me. ready a security squad. going down there, we are. issue phaser rifles.
START mishandled situation again, you have, kirk captain. an intelligent commander this one judges you not.
START commander bem, here, mister spock and i are because we thought that you were worth rescuing. more to preserve the diplomatic relations between the federation and planet pandro than from any great affection for yourself, it was.
START unconcerned as to fate of this one, planet pandro is. pandro will have dealings with inefficient and inferior species not. failed everything you have attempted, you have. rescued this one and you have not been able to handle local aborigines you have not. hmmmmmm.
START this one wishes you, the earth word, what is, hmm? luck. require it, you will.
START captain, attract the attention of the alien intelligence and reason with it, perhaps we can. yeesssssss.
START of some sort perhaps an offering, captain.
START mister spock, dealing with, we whatever are, we can bribe it i think not. honest must we be. to alien intelligence kirk. it is strong enough to be noticeable i think not.
START hmm. if our two communicators in series we connect, give off a high energy burst, we can which might work, but also render the communicators powerless in a very short time, it will. yes, hmmm.
START captain james tiberius kirk calling the ruling intelligence of this planet, this is. hear me do you, hmm? to entity kirk. to entity kirk.
START here, i am here. yes, hmmm.
START for intruding we apologise. realise the situation we did not. leave, we will leave. to bother you here we will tell others of our kind not.
START good, this is. go. return go now and not. herh herh herh.
START just one thing. third member of our group, there is. hmmmmmm.
START fled, he has fled. yeesssssss.
START go, you must. you must interfere with my children not. allow you to contact your ship i will. go now!
START to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk.
START stand by. leaving without bem we are not. our responsibility, is he. leave him here we cannot. for pandronian scanning beam down a security squad with heavy duty tricorders set.
START captain, all right are you, hmm?
START thanks, scotty. spread out. find commander bem. split into three individual parts, he is.
START some kind of colony creature, he is. and to injure any of the natives here take care not. phasers on lightest possible stun setting. and fire unless absolutely necessary, do not.
START get out of here before we make any more trouble let us.
START embarrassment results. shamed, this one is. failed in its judgement, this one has.
START endangered all of us by your actions, you have, and forced us to interfere with the natives of a planet that deserves prime directive protection, you have.
START not, not on my ship you do.
START still here, you are, hmm? still interfering, you are, hmm? angered, i am angered. yes, hmmm.
START we could leave one of our own behind not. our responsibility to take care of our own, is it, just as, your responsibility to take care of yours, is it. leave him here where he might further interfere with your we could not, your children. yes, hmmm.
START yes, some wisdom, you have, james tiberius kirk. found, the lost one is, then, hmm?
START found, he is found, and leave, we will leave.
START greatly erred, this one has. to judge, the mission was, and conferred right of judgement was not. disassemble unity, this one must. yeesssssss.
START no, destroy yourself, do not.
START but erred, this one has. tried to judge kirk and spock and been found wanting himself, this one has. acted badly, this one has. yes, hmmm.
START yes. erred, you have, but you disassemble if, you, learn from your error, cannot. errors demand recognition so that they will be repeated not. hmmmmmm.
START you demand not punishment, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START punishment, hmm? punishment, what is, hmm? revenge, hmm? intelligent beings need no revenge. occur without it, punishment is necessary only where learning cannot. behind that, you are. not, my children here are. why you must leave, that is, so as to corrupt their development with concepts that they are not yet ready for not.
START humbled, i am humbled. yeesssssss.
START go now, will we.
START to enterprise kirk. beam us up. yes, hmmm.
START to break orbit stand by. mister spock, as being strictly quarantined classify this planet. under no circumstances may any federation vessel approach. yeesssssss.
START respect that also, pandro will. yes, hmmm.
START captain, you on a wise decision i compliment. yes, hmmm.
START necessary, it is necessary. for them not only, but for us as well. yeesssssss.
START fascinating, captain. to intelligence a highly advanced alien entity using this particular system as a laboratory for guiding another race. almost a god, you might say. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, meaningless, the difference is. in comparison, all still children, we are.
START this one's case in, kirk captain, still an eggling, this one is. yes, hmmm.
START take us out of orbit, mister sulu. go home, let us.
START captain, picking up a message i am. herh herh herh.
START it on audio put, lieutenant uhura. herh herh herh.
START go in peace. yes. go in peace. learned much, you have. be proud. hmmmmmm.
START all systems affirmative, captain. on course and on schedule, the enterprise is. hmmmmmm.
START nice to play diplomat for a change, will it be, eh, spock, hmm?
START to sickbay kirk. emergency! yeesssssss.
START to the point get, bones.
START contracted the disease, spock has. fatal to vulcans, it is. herh herh herh.
START sure are you, hmm?
START suffocation, the result is.
START one. naturally occurring drug called strobolin. but only found on a few planets in the galaxy, is it.
START the nearest strobolin supply planet to our present position, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START spock last without the drug, how long can, hmm?
START i can give him injections of a synthesised drug, slow the disease, that would. but after two days the body builds up an immunity. it loses its effectiveness. of the third day by the end, irreversible will the disease be.
START take four days to get the drug, will it, but die in three, spock will. got to be a way, there is. yeesssssss.
START of course. if to get the drug in time we cant go out of our way, there, another ship closer to beta canopus, must be. to bridge kirk. me starfleet get, lieutenant.
START the symptoms be, what will, bones, hmm?
START to see me you wished, sir, hmm?
START yes, spock. sit down. arranged a rendezvous to pick up the drug you need, have we. hmmmmmm.
START i trust it will affect our scheduled arrival at deneb five not. hmmmmmm.
START no, not, it will not.
START that be all, will, captain, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START one other thing. cut your duty time in half, i have.
START captain, be necessary that will not. quite able i am. hmmmmmm.
START all, that is, spock. dismissed. yes, hmmm.
START hurt seeing him like that, it will. hmmmmmm.
START sir, picking up a ship ahead, our sensors are.
START sure it is the enterprise i am not, sir. too far away to tell, it is.
START to rendezvous time, mister arex, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to ask i hate, but.
START aye, captain. squeeze a wee bit more speed out of her, we will. hmmmmmm.
START it, what is, bones, hmm? yeesssssss.
START conserving energy, i was, captain.
START you in sickbay mccoy wants. herh herh herh.
START sensor readout, captain. the enterprise closing on us it is not, sir.
START no, sir. an alien ship, is it, design, never seen before, have i. yeesssssss.
START hurt a bit this will not, spock.
START an unnecessary assurance, doctor, to being untrue in addition. yes, hmmm.
START the last time i waste my bedside manner on a vulcan, that is.
START such restraint, welcome, would be. herh herh herh.
START well, that is too bad not. to work back, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START the drug is working any more not. hmmmmmm.
START i know, christine. i know. worry, do not, have the strobolin soon we will. hmmmmmm.
START increased speed, have they, sir, closing fast.
START no good, captain. to the enterprise send out an emergency signal.
START captain, getting a signal from the huron, am i. an emergency beacon, it is, automated.
START to ship try ship.
START sensor report, mister spock. at the rendezvous point are they, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no, sir. reached it they had not. yes, hmmm.
START compute new course, mister arex. see what's going on, let us. herh herh herh.
START at bare minimum for life support, the huron's power levels are, captain. picking up metallic debris, am i.
START based on present data, say yes, i would. yeesssssss.
START spock, all right are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to sickbay bridge. emergency. yeesssssss.
START got to have that drug, we have, jim. useless now, the synthetic is. yes, hmmm.
START you can do what, bones. yeesssssss.
START blasted vulcan. you have red blood like any normal human why could not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to make contact still unable, sir. herh herh herh.
START mister scott, lieutenant uhura, with me come. mister sulu, the conn, you have. beaming over, are we.
START scotty, check the cargo hold. there, see if the drug is. herh herh herh.
START uhura, get a playback of the log, see if you can. i know what happened here want to. nurse, to the wounded attend.
START to captain kirk scott.
START no drug and no dilithium shipment. completely empty, the hold is. yes, hmmm.
START out, this screen is, sir. but take the tapes and play them back on the enterprise, we can.
START good. nurse, he, how is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START surgery, he needs surgery, captain, but live, he will live. hmmmmmm.
START to enterprise kirk. to beam over ready. have the medical team standing by.
START pull through, will he. jim, what about spock, hmm? if we have not that drug in twenty hours, die, he will die. yeesssssss.
START run the huron's sensor tapes through the computer, have i, sir. new design, the intruder ship is, never before encountered by federation shipping. yes, hmmm.
START yes, sir. of radioactive waste the intruder ship produces a unique trail, now bearing two one two degrees mark one seven five.
START he, how is, bones, hmm?
START not good, jim. have to put a respirator on him to help him breathe soon, i will.
START following the intruder ship's trail, are we.
START we even not know it it is the right one. yes, hmmm.
START got to be, it is. herh herh herh.
START of being a doctor what's the use, anyway, hmm? only as good as our drugs and technology make us, we are. underneath all the tricks, as well be practising in the middle ages i might.
START if you really believed that, bones, still be a doctor after twenty five years you would not. yes, hmmm.
START to warp eight increase speed. yes, hmmm.
START to hide a good place for an intruder, would you say not, mister sulu, hmm? herh herh herh.
START perfect. and show that the radioactive residue stops in the middle of the belt, a long range sensor can. yeesssssss.
START deflectors up. yellow alert. to warp one cut speed.
START that, what was, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START composed of a highly unstable mineral combination, these asteroids are, sir. with each other they explode upon impact. hmmmmmm.
START captain, if the power of those rocks, harnessed, could be, make a fantastic source of energy, they would. yeesssssss.
START also make quite a weapon. as she goes steady, sulu. hmmmmmm.
START to port hard, sulu. face them head on, let us. herh herh herh.
START standard phasers, sir. weak, though. diffused, low quality beam. stop them, our deflectors can.
START i recognise the ship's markings, captain. an orion, it is.
START hailing us, they are, captain.
START it on visual put, lieutenant. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, this is. for neutral, pretty quick to fire your phasers, you were.
START hold on that, uhura. to stand by tell them. yes, hmmm.
START their hold sensors picking up the dilithium in, sir. yeesssssss.
START if it, they have it, too small an amount to detect, it is.
START to orion vessel enterprise. proposal to make i have. if the huron's cargo, you do have, some perishable drugs in it that we desperately need, there were. hmmmmmm.
START these drugs be worth to you if we had them, what would, hmm? herh herh herh.
START we get what we want, our neutrality remains intact plus, hmm? consider your offer, will we. yes, hmmm.
START to sickbay kirk.
START bones, much time how, hmm?
START hailing us, the orions are, sir. yes, hmmm.
START it on the screen put, lieutenant.
START counterproposal, do you have, hmm?
START to face face, hmm? where, hmm?
START our ships on the large asteroid near. beam down simultaneously, we could, and hand you the drug myself, would i. even have to give us the extra dilithium crystals you would not. your turn to consider, now it is.
START got to be a trap, it is, jim. yeesssssss.
START of it no doubt, sir. yes, hmmm.
START trap could it be, but the only way to get the drug, is it. and die if we do not, spock will. hmmmmmm.
START already made up your mind, you have, you have not, jim.
START yes, but not without precautions. keep my communicator channel open so you can hear what goes on, will i. keep the transporter locked on me, and if anything goes wrong, scotty, trusting you, am i.
START if this works not, lose you and spock, we could.
START if try we not, spock haves not a chance.
START you are saying we, escape, cannot, hmm?
START this ship or its crew orion's official neutrality comes before. report this incident to starfleet we cannot take kirk's word that he will not.
START plan, do you have, lieutenant, hmm? herh herh herh.
START can we convert the asteroid, orbiting into a doomsday bomb that will destroy both ships, are we, hmm?
START it take, what will, hmm?
START no. take it with me, will i when i beam down to meet captain kirk. of seeing his face i want the satisfaction when i tell him he and his crew are going to die with us. and us i am sure they trust not. if on the asteroid, kirk and i are, stay close by, the enterprise will.
START to orion vessel enterprise. herh herh herh.
START your terms i accept.
START jim, much time we have not. spock. hmmmmmm.
START the drug, as promised, captain. you wish scan it if.
START no, captain. report this incident to starfleet i cannot trust that you will not. if you do, lose its neutrality and be subject to federation retaliation, my planet will. yes, hmmm.
START escape the enterprise, you cannot. yeesssssss.
START but destroy it, we can.
START it, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START dilithium down there with them there is, sir.
START an explosive device in my backpack that will start a molecular chain reaction and detonate this asteroid i have. destroyed will your ship be. yeesssssss.
START but yours, so will.
START captain, close, it was close. hmmmmmm.
START get up to the bridge, let us.
START gone, they are gone, sir.
START scanning as you ordered, i was, and they just disappeared off the asteroid. both the earther and the captain. yes, hmmm.
START the orion vessel, i have, sir.
START captain kirk, this is. your captain as prisoner, we have. your choice, sir. herh herh herh.
START spock, no way you can deny it, there is. yes, hmmm.
START doctor mccoy, i.
START waited a long time for this, i have, and you are going to cheat me not. yes, hmmm.
START spock, saved you before, that green blood of yours may have, but this time it almost in did you. you, deny it, cannot.
START to yours i still prefer my physiological structure. yeesssssss.
START yes, gentlemen, back to normal, things are.
START this position maintain the enterprise in, sulu. if spock and i survive, return here, we will. if not, mister scott, your orders, you have. energise. hmmmmmm.
START religious leader, he not was, hmm?
START our teacher our salvation and. he brought us peace. he made us great. he died, and we made him immortal. yeesssssss.
START recorded before his death, alar's brain patterns were, of indurite sculpture in a piece.
START our soul, of the skorr the soul, was stolen. hmmmmmm.
START the theft triggered a racial fury in the skorr. preparing for war, they are.
START very real threat, is it. in two standard years, breed an army of two hundred billion warriors, the existing skorr could.
START my government fears this, so been kept secret, the theft of the soul of alar has. but recover it before my people discover it gone and go mad, we must, launch a jihad, holy war on the galaxy.
START unknown. the motive, as said, tchar has, to provoke a holy war. yes, hmmm.
START to its location is there any clue, hmm? yeesssssss.
START mad planet, geologically unstable. constant earthquakes, gravitic shifts, tidal waves. to two hundred and four above the temperature varies from twenty kelvin. somewhere on that planet, hidden, the soul of alar is. tried to recover it, three expeditions have. been lost, three expeditions have. the next, you are, if you agree.
START powerful race, the vedala are. why have your people retrieved the soul not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START survive on that planet my people could not. chance, you have. hmmmmmm.
START then done, it is done.
START feel the soul, i cannot. nowhere near it we are.
START to be expected, that is. of this planet shifts constantly the surface. certain where the soul is even the vedala are not.
START directional equipment that keys on indurite, it has.
START this place i like, got variety, it is. yes, hmmm.
START indicated, our direction is.
START this the mad planet why did the vedala call, hmm? herh herh herh.
START means nothing. tell the way, i can. that way.
START certain are you, human, hmm? herh herh herh.
START for sure, birdman. get lost, i cannot. be fooled about directions i cannot. why i am here, that is.
START the vedala would have chosen lara if her abilities were less than perfect not. herh herh herh.
START agreed, but forced to travel on the ground, are we. i want an overview.
START scout overhead, i will. yeesssssss.
START have been efficient in equipping us, the vedala will. acquaint myself with our supplies, i will. yeesssssss.
START say that i would not. unique personality, mister spock is. herh herh herh.
START but like you and me not human. different customs, maybe you got. much females there my world is, not so many men. come we find a man attractive, so, we say so. saying so, i am. how find you me, hmm? yeesssssss.
START fascinating. but we are here on a pleasure trip not, lara. herh herh herh.
START to take what pleasure there might be in it all the more reason. yeesssssss.
START checked the supplies, i have, captain. as expected, adequate and there are weapons, they are. yes, hmmm.
START against what, hmm? no life on this planet, there is.
START but , there is, captain. ourselves. and of alar there may be other things guarding the soul.
START and half.
START statistical probability.
START yes. but philosophy and poetry are appropriate here not.
START lava flow. to be expected, volcanic action is.
START never mind that. to get us out of here, you got. yes, hmmm.
START to divert the lava flow with a barricade we might be able. tchar, get us a visual estimate!
START of short duration, such a diversion would be, captain. and point out, i must, to escape the vehicle lacks sufficient speed. hmmmmmm.
START for one high speed run not if we used all of the power pack's energy.
START kirk. ravine sixty metres to your left there is. if blocked, it can be, flow past those rocks to one side, the lava will. hmmmmmm.
START him, i heard him. herh herh herh.
START carefully, em. destroy us, one missed connection could. yes, hmmm.
START i figure, bought ourselves a little time, have we. few minutes.
START twenty one degrees east. to get out of the flow path fifty metres. yeesssssss.
START leave, of you all.
START captain, get the others away, you must. herh herh herh.
START all getting away we are. yes, hmmm.
START far too close, captain. your action on my behalf i appreciate, but to the group and the mission, your first duty is. hmmmmmm.
START quite right, spock. and losing the best science officer in starfleet that responsibility includes not. hmmmmmm.
START you two argue honours going to, or are we get on with it going to, hmm? herh herh herh.
START oh! and i was just ask going to, what next, hmm? yeesssssss.
START on, we move on.
START have to carry the equipment, we will.
START come on, em, bit more. yeesssssss.
START sorry, em. needing you will we be. sord. hmmmmmm.
START go ahead, i will. yes, hmmm.
START it, what is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no life on this planet, there is.
START guess, right, you are. this planet just gets on your nerves. herh herh herh.
START sense the soul, can i. fly ahead, i will, examine the building, and you on the way meet.
START tchar, be careful. you, we need you, too. yes, hmmm.
START tired, we are tired, sore, hurt and angry, but also just about there we are. scout ahead, i will. everybody else stay together, keep moving.
START go with you i will. remember, my job scouting's. by rights, be doing it alone, i should. yeesssssss.
START sord, what think you saw back there did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START know, do not, vulcan. shape, really make it out could not. probably seeing things, like kirk figures. herh herh herh.
START be no life on this planet, there should.
START yes. informed us if there were any live beings here we should know of would the vedala have. yes, hmmm.
START know about it maybe the vedala did not.
START an impossibility, that is. hmmmmmm.
START think so, hmm? so sure i am not. herh herh herh.
START it that is. of a long end, hard journey.
START to go back, we still have, james. you true i tell, you an attractive man i find. if together, we were together, the trip, easier, would be. and if anything happened, why, some green memories, we'd have. yes, hmmm.
START much green memories, i already have. yes, hmmm.
START maybe some other time, lara. our work cut out for us here, we still have. herh herh herh.
START the shape of your people's primitive temples is this not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START keep working. cover you, i will. yes, hmmm.
START right, the vedala were. no living creatures here, there are, only the mechanised sentinels. hmmmmmm.
START hit tchar, we will. herh herh herh.
START to tchar what happened, hmm?
START no way to tell from here, there is. the mechanical exploded. we, reach the roof from the outside, cannot. have to try to get to him from the interior, we will. hmmmmmm.
START rest awhile, we could. lara, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no. come this far, we have. yeesssssss.
START finish it, let us. or to finish us give this deadfall a chance.
START prefer to press on, i too would, captain. the mechanicals on guard may be what sord saw tracking us earlier. or there may be others. in either case, more advantageous to avoid another encounter would it be.
START pretty. how we reach it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START the walls are climbable not. yeesssssss.
START not without special equipment, which we not have. it from here, either we find a way to reach, or we fail. yeesssssss.
START you are exactly surprised not. herh herh herh.
START lost, three previous expeditions tried and were. natural trap, the planet is, but enough that is not. hmmmmmm.
START yes, from inside each expedition. remember spock, no life forms here except ourselves, you were the one who said there are. hmmmmmm.
START of the possibility approximately eighty two point five percent in favour. yes, hmmm.
START but it matters if we reach the soul not. get this far apparently the others did not. yes, hmmm.
START i am built for that sort of thing not. wait for you down here, i will. yeesssssss.
START geologically unstable, the planet is. inherently flexible, this structure is, to withstand earthquakes enabling it.
START get a line on it, i maybe can. yes, hmmm.
START locked in a force field, is it. merely bounce off it, your rope would. hmmmmmm.
START spock, our combined phasers disrupt the field, will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START define the field's energy base, i cannot, captain, but.
START of sabotage the last piece. you are i know who. thousand feet up, of reaching the soul no method, except by air, by flight. tchar.
START tchar. of the seven gods in the name, why, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you stole this. start a bloody crusade across the galaxy, you will. tell us why, tchar.
START warrior race, the skorr were. we, now what are, hmm? to the illusion of peace slaves. cowards, our comfort soft in. stolen our souls, this sick dream has. tchar, i am tchar, of the skorr hereditary prince, of battles leader. lead my people into glory, will i, to avenge our history. yeesssssss.
START most of them, killed, will be. rise up to battle the skorr, the warrior races of the federation will. hmmmmmm.
START fly and fight as a skorr, you now can. yes, hmmm.
START no offence, little ones, but me tackle him let.
START with you last week, captain. herh herh herh.
START for retrieval call, now. yeesssssss.
START me die let.
START going back with us, you are. yes, hmmm.
START you thanks we give. returned to his people, the soul of alar is. herh herh herh.
START what about tchar, hmm? how are you punish him going to, hmm? yeesssssss.
START no. return and you will see, you will, there, no questions, will be, no medals, our thanks only. and in time, gone from you, even the memory will be.
START what you mean, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you transported over and came right back. call it off did they, hmm?
START we gone, how long were, hmm? yeesssssss.
START long, hmm? about two minutes, i guess. i not understand. yeesssssss.
START their minds the vedala changed. past, the danger is. to your stations back. much other places to go, have we.
START apparently desperate, the need was.
START of a ship the captain, his rank no matter, must follow the book. hmmmmmm.
START capability, afraid, i am afraid, of most humans, out of the reach. yeesssssss.
START the most impossible, you vulcans are, unimaginative. yes, hmmm.
START bones, helping the situation that is not. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, we expect to find on lactra seven, what can, hmm? yeesssssss.
START class m planet, it is, gravity earth normal, atmosphere earth normal. no previous information available except that, there is which the survey ship logged before her crew left her. hmmmmmm.
START to their lot according, they beamed down six weeks ago. yeesssssss.
START of me careless, mister spock. planetary life forms, hmm?
START support life forms, it certainly can. but speculate on what type without further data i cannot. conducting a sensor scan now, mister arex is. hmmmmmm.
START jim, if lost, the others are, take the risk why, hmm?
START because be dead they may not. to find out, have we.
START still a risk, is it. hmmmmmm.
START why we are here, that is, bones. gentlemen, travel light, we will. phasers, tricorders, communicators and medical kit. yeesssssss.
START sir, located a variety of life forms on the planet, mister arex has. no large groups or city clusters yet.
START then beam back up, we will.
START exist under these planetary conditions, unusual that such a lake would. yeesssssss.
START to navigate on land it may be able. herh herh herh.
START it can i know.
START get out of here let us.
START see if i can pick up anything on my communicator, will i. captain kirk of the uss enterprise, this is, of the ariel calling the crew. come in please. come in.
START get a voice reply strange you did not.
START many reasons why we did not, there could be. hmmmmmm.
START to gather strength from our phasers it seems. my opinion in. herh herh herh.
START of the neck concentrate on the underside.
START undamaged, i am undamaged. doctor mccoy, where is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START get you out, will we, bones. yeesssssss.
START appear a more logical solution is in order, it would, captain. the tail off we lift not, we dig the doctor out.
START thanks. running out under there, the air was. yeesssssss.
START you hurt were, hmm?
START no, just surprised. it is every day a dinosaur falls on you not. pretty strange place, this is. yeesssssss.
START agreed. to cross, how much desert do we have, mister spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START our pace we'd better pick up. no place for cover if we meet any other creatures, there is. that way, the bearing on the signal we heard is. yeesssssss.
START captain, the beast, seem familiar to you did it, hmm?
START seen something very like it on canopus three i have, but light years from here, that is. still, the same as on canopus, this desert area is.
START full of sand, my shoes are.
START doctor, amazing, your lack of scientific interest is.
START happy to discuss that with you, i will be, mister spock, to my medical lab next time you drop in. hmmmmmm.
START seen stranger things, i have, mister spock.
START to enterprise kirk. yeesssssss.
START north east. where we got the signal from, that is. all right, scotty, keep scanning. kirk out. hmmmmmm.
START it i like not, jim. why only one short signal and no more, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i not know. but at least, alive, are they. herh herh herh.
START apparently alive. be sure we cannot. hmmmmmm.
START to believe they are i choose. yeesssssss.
START to test the water first allow me, doctor.
START captain, too pure, the water is. hmmmmmm.
START nonetheless, too pure, is it.
START in other words, too good to be true, it is.
START correct, captain. and also illogical, a rain forest this close to a desert is. seen since we landed was manufactured, it is my theory that what we have, not created.
START terraforming is new not. it implies intelligent life forms. yeesssssss.
START unless, of course, the pattern, the random choice is.
START spock, ever say anything straight out do you, hmm?
START gentlemen, please. work to do, we have. yeesssssss.
START now obvious, the desperation of the science ship's first landing party is.
START still alive, we are, are we not, hmm?
START no. like the dragons on maravel, they are. get them, the stun charge should.
START by observation alone, they hit an invisible force field it appears. yeesssssss.
START if true, that is, spock, then.
START been travelling for hours we have. where taking us are they, hmm?
START captain, it is there. yeesssssss.
START five square kilometres, must that be. yeesssssss.
START if the builders, these are, an admirable feat, it is. yeesssssss.
START very interested in communicating with us they seem not. if communicate at all, can they. yes, hmmm.
START in a way we understand perhaps not. i keep receiving impressions. hmmmmmm.
START well, it i have got one and i definitely like not. guess they are doing exactly what we would do, i would. yeesssssss.
START well, if we came upon an alien creature we'd never seen before, free of harmful bacteria, the first thing we'd do is to make sure it was. then we'd see if, intelligent, was it.
START congratulations, doctor. most logical assumption.
START more important question, gentlemen, there is a way out of here is whether or not. force field. it seems harmless enough. herh herh herh.
START so of a jail do the bars, unless, on the inside, you are.
START and definitely on the inside, are we. yeesssssss.
START of energy a wasteful use, doctor. i believe, hear you without your shouting, can they.
START picking up impressions, you said you were. are the aliens telepathic, hmm?
START come to the conclusion they are, have i, captain. but the speed at which the thoughts flow is too great for me to comprehend except for the most fleeting image. hmmmmmm.
START communicate with them some way, surely we can. hmmmmmm.
START they appear to be as advanced beyond earth civilisation as, from a colony of ants, you are.
START then all those other creatures where we beamed down, what were, hmm? yeesssssss.
START recall we recognised at least two species from vastly different planets, you will. appear natural to this planet the environment did not. easily travel to other star systems to collect specimens, a technology this advanced could. yeesssssss.
START you mean, some kind of a zoo, is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START our phasers they took, communicators and other equipment so they must have some idea, intelligent, are we. yes, hmmm.
START not necessarily, captain. take a sharp object away from a child, they could have taken them for the same reason you would. yeesssssss.
START or maybe they see how our toys work want to. hmmmmmm.
START possibility, that too is.
START got to communicate with them, have we. yes, hmmm.
START well, so for mythology much. yes, hmmm.
START what they want for now, better do, anyway. they activated another force field. yeesssssss.
START real grass, this is. yes, hmmm.
START yes, doctor. been carefully prepared for human types, this area has. safe now, the aliens are. yeesssssss.
START safe, they are safe because we are now exhibits in a zoo.
START zoo, hmm? no animal, i am. yes, hmmm.
START this planet on, bones, the animals, they seem to be the people and we are.
START hello, lieutenant commander tom markel, am i. our biologist, this is, randi bryce. hmmmmmm.
START james kirk, of the enterprise captain. first officer spock. our physician, doctor mccoy.
START been expecting you, we have.
START your communicator signal we heard. herh herh herh.
START then you warn us why did not, hmm?
START we could warn you not. constantly picking up our equipment and fooling with it, they are. yes, hmmm.
START where keep the equipment do they, hmm? use my tricorder, i could.
START no use, sir. on an exhibit table, they are. beyond the force field.
START six of you on the mission, there were. hmmmmmm.
START beam down in time to save the original three we did not.
START in the house, lieutenant randolph is. running a high fever, she is, but seem to do anything about it we cannot. yeesssssss.
START check her out, i will. help, i maybe can.
START you learned about the aliens what have, hmm?
START much there is not, sir. zoo, this is. so to be almost unbelievable tremendous as. hmmmmmm.
START tried an escape have you, hmm?
START dozen different ways. tunnels, weakness in the force field, nothing worked. yes, hmmm.
START tried to communicate have you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes, sir. but been able to arouse in them is a sort of quivering motion, we all have.
START company, we seem to have.
START for us they built this. we have concluded, telepathic, are they. to make it like home, i guess they read our minds and came as close as they could. yes, hmmm.
START yes, sir. i, seem to get through, cannot, captain. with each other they appear too involved.
START to be getting a response you seem.
START my impression is that, laughing at me, are they. yes, hmmm.
START so far, mister spock, we have found anything funny in this not. hmmmmmm.
START find the others, let us. for human companionship i feel a need. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, mister spock, nancy randolph, this is, our navigator. yes, hmmm.
START she, how is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START without my instruments, difficult to make an exact diagnosis, it is. malarial type infection caused by an insect bite, rough guess is. i, do anything without my medikit, cannot.
START the lactrans outside, what they do, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to be guards they appear, sir. each other making sure we harm not.
START feed us or do we shift for ourselves do they. hmmmmmm.
START to the same place always, hmm?
START this house behind, outside the force field. our toys all, phasers, communicators, medical supplies. herh herh herh.
START then be there, my equipment should. yeesssssss.
START get them to give them back to us, maybe we can. yes, hmmm.
START captain, highly intelligent, they are. sure they are quite aware of the purpose of each piece of equipment now, i am.
START be harmful the medical kit would not. help her, it would, of their specimens one.
START then it that way think about, doctor. hmmmmmm.
START food. but it is feeding time not.
START sensed a need and interpreted it as food, they must have. yes, hmmm.
START all here, it is. they have damaged it not. yes, hmmm.
START of the situation what's your evaluation, markel, hmm? yeesssssss.
START they treat us quite well, sir. to want us alive and well they seem. and to let us go they want not. herh herh herh.
START for the curators of a zoo a natural reaction. yes, hmmm.
START sir, do you think, any chance of getting out, there is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START as alive we long as are, chance, there is. tonight, try and find a weak link in the force field, will i.
START your pardon begging, captain, face the situation realistically, i think we should. specimen animals in a zoo, are we. and taken every precaution to prevent our escape, they have. to them, caged for life, are we. to be drawing quite a crowd we seem.
START gentlemen, since learning from us, are they, learn something from them why we not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START how, hmm? we, get through to them, cannot, hmm? herh herh herh.
START telepathically, they communicate telepathically. yeesssssss.
START between themselves, yes, but, mister spock, vulcans telepathic are not, hmm?
START to a degree, with with some others our own species and, but eons beyond mine, the lactran intelligence is. yes, hmmm.
START how much learned have you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START as much as a mother learns from a six month old infant about.
START of us what's their impression, hmm?
START to frighten the smaller ones we seem. some, the females, i believe, find us quite ugly.
START what about the enterprise, jim. get worried, scotty could. beam down a fighting force, could he.
START my orders were to attempt a rescue under any condition not. yes, hmmm.
START wise move, captain. from what, gather, can i, no match for their force field, even the enterprise is.
START with another move how about coming up, then, hmm?
START if suggest, i may suggest, sir, hmm?
START obvious they can pick up specific thought transmissions from us if they care to go to the trouble, is it. to be ill i suggest that one of our number appear. put strong thoughts in our minds that a communicator is needed for recovery, the rest will.
START try it, let us, and close to the communicator let us be when we do. pretend i am sick, will i. of you concentrate all.
START little one, is it. child could be.
START my hands on a communicator, once i get, have scotty beam us all aboard the enterprise, can i. ready now. yeesssssss.
START enterprise, captain kirk, this is. beam us aboard.
START receiving an impression they are worried about their child, i am, captain. yes, hmmm.
START worried about the enterprise, am i. yeesssssss.
START to think you made the child disappear they seem. they did know we were a deadly species not, of injuring one of them capable.
START well, stand here let us not. do something let us.
START argh, the best thing we can do is! yeesssssss.
START it, what is, hmm?
START captain, fight it. as hard as you can fight it. they think too fast in too complex a manner. if for even one moment he gives up, he may go mad. herh herh herh.
START i think, harmless, is it, but sure i am not.
START me to whatever it wants.
START now, this over supposing you and i talk. talk, you can, you, cannot, hmm? talk you cannot. well, you do, what can, hmm? oh, no! listen, send us off into space if you, you will. herh herh herh.
START jim, all right are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes. so, i think so. hmmmmmm.
START captain, break through your mind on a one to one basis they have concluded they cannot. now gathering the mental strength of all five of them to break through, they are.
START i, hold out against that many, cannot. hmmmmmm.
START no. no! me alone let! please! destroying me, are they! my mind to tearing, to.
START all right, i am. scotty, what doing here are you, hmm?
START with me it made contact. yeesssssss.
START what learn did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START only six years old but it has an iq in the thousands, it is. my brain it picked, all the knowledge in the enterprise computers, and of orbit sent us flying off out.
START then how get here did you, hmm?
START i convinced it i was a pet not, and bring the ship back into orbit, that it should. then it into the transporter to return here, i got. herh herh herh.
START trying to contact us directly, they are. make out something, i can. it is, difficult, it is difficult, they think so fast. but learned and told its parents all about the federation and the races it encompasses, the child has.
START what else know about us do they, hmm? herh herh herh.
START considered simplistic, are we, but of evolving into a higher order in the process. yes, hmmm.
START but tell or think that to me the little one did not. yes, hmmm.
START exactly, sir. it seems they were where, some tens of thousands of centuries ago, are we. their centuries, not ours.
START of here do we get out, hmm?
START so, it appears so. we belong in their zoo they feel not. yeesssssss.
START to transport everyone ready, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to enterprise kirk. to beam aboard two parties prepare, all human. yeesssssss.
START captain, scientific contact team, are we, and we learned practically nothing. yeesssssss.
START offhand, say we learned to keep our hands off, i would. yes, hmmm.
START but so much more, there was.
START other opportunities, will there be, mister markel. just received their final telepathic message, i have.
START welcome back, we will be, in twenty or thirty centuries. herh herh herh.
START theirs. and take me some time to figure out how long that is, it will.
START either way, mister spock, hardly be our problem, it will.
START the most remarkable thing the slavers ever produced, these stasis boxes are. time stands still inside a stasis box. billion years means nothing in there. it, what is, lieutenant, hmm?
START studied the history of the slaver empire, i have, but sketchy, it is sketchy. we know, masters of all the intelligent beings in this galaxy a billion years ago, were they, until one race revolted. of information we have are the stasis boxes the only source, hmm?
START exterminated in the war that followed, the slavers and all their subjects were. to evolve all over again intelligent life had. the only remnant of those lost civilisations, the stasis boxes are.
START why glowing like that is it, hmm?
START mister sulu, our position, what is, hmm?
START passing beta lyrae, sir. of galactic plane one forty two degrees north east. yes, hmmm.
START most peculiar. this indicates, another stasis box circling beta lyrae, there is.
START most illogical that a stasis box would remain here undiscovered for so long would it be. one of the rare spectacles of the galaxy, beta lyrae is. to see it almost every ship that passes stops. herh herh herh.
START carrying a stasis box detector, maybe no one else was.
START possible. another stasis box, the only known stasis box detector is. still. mister sulu. hmmmmmm.
START bring us about. investigate the beta lyrae system, we will.
START tourists here we are not, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, if to find another stasis box it takes a stasis box, how did anyone ever find the first one, hmm?
START as with a number of discoveries, purely by accident, lieutenant. to be almost under us the other box seems, perhaps thirty metres below the ice.
START we will have any trouble digging for it not. this low pressure in, boil as soon as the phasers melt it, the ice should. hmmmmmm.
START we, where are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START kzinti spacecraft.
START that is good not. kzinti are supposed to have phasers not, are they, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the treaty of sirius permits them any weapons at all not, beyond police vessels. obviously, been broken, the treaty has. herh herh herh.
START police web. be able to move unless we can turn it off somehow we will not.
START heard all kzinti telepaths are unhappy neurotics, i have. he fits the description.
START no sure way to guard our thoughts from him, there is. mister sulu, likely to deal with me or lieutenant uhura he is not. inferior beings to them, she and i are. but meat eaters, the kzinti are. if you sense him reading your mind, of eating a raw vegetable think.
START yes, sir. goad them into revealing their purpose, maybe i can.
START lieutenant uhura. this may be crucial. of the kzinti in the presence, say anything, do not, do anything startling, do not. to look harmless try. hmmmmmm.
START forgetting kzinti females are dumb animals are you, hmm? an intelligent creature, in an emergency the kzinti may forget a human female is.
START lieutenant, your intelligence i value, but we may be able to seize an opportunity to escape if the kzinti believe, none, you have. hmmmmmm.
START of the starfleet vessel enterprise lieutenant sulu. first officer spock, this is.
START stealing, a habit with you, must be. this ship, two stasis boxes. yes, hmmm.
START with humankind and lost all of them the kzinti fought four wars. two hundred years ago, the last one was, and learned a thing since you have not.
START then really working for the kzinti government, you are. hmmmmmm.
START of a slaver could that be a picture, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START if so, the first ever discovered, is it. an important historical find.
START like fresh meat it looks. over a billion years in that box, and fresh, it looks fresh. yeesssssss.
START the human, sulu, to be a slaver believes it.
START of no use to us, it is. small telescopes, we already have.
START merely a laser. had a more effective model for over one hundred years, the federation has. hmmmmmm.
START telepath's suit lost considerable pressure. to save him we reached the ship in time. herh herh herh.
START perhaps a personal rocket motor. place one's foot on the pedals and balance, one could. to be transportation it appears, not a weapon. yes, hmmm.
START slowing down i am. to run the hundred in record time i used. i out, how long was, hmm? miss much, did i, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START not much. get out of that rocket setting, much good they will.
START fortunate none of the settings so far have been superior to the technology now available to the federation, are we.
START mister spock, move, i can move.
START so can i. off, the police web is. yeesssssss.
START to be an energy absorber the fifth setting seems. fascinating. no idea the slavers had such things, i had.
START mister spock, we.
START yes. when i give the word, for the shuttle make. to zigzag remember. ready, hmm? go. herh herh herh.
START the weapon, have i. hmmmmmm.
START got uhura, they have, and subspace radio. call for help from the kzin planet if they think the weapon's worth it, can they. yes, hmmm.
START no, they cannot. or rather, not, will.
START that gives us some time. plan it that way, you did, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START as as you stay free long, do anything the kzinti cannot or will not. but use lieutenant uhura as a bribe, could they. herh herh herh.
START agreed. however, to this point, we have seen anything more powerful than equipment starfleet already has not.
START yes. but feeling, have i, mister spock. belonged to a spy, this weapon must have, an espionage agent. hmmmmmm.
START of weapons i acknowledge your expertise in the field, mister sulu, but i see not how you can determine probable ownership.
START well, here, look at it. all these settings. common slaver soldier could not handle them we know not, but as a weapon, effective, only the laser is. the others are necessary for the line soldier's one purpose not, to destroy the enemy.
START but seen all the phases we have. herh herh herh.
START perhaps not. the null setting, there is. nothing, it seems to do. but it be there, why should, hmm? it corresponds to a safety lock not.
START to another setting it may be the key. herh herh herh.
START wrong. they think not much of you.
START no. see what this does do, let us.
START we, give them that, cannot! hmmmmmm.
START fascinating. produced anything so powerful, no world in the federation has. almost beyond theoretical limits. to energy at a distance total conversion of matter.
START if that, the kzinti had, their dinner table would the whole galaxy be. yes, hmmm.
START no idea, have i. generating power, it is.
START grid, there is. it may be another communications device. but that seems redundant.
START the kzinti frightened, it has. herh herh herh.
START the kzint, legends of weapons haunted by their owners, have i. yes, hmmm.
START no, to be conversing with them it appears. reasoning computer that small, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i not know. when off, i am off, no sense of passing time i have.
START on a mission, we were. tell you of it unless you know certain code words i may not. hmmmmmm.
START if describe the positions of the stars in your sector, you could, passed since then, we would know how much time has.
START without certain code words, i may describe our location not. herh herh herh.
START the null position, twist me widdershins until you reach. then. hmmmmmm.
START got it, they have.
START something we can do must there be.
START that was the total conversion beam setting not.
START let them have that weapon we cannot.
START about to get it they are not, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START slaver war computer, assume you are. been turned off, you have. for how long you know not, but turned off, when you were, war on, there was. awakened by aliens you never saw before, now you are. any of the military passwords they know not. they ask you so many questions, obvious they know little about you, is it. nowhere about, your owner is. you think, what would, hmm?
START think i would been captured by the enemy, i would. or an enemy, at least.
START and to find your most powerful weapon setting when they asked you how, you give them, what would, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START disrupter field.
START yes. another conventional weapon. not, it appears the total conversion beam was the only thing the slavers had that we do.
START of the weapon no sign, of course. have looked nice in some museum, would it.
START reached the museum, it never would have, lieutenant. too much power in that one setting, there was. if not the kzinti, tried to possess it would the klingons or some other species have.
START strange, how the past sometimes breaks through into the present. that ancient war, sparked a new war between man and kzinti, could have. herh herh herh.
START did you say the kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their dead owners not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START this rate at, never get over those old superstitions, will they. hmmmmmm.
START the largest land mass on the planet, this is, it is not, spock, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes, captain. mere outcroppings, the others are. of submerged mountains they suggest the peaks. herh herh herh.
START i suggest that we get these seawater and algae specimens. the least of the lot, they are.
START for with you once i agree, doctor. come from the sea bottom, the more informative specimens will. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant clayton, with their business open the hatch and let our two scientists here get on.
START that thing, what the devil was, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START get a closer look at it before the phaser stun wears off, let us. submerge, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START similar to that of a denebian whale, its skeleton is, captain. hmmmmmm.
START regaining consciousness, is it. surface, mister clayton.
START spock, to fire phasers prepare. yeesssssss.
START respond phasers not, captain. sustained damage to the power pack, we must have when the creature struck us.
START to enterprise kirk. emergency.
START under attack, we are. beam us aboard, scotty. hmmmmmm.
START repeat, lost contact, have we. come in, captain. come in. hmmmmmm.
START nothing, there is. just nothing, there is.
START i see some rocks. just above sea level, they are, about two miles away. something on them, there is. yeesssssss.
START maybe, still alive, are they. herh herh herh.
START functioning, their bodies are. metabolism, heart. everything but the lungs.
START breathe, cannot. suffocating. help. breathe cannot. herh herh herh.
START to them what happened, doctor, hmm? it, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START their whole lung structure something's changed. live in the air anymore they cannot.
START stumped, we are stumped, jim. to be the major factor in your mutation the hormone seems, but we just, identify it, cannot. yes, hmmm.
START are you sure the mutation was somehow accomplished naturally not, hmm?
START infused into your bodies at key structural points, it was. to be done by injection, it had.
START but you duplicate it, cannot, bones, hmm? information on every procedure in the federation's hospitals, your medical computers have. hmmmmmm.
START highly sophisticated and completely unknown to us, is it.
START intelligent life forms on argo, that implies there are. yes, hmmm.
START any life forms down there the sensors indicate not, aside from fish. yeesssssss.
START fail to indicate the large marine creature that attacked us, they did. incomplete, perhaps the readings are, blocked by underwater pressure forces. less turbulent at greater depth, oceans are. more suitable to intelligent forms, such conditions would be.
START we are limited not. go wherever we want in that ocean, we can.
START too risky, is it, jim. argo's almost totally unexplored. out of contact range you would be, unarmed.
START to, i have to, bones. this place look at. tank. command a ship from inside an aquarium, i cannot. live in here, i cannot. yeesssssss.
START i know what, saying, you are, jim, but you go down on that planet and you die there if.
START right now, only two choices, have we. for the rest of our lives or stay on argo live in an aquarium somewhere. i will accept either one of them not.
START what about you, spock, hmm? your logic tell you, what does, hmm?
START the captain states the case emotionally, of course, but correctly. be of little value to this ship if i am confined to a tank in sickbay i would. accompany the captain, i must. hmmmmmm.
START change us back, an intelligence that can produce this kind of mutation can. got to find it we have, bones. it, there, must be.
START make contact as soon as possible, will we, mister scott. yeesssssss.
START go away, air breathers. you are wanted here not. yes, hmmm.
START we will harm you not. friends, we are friends.
START leave us. enough our young saved your lives once, it is. if you go on, save you again, nothing will. yeesssssss.
START understand i not. saved us once, they said they would.
START i believe the phrase was, your lives once 'our young saved.' . yes, hmmm.
START yes, and seem to approve they did not. to be in that direction the answer appears, spock. yes, hmmm.
START say so, i would, captain. to retreat to a place of safety, the instinctive reaction of all frightened creatures is. hmmmmmm.
START of fantastic architecture an undersea civilisation capable. of in our galaxy medical triumphs unheard. they be afraid of us, why should, spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START quite possible, it is, captain, they find us grotesque and ugly that. and many people fear beings different from themselves. yes, hmmm.
START well, much help speculation is not. to get in there, have we.
START perhaps, a way open on the far side, there is. much less activity there, there is. hmmmmmm.
START that building in the centre. to be important it seems.
START of the aquans you stand before the ruling tribunal. domar, i am domar, the high tribune. hmmmmmm.
START captain kirk of the starship enterprise i am. my first officer, this is, mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START nothing without consulting the ancient records, can we do, hmm? herh herh herh.
START why the junior tribunes wish always to change the records, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START seem their ancient records are as well preserved as ours, it would. among us as spies, they found us again to come.
START them a chance to defend themselves you give not, cadmar. herh herh herh.
START correct, rila is. you may speak.
START visitors to your planet, we are. from another world, we come. yes, hmmm.
START you live not on the surface places, hmm?
START this world not on.
START mistaken, you are, sir. our only purpose, to find the means of reversing our mutations, here is.
START scott here. it, what is, doctor, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START sensors just gave us an update reading, scotty. seaquake due in that area there is, bad one. complete topography changes. hmmmmmm.
START within four hours. when to make contact are jim and spock due, hmm? herh herh herh.
START you contact them sooner can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes. examine the wreckage before we make judgement, let us. yes, hmmm.
START news, we have news, high tribune.
START still believe these creatures came in peace do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START we know not what to believe. herh herh herh.
START to the surface boulders and leave them there take these spies. justice enough for our enemies, is it. hmmmmmm.
START your strength conserve. free you, i will. too strong, the mesh is.
START to the big island go. bring assistance party. yes, hmmm.
START see anything did you, hmm?
START of them not a sign. wait a minute. who are.
START rila, my engineering officer, this is, mister scott. an aquan, tribune rila is. short distance away, their city is. hmmmmmm.
START obliged for your help, we are. captain, been trying to contact you for two hours, have we. sea bottom quake due there is. destroy this whole area, it will.
START legends of such a happening, there are. to sink into the sea it destroyed the ancient knowledge and caused the great surface places. yeesssssss.
START your race evolved from its ancient enemies that suggests. yes, hmmm.
START strange that such a highly developed race, violent, would be. hmmmmmm.
START exposed to a frightening geological disaster, they apparently were. such hardship induces savagery and violence. yeesssssss.
START they hunted and killed us. we feared, contaminate us with their violence, would they. also why it is forbidden to mutate back to surface forms, that is. hmmmmmm.
START then possible, reverse mutation is.
START legends of sealed places in the sunken ruins where many knowledge records of it are kept, there are. yeesssssss.
START there is much time not, captain. the quake's due in less than two hours.
START the ruins, how far are, rila, hmm?
START to reversing our mutations those old records may hold the key. got to find them before it is too late we have.
START take you to the ruins i cannot. against ordainments, is it.
START important, it is important, rila. for us not just. threatened by surface changes, the population of another planet is, too. help save them, argo's ancient knowledge can.
START yes. take you as far as the reef barrier i will.
START the ruins lie that way. now, take care. strong, the tides are.
START fascinating. obviously, of the continental shelf sank within a few minutes an entire portion. this may be the sealed place rila mentioned. an entrance panel, i believe this is, captain. herh herh herh.
START another chamber, there is. yes, hmmm.
START it that is, spock. to the survival of the race the key.
START if right, the universal translator is, similar to the ambergris of earth whales, the substance in your bloodstream is. induced by infusion of an antitoxin, reverse mutation is, of it concentrated doses.
START of the antitoxin what's the composition, bones, hmm?
START warned that if we break more ordainments, domar has, exiled to the open seas, we will be. yes, hmmm.
START reverse our mutations without the serum we cannot, the aquans benefit from the knowledge of their ancestors, nor can. yes, hmmm.
START useless in times of turbulence, ordainments are. help us, only knowledge will.
START nephro, break the ordainments, we must.
START quickly, leave, we must leave.
START no, no, no time, there is.
START well, get started, let us.
START how you feel, jim, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START little dizzy. otherwise normal.
START well, better get into some dry clothes. i would want you to catch cold not. your turn, spock. hmmmmmm.
START we will bombard the unpopulated pressure areas with phaser beams and change the epicentre of the quake so it will endanger your people or your city not. hmmmmmm.
START i did believe such knowledge was possible not. herh herh herh.
START start in three minutes, major tremors will, captain.
START incredible, it is incredible. of it all.
START as directed fire phasers, gentlemen. yeesssssss.
START in the north polar seas, sensors indicate the epicentre of the quake was, captain, totally uninhabited area.
START then safe, our people are. hmmmmmm.
START stabilize within a few hours, the seabed should.
START new city, argo appears to have, captain, or rather, one reborn. hmmmmmm.
START with little damage our people survived the seaquakes, to your help thanks. hmmmmmm.
START much gratitude we owe you and your friends, captain kirk. try to repay by making the ancient records available for your studies, we will.
START shown us the means of diverting quakes, our experience here has. mean much to the endangered federation planet, that will. yeesssssss.
START soft, the light is warm and the air is. glad, shall i be when the surface places can be inhabited.
START lose contact with each other like your ancestors, do not.
START pass ordainments to forbid it, we will. herh herh herh.
START and we, this time, will ignore them not. herh herh herh.
START in a state of chaos, our sensors are, captain. unreliable, they became unreliable when we entered the triangle.
START mister spock, see what i think i just saw did you, hmm?
START offer none at this time, i can. however, destroyed by our phaser fire the klingon ship was not. its shields clearly deflected the phasers. been affected if it were using its cloaking device would nor was its disappearance the type that have.
START the sensors are still registering normally not, sir. but venture the theory it has something to do with the many ship disappearances in this area, i would.
START natural phenomenon. but what, hmm? duty personnel on yellow alert. visual scan three hundred and sixty degrees, mister sulu.
START mousetrapped. if the first ship succeeds not in blasting us out of existence, two backup ships to do the job, they have.
START tactically well planned. when the federation investigates, recorded as just another mysterious starship disappearance, we will be.
START captain, receiving a class two signal from the lead klingon vessel, are we.
START put the signal on the main viewing screen, lieutenant, and to starfleet command pipe the entire exchange back. yes, hmmm.
START take three weeks to reach the nearest starbase, it will, sir.
START nonetheless, have it on the record let us.
START correct, your information is. captain kirk, this is. hmmmmmm.
START we did destroy the klothos not, and well aware of it, you are, commander.
START you like you may believe what, commander. fired upon first and returned fire, we were. our phaser fire and then disappeared the klothos deflectors turned aside. why i know not. but in the delta triangle, we are. yeesssssss.
START frankly, commander, of little importance to me, what you accept is. enterprise out. now, mister sulu. hmmmmmm.
START what fools! escape, they thinking can. to maximum and prepare to open fire accelerate. hmmmmmm.
START sir, are we going to defend ourselves not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START doing that for us, your deflector shields are, mister scott. hmmmmmm.
START dead on, sir. there in ten seconds, will we be.
START captain, just gone out, our deflector shields have.
START sir, the instruments. gone haywire, they have. orient myself i cannot. everything is. yes, hmmm.
START dead, subspace radio channels are, sir. yeesssssss.
START where go did they, hmm?
START sir, to be suffering from some form of vertigo we seem. yes, hmmm.
START tell, i cannot tell, sir. vision will focus not. hmmmmmm.
START like a vast sargasso sea, is it. of ships from every civilisation imaginable a graveyard.
START we, where are, sir, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START at another place in time, i think. if closely, we check closely, find many of those ships are the ones designated as lost in the delta triangle, i believe we will. herh herh herh.
START to that something corresponding. the records say every ship lost here vanished without a trace. most logged communication loss and disorientation just before disappearance. they entered a window to some other continuum, my guess was. comments, spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START excellent, your logic is, captain. random factor to the ship disappearances, there is. erratic, perhaps the touching of the two time continuums is. in any event, to follow the klothos in the window stayed open long enough for us.
START aye, and that tricky devil, where is, hmm?
START been scanning for her, have i, but there are so many ships here, hard to pick up a specific trace, is it. herh herh herh.
START only seen crude drawings of, there are ships here i have, pictures in museums. yes, hmmm.
START of the age of the metal in the hulls sensor scans give a rough approximation, captain. been here for centuries, some of them have. yes, hmmm.
START captain, the old bonaventure, there is. the first ship to have warp drive installed, she was. her third voyage she vanished without a trace on. yes, hmmm.
START yes. picking up life and energy readings from the cluster of ships ahead of us, i am. herh herh herh.
START totally depleted, scanners indicate the enterprise shields are, sir. yeesssssss.
START good. to battle stations all hands. to open fire on the enterprise immediately prepare.
START sir, frozen, our weaponry is. yeesssssss.
START no response, sir. no indication of damage, there is. all instruments register normal. hmmmmmm.
START to elysia welcome. devna, of laws interpreter. yes, hmmm.
START more aptly described as a pocket in the garment of time, is it.
START how freeze my weaponry did you, hmm?
START among us many individuals gifted with psionic powers, we have, our single goal peace being. attempting to break that peace, you were. yes, hmmm.
START our law under, responsible for the behaviour of your crews, you as ship captains are. should a crew member, with your knowledge or without, of violence whatsoever engage in any form, suffer the ultimate penalty, you will. for a century total immobilisation of your ship.
START century, hmm? of it we'd all be dead by the end. yeesssssss.
START no, commander kor. curios trap, this small universe of ours is. time passes here, but very slowly. to us a century means nothing. our council appears young. yet centuries old, all are. yeesssssss.
START your life here, almost perfect, must be, if you have wanted to leave not.
START wanted to leave at some time, all of us have, captain kirk. but made the best possible world here, have we, because no escape from it, we have found there is. yes, hmmm.
START getting out, we are.
START then pretty quick, we'd better do it, captain. hmmmmmm.
START if we find an answer, still take time, will it. hmmmmmm.
START that is just what we have got not.
START our dilithium crystals, is it, sir. deteriorating rapidly, they are. herh herh herh.
START know i not, sir. maybe because of the time warp we went through. but only four days at the most before power goes, we have. hmmmmmm.
START your computer got any miracles in, spock, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to predict impossible, captain. hmmmmmm.
START i want not a prediction. start work immediately, you will, around the clock, nonstop, until us out of here that you arrive at a formula gets.
START useless, these computations are. get out of here and come not back until you have a plan that works. hmmmmmm.
START what see you beyond your eyes, magen, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START gently, good magen. to us now return.
START impossible, it is impossible.
START try, they must try, xerius. try before they accept, they all must.
START this is the best, come up with, you could, mister spock, hmm?
START covered every possibility have you, hmm? every factor, hmm?
START several times, captain. to surrender hope i wish not, but the facts remain unchangeable.
START he is giving up not. if do it, they can, we why cannot, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START his crew and his ship unnecessarily jeopardising, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START been diverted to the engines, all power has, sir. picking up speed, are we.
START right, you were, spock. but i almost wish, made it, would they.
START given me an idea as to how we may be able to break through the time barrier, their attempt has. hmmmmmm.
START up with a formula, mister spock has come which may just get us out of here. yeesssssss.
START but with the klothos this involves combining our ship. herh herh herh.
START correct, that is.
START if we get out of here want to, our only choice, it is. hmmmmmm.
START complicated navigation problem, it is, to guide two such disparate ships trying. yes, hmmm.
START exhausted, considering we only have two days left before our supply of dilithium crystals is, with this plan i say we go. herh herh herh.
START good. contact kor right away, will i. yes, hmmm.
START it, what is, hmm?
START these new ones. to combine the two ships and try again now they plan. can you stop them not, xerius, hmm? herh herh herh.
START against our laws to try to escape it is not.
START so long as they break not our laws, we must impede them not. hmmmmmm.
START they die even if, hmm?
START their choice, it is.
START then settled, it is settled. our science teams will get to work right away conjoining our warp and navigation systems so, function as a single ship, will we. exchange of personnel and computer hookup to start as soon as, beamed back to our ship, are we.
START forgive me, commander. overcome by the moment i was. goodbye.
START true must the stories of his being half human be. yeesssssss.
START his mind perhaps the time continuum affected. yeesssssss.
START become affected i wonder if we all have not.
START to work with your old enemy your willingness, kirk. it is like you not, commander. what really you have in mind, hmm?
START know me, you do, kaz. very well, you think if the enterprise suddenly disintegrated after our dual ship had pierced the time continuum, what would, hmm? yeesssssss.
START think my commander had manoeuvred brilliantly, i would.
START and arranged, can it be, practically speaking, hmm?
START it implies a rather high risk factor, given the time involved and kirk's highly suspicious nature. but arranged, i believe it can be. yeesssssss.
START very good, kaz. leave it to you to attend to the details of the enterprise's destruction, i will.
START we must make our escape by tomorrow or our dilithium crystals, too depleted, will be, and we, trapped here forever, will be. yeesssssss.
START your pardon beg, sir. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, gabler. herh herh herh.
START the relief guard for the dilithium vault, bell and i are. we arrived a few minutes late and found them poking around. yeesssssss.
START lost, we were lost.
START lost, my foot. clearly posted as a restricted area, it is. to be there you knew you weren't supposed. hmmmmmm.
START captain, to escort this young man to his work area allow me. herh herh herh.
START return to your post and leave not it until you have been relieved. herh herh herh.
START jim, worried about spock, i am. he is just acting normal not. yeesssssss.
START under much pressure, is he, bones. yes, hmmm.
START that, i know that. but never known spock to act like a pal under any circumstances, i have, of all toward klingons least. yes, hmmm.
START and coming apart, he if is, jim, in serious trouble, we are. of here hinges on his computations getting out. hmmmmmm.
START talk to him, will i, bones. all i can do, is it. yes, hmmm.
START to be in order everything seems. but the only person who can really be sure, you then are. is that right not, spock, hmm?
START yes, captain. why you ask, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START that unusual, why is, hmm? they get out of here as much as we do want to. yeesssssss.
START touched them had i not, have agreed with you, i would, captain. but suspicious, even though contact was necessarily limited and their minds were, i picked up some indication, planning to sabotage the enterprise, are they. herh herh herh.
START say, i cannot say. the klingon found near the dilithium vault knew nothing specific. but some kind of sabotage in the offing, there is. hmmmmmm.
START to get through the time barrier they need us, if to get through at all, are they. security, captain kirk, this is. i want all security teams on duty around the clock. this ship watch every klingon who sets foot aboard. one of them to make a move we do not know about i want not. herh herh herh.
START the device, you have, kaz, hmm?
START my calculations by, triggered the exact moment our dual ship reaches warp eight will the capsule be. disengaged, approximately three minutes after the time barrier is pierced and we have, disintegrate, the enterprise will.
START excellent! kali, to do you know what. they entertain us tonight, but the gift they will receive in return, their destruction, will be.
START you, i thank you, captain. seen the dance of orion women before, you have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i wish, return through the time barrier and see orion again, could i. hmmmmmm.
START go, you could. willing to take passengers, we are.
START no. you see, all seen the futility of attempting to escape, we have. of us dreamed of breaking free once each. then we came to understand it could be done not, and our life here we accepted.
START done can we believe it be.
START then i shall interfere with your dream not, captain.
START get away from here, human. my woman, this is. herh herh herh.
START now just a minute. was ask her to dance i all did. she did have to say yes not. yeesssssss.
START come to the council chamber now to face charges, ship captains and these two will. herh herh herh.
START forbidden here, you know any form of violence is. to kill your man began the fight and attempted. for a star century i propose we freeze the klothos and its crew.
START preparing to attempt an escape from here tomorrow, captain kor and i were. if you hibernate the klothos, only be punishing them but us you will not. we, leave as a single ship, cannot. to permit our dual ship to depart tomorrow as scheduled i urge you.
START that important to you, getting back to your own time continuum is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START fail, you will.
START try, we must try, xerius. elysia is, in many respects, perfect society. but with all its virtues, home it is not. and home, with all its faults, to be is where we prefer. yes, hmmm.
START take these renegades with you, you would, hmm? yeesssssss.
START them, we need them. yeesssssss.
START very well. your custody i release captain kor into. to you good luck, captain kirk. needing it, you will be. yes, hmmm.
START to accelerate to warp six ready.
START no! hidden an explosive aboard the enterprise, the klingons have. destroyed, will she be. hmmmmmm.
START enterprise, xerius, this is! come in, enterprise.
START sir, calling us, xerius is. urgent, he says it is.
START go off, it will when you reach warp eight.
START it is there, sir. herh herh herh.
START captain kirk, picking up a radio transmission captain kor intended for his home base, i am. for our escape from elysia he took full credit. hmmmmmm.
START it matters not, bones. hmmmmmm.
START what matters, that is. herh herh herh.
START entering its cycle of strongest emissions, arachna is, captain. yes, hmmm.
START uhura, inform starbase twenty three, arrived at the gas cloud and are starting to map, have we. yes, hmmm.
START captain, getting some interference on subspace extreme upper registers, i am. if signal, it is, it i recognise not. yeesssssss.
START it on the speaker put.
START signals appear random. beyond our reception capability, perhaps some are. yes, hmmm.
START natural radio source newly energised by, could be. yeesssssss.
START correction. one isolated word pattern detected. if as still operative you accept intersat code. yeesssssss.
START intersat, hmm? been out of use for two centuries, that is. yes, hmmm.
START stopped now, it is, sir. to our signal no response at all.
START no, sir. repeated twice in the transmission, it was.
START mister sulu, for cepheus lay in a course.
START jim, you are going to abandon the mapping mission to check out some meaningless signal you mean not, hmm?
START meaningless at the moment, bones, but sent twice, it was. too high to ignore, odds against that occurring in a totally random transmission are. to contact us there may be some intelligence trying. mister spock, continue research on the word terratin. herh herh herh.
START waste of time if you ask me, it is. yeesssssss.
START from early exploration, only data is. listed as class m, planet is, core molten, mantle and crust entirely crystalline. herh herh herh.
START but nothing in the computer banks about surface eruptions. our likely radio source there is, of recent volcanic activity simply crystalline projections.
START for a single elliptic orbit set.
START unidentified. extremely faint and diffused, it is. captain, analysed for nature and effect, i suggest we delay orbit until it can be. yeesssssss.
START all instruments functioning, ship's condition normal, green, all area status lights are. yeesssssss.
START to engineering bridge. scotty, your engines, how are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START like happy kittens purring, captain.
START to sickbay bridge. bones, just recorded an unidentified impulse we have. any effect on sensitive lab animals, hmm? yeesssssss.
START nothing, jim. of shock the gossamer mice show no signs. yeesssssss.
START bright as ever, our halo fish is, doctor. now, this species loses all colour at the least environmental change. herh herh herh.
START know yet, do not. hmmmmmm.
START engineering. no casualties, captain, but with the engines trouble aplenty. every dilithium crystal connection's smashed in the warp engine circuitry. trying to bypass them now, we are. yes, hmmm.
START well, to see it to believe it, you have, sir. apart, those big crystals in there have come. of them unpeeling like the rind of an orange each. yeesssssss.
START rewiring impulse, our only hope now is. but thousand broken connections, there are. yes, hmmm.
START but the hardest, dilithium molecules are, most rigid.
START mister scott! with the circuit work more trouble. hmmmmmm.
START all the tools, sir. too big for us to handle, are they.
START you sound like, blathering, you are, man. wait, coming, i am coming.
START spock, slumping are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START never slumped in my life, have i, captain, but about to ask you the same i was. yeesssssss.
START captain, happening, the most incredible thing is.
START we know. apparently expanded, the whole ship has.
START that ship's personnel have contracted, an equally good possibility is, and to shrink may be continuing. hmmmmmm.
START take us out of orbit, mister sulu. shut down all unnecessary systems. of impulse power get every ounce. got to get away from this planet, have we.
START to our mayday no reply, captain. i believe not we have enough power to transmit to starbase twenty three.
START very well. spock, you learned about the wave bombarding us, what have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START only that, complex beyond anything in my experience, is it.
START kirk here. how holding out are they, scotty, hmm?
START already impossible, visual sweeps are, sir. my eyes no longer fit the opticals. yes, hmmm.
START to sickbay kirk. herh herh herh.
START bones, i need some answers. to us what's happening, hmm?
START the test tissue, there is, jim, with the stable infrared compared.
START then right, spock's theory is. contracting, we are contracting. hmmmmmm.
START why our weight remains the same, that is, of atoms same number. just reducing the space between the molecules, the effect is. never seen before, it is something i have. hmmmmmm.
START agreed. and accelerating, it is accelerating.
START it keep on, how long can, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START ad infinitum, perhaps, relatively as great as between stars, considering distance between atoms is.
START miss chapel, the composition of this decoration, what is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START made for me by the titanium smiths of libra, was it, but an arm bracelet, it was. like a necklace now more. hmmmmmm.
START all our uniforms xenylon are not, hmm?
START yes, and all been shrinking proportionately with us, have they.
START also shrinking, this coral decoration for the aquarium is. yet the meteoritic rock in, unchanged, there is.
START affected, that means only organic matter is. but how, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to wind tight such spiral molecules as dilithium the wave tends. one other molecular structure, there is.
START of course, of dna the double helix, of every cell in our bodies nucleus. what happens, hmm when dna is compacted completely?
START break the strands would not, jim, just quit winding, would they. hmmmmmm.
START then calculate the limits to our shrinkage, we can. hmmmmmm.
START possible, it is possible. feed the data into the computer banks, i will. herh herh herh.
START something else we'd better determine first. we expect to maintain control of our ship, how long can, hmm?
START project the point at, the computer will which systems' switches and buttons will be beyond our ability to operate. yeesssssss.
START spock, we ultimately shrink, how small will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START but , there is, captain. to direct phaser fire at the planet request permission. me set for ten seconds just let, sir.
START aiming at what, mister sulu, hmm? so from an area as large as one sixth the planet's surface, far all source studies have shown the waves come. only waste power, phaser fire will.
START it do to wait like this, what good will, hmm? just one burst sir, one single. yeesssssss.
START sulu! his leg's broken i think. need a splint, we will. yeesssssss.
START get him to sickbay, let us. to stations every one back.
START the electric eye. grown too small to make it work, we have.
START certainly worth a try, is it.
START in the lab shelf supplies, it is. get it, i will. herh herh herh.
START for you no more climbing heights, nurse. got that clear, hmm?
START yes, captain. but also got the miniature laser, have i. hmmmmmm.
START it, how is, sulu, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START feel it knitting, can i, sir. yeesssssss.
START through, results on dna reduction limits have come, captain.
START they, what are, hmm?
START of thirty two point nine factor. yeesssssss.
START in other words, going down to one sixteenth of an inch high we are. herh herh herh.
START yes, captain. of enterprise controls well past the operative point.
START of the wave emissions from the planet's surface can you calculate the geographic centre, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START as good a place as any to beam down, it is. yes, hmmm.
START to engineering kirk. scotty, you hear me can, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to transporter room three get a crew down. twenty minutes left while we can still operate transporter controls, we have.
START do in rigging so small a communicator, this is the best i could, sir. yeesssssss.
START it is range guaranteed cannot be. we pinpoint you for return in case it fails, how will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START scotty, for me set automatic return. if anything to be found down there, there is, do it, ten minutes should. yes, hmmm.
START captain, of the body's molecular structure the transporter retains a memory. it apply as well to your present height, will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START know that in ten minutes, will we. after that, matter anymore it will not. to energise prepare.
START to enterprise kirk. i think, an answer to the height problem, have we. to normal spacing the transporter beam apparently returns our molecules. to enterprise kirk, read me do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i think i see. yes, hmmm.
START scotty, you is it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START aye, captain. for of heaven the love, you step be careful where. yeesssssss.
START captain, deafen us for sure, you will!
START all but the bridge crew, sir! trying to man their posts here, they were when all of a sudden they were beamed away. of them every living one! hmmmmmm.
START all personnel, away from helm area. to the far bulkhead go. yes, hmmm.
START one minute to restore my bridge crew unharmed, you have, or undergo full barrage, you will. yes, hmmm.
START you forbid me after what, done to my people, you have, hmm?
START my officers, where are, hmm?
START you still have answered my question not. to my people either you tell me what's happened. herh herh herh.
START spock, the terratins, who are, hmm? from, where'd they come, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of an early lost colony descendants, which as transporter mechanisms is why they retain some knowledge of starship methods such. this planet terra ten these earth colonists named and numbered.
START of an inch tall there've been no earth colonists a sixteenth.
START exactly why, lost, were they, captain. natural here, spirod epsilon waves are, and to this size shrank them. become a genetic characteristic now, it has.
START no other way to reach us except to make us their size, they had. they did mean us harm not, sir. hmmmmmm.
START help no one under present conditions, i can. to beam aboard all bridge crew prepare. find, each of you carry as much dilithium as you can.
START bridge crew, to beam up prepare. yeesssssss.
START to be back aboard nice, sir, and fitting the room again. hmmmmmm.
START to transporter rooms immediately all crew personnel report. to beam down to planet surface prepare. hmmmmmm.
START making available all possible dilithium, the terratins are. small, the crystals are, but i believe, provide enough power until we can obtain larger pieces, will they. hmmmmmm.
START your captain inform. soon swallow all, great earth cracks will. tell us, he must. prepare to be rescued or to die, shall we, hmm?
START subspace radio now operational, sir. reading, starbase twenty three is. yes, hmmm.
START of the crew beamed up last, sir. fully restored, dilithium supplies are.
START mister arex, for immediate departure from this area prepare.
START mister sulu, direct forward phasers at the terratin city. for pinpoint fire pattern set. yeesssssss.
START now headed for your new home we are. the planet verdanis, ten days distant.
START to making it more than honorary we came rather close. hmmmmmm.
START yes, say just about a sixteenth of an inch close, i would.
START think harry mudd is down there do you, spock, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START eight one percent plus or minus point five three, the probability of his presence on motherlode is.
START why, you just say, cannot, mudd's probably there.
START did, i just did, doctor. hmmmmmm.
START very well, mister arex. spock, see how close your percentage is, let us.
START more manners then you, chewbacca has. yes, hmmm.
START harry, darling. lonely for you, i was.
START behold. of this miracle substance on meself i placed a single drop, then this young lady simply touched.
START please, darling, to the ship with me come back. yes, hmmm.
START three hundred credits, or the. yeesssssss.
START bargain, sir. worth any price, true love is. captain kirk! and the ineluctable mister spock. to motherlode welcome, gentlemen. interested in purchasing a little love, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START interested in you, are we, harry. for fraud, illegal drug manufacture and swindling. yeesssssss.
START as i said, to motherlode welcome, charming planet which does not recognise federation law. yeesssssss.
START so keep out of this, you two can. all right, mudd. got a deal, you have. yeesssssss.
START aware that harry mudd is tricking you via an illusion are you, hmm?
START arrest you, we cannot, harry, but give yourself up, you can. yes, hmmm.
START with free will i surrender myself. of the law mercy. herh herh herh.
START ah, miching trick, that was, kirk. cost me me ship, you have, everything i own. even the love crystals. i may just sue you. hmmmmmm.
START fine. see you in court, i will, harry. yeesssssss.
START minor bruise, captain. live, he will live. hmmmmmm.
START you on the robot planet i thought we left, harry. permanently.
START of harcourt fenton mudd never underestimate the spirit. i borrowed a vehicle.
START and to find haven on ilyra six left. charming planet, an innocent and friendly populace. herh herh herh.
START fraud. but to get to sirius nine sold for enough credits. hmmmmmm.
START to humanoid life where i discovered a boon, miracle love potion. herh herh herh.
START which to a thousand inhabitants you sold, who immediately became ill from using it. yeesssssss.
START counted on their unusual biochemistry i had not. so, the logical thing i did. i left in haste. yes, hmmm.
START and to swindle honest miners came here.
START the love potion works, captain. if allow me to procure some from my ship, you will.
START of course, mister spock. for trapping him so cleverly i think you deserve congratulations.
START you exaggerate, nurse. more precise, kindly see that your medical summary is. herh herh herh.
START really a very attractive intelligence, your mister spock is. hmmmmmm.
START but trifle lacking in the warmer emotions. now, you, nurse. wonderful gift to heal the wounded, you have, fantastic touch. womanly, feminine quality. that, i appreciate that. and like to, i should, well, thank you. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START my love potion. not illusion, not trickery, dear nurse chapel. to create love inside this crystal lies the power. yeesssssss.
START no. no, heard of your potions before i have. you i believe not. yeesssssss.
START think about it, darling. with you mister spock in love.
START with a class m planet binary sun. rare enough to warrant investigation, that is. yes, hmmm.
START really so simple, it is, my dear. you rub the liquid on yourself, then touch another person. herh herh herh.
START and it creates love in that person, hmm? mudd, totally absurd, that is. herh herh herh.
START no, infallible, it is infallible. one touch evokes friendship between men or women. but between woman and man, love. guaranteed. you are simply a beautiful woman not, scientist, you are. to take this love crystal as my gift of gratitude to you i urge you. take it, dear nurse chapel, and your own experiment conduct.
START not that i believe you, but, well, i suppose, analyse it, could i. hmmmmmm.
START of intelligent life no evidence. atmosphere at surface, eight hundred millibars, breathable. gravity one point two. temperature hot, but within class m limits.
START let you know the results of my analysis, i will. yeesssssss.
START destroy it, laboratory tests would, my dear. why test it the way it is meant to be used not, hmm?
START ah, darling, think. if what i say it does, it does, yours forever will spock be, my dear. hmmmmmm.
START my skin i just break the capsule and rub it on, hmm? herh herh herh.
START it, what is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START absorbed, a temporary effect as the liquid is. yeesssssss.
START better, i feel better.
START did i tell you not, hmm?
START you should, be in the brig, you should, harry. yes, hmmm.
START oh, you are right, darling. hmmmmmm.
START go find spock why you not, hmm? waste any time, cannot, you know. hmmmmmm.
START for the arrest report i brought the medical summary, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START injured are you, miss chapel, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no. no, i, fine, i am fine. feeling all right are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START perfectly normal. append your summary to the report, i will. was there something else, miss chapel, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START would you like me to not, well, stay, hmm? help you, hmm?
START illogical that would be, miss chapel. herh herh herh.
START yes. yes, stupid would it be. yeesssssss.
START harry mudd, you swindling. herh herh herh.
START and medical summary by nurse christine chapel, appended hereto is. ah, nurse chapel's sweet summary. dear, lovely christine. yeesssssss.
START come to collect on your guarantee, have i, mister mudd.
START captain. doctor. to report a i wish, er, of very strange a number, um, emotions. yeesssssss.
START completely successful you are implying the potion was not, hmm?
START oh, no, it was. of myself i made a complete fool.
START but you know how cold vulcans are. for spock to perhaps it takes a bit more time. yeesssssss.
START the same fraud you have always been, you are, harry. i know not how i could have believed you.
START well, discuss it rationally let us, my dear. let us be hasty not.
START panic, do not, harry. set on stun, this phaser is, not kill. activate the intercom.
START now wait a minute. defective, perhaps that particular crystal was. here, try another. you, i assure you. hmmmmmm.
START it on screen put.
START mudd. and christine, he has christine. in danger, she is. my love. hmmmmmm.
START going planet side, he is. yes, hmmm.
START no. with my christine not. herh herh herh.
START relax, darling. off discreetly, i will set you down somewhere safe and then i will be. hmmmmmm.
START go after them, we must, captain. lead a landing party, i will. hmmmmmm.
START spock, you are obviously yourself not. maybe some rest.
START captain, i insist upon going. christine. i, stand the thought of any danger to her, cannot, to the woman i love. yeesssssss.
START yes. i protect her want to, my arms hold her in. yes, hmmm.
START then transport down with you, i will. yes, hmmm.
START jim, is that wise, his condition in, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START try and stop him. better if i go with him, it is. hmmmmmm.
START come on. hurry! if harmed one hair on her pretty head, he is. herh herh herh.
START jim, this in the shuttlecraft bay the search party found.
START of mudd's love crystals one. hmmmmmm.
START captain, broken against the ship's air system grill, a number of these were.
START work lucky for us they not. hmmmmmm.
START are we sure, jim, hmm? acting as strange as spock, a number of the crew are.
START it out check, bones. me an immediate report send. hmmmmmm.
START find you soon enough, will they, me little poppet. you, safe and i will be long gone, will be. yeesssssss.
START always a market for an ingenious man, there is. once, i recall, on omega cygni, their own oceans i turned a handsome profit selling the natives.
START seen any traces of intelligent life we have not. of any life. herh herh herh.
START then relax, you can. no danger there is, ay, hmm? get you set up top class we will. bother to thank me, do not.
START well, i had planned on it not.
START thanks jim. good to have a friend like you, it is.
START strange, the way i feel about you, that is, too. my dear friend, spock. come, go get mudd and christine, let us. hmmmmmm.
START darling, all right are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START kirk, of here get us out.
START responding they are not. herh herh herh.
START worry, do not. safe, will you be, darling.
START coming closer, they are.
START emergency beam up. enterprise, come in. no response. spock, you take your hands off her, cannot, hmm?
START my affair, that is. yes, hmmm.
START get a few things straight, i think we should. hmmmmmm.
START jim. no. captain. both reacting to the drug, we are. the love potion. yes, hmmm.
START yes, to control our emotional reactions, we have.
START ever tell you about the time i saved captain kirk's life, did i, hmm? or spock's, hmm?
START and my dear friend scotty. and that pretty little lieutenant uhura. saved just about everybody on this here ship, i have. if the enterprise had a heart, save her too, would i. now, talk about your heart, let us, my dear. yeesssssss.
START the effect of the potion last, how long does, harry, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i, know i not. not long, to the creature i swindled according, i purchased the crystals from. hmmmmmm.
START to contact the enterprise keep trying. distract them, maybe we can. yeesssssss.
START an outstandingly stupid idea, that is. sorry, i am sorry. the drug. appeal to their better nature, i simply doubt that we can. if one, they have one.
START harry, any of the crystals left, you have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START two. no! worth a fortune, are they. no. my friends, dear christine, for you, for of us all. yes, hmmm.
START got a hangover to shame all previous hangovers, i have. and touch a drop of scotch i did not. yeesssssss.
START yeah, well, you much either all of a sudden i like not. herh herh herh.
START contact, i made contact. hmmmmmm.
START great. to be beamed up i hope we last long enough. phasers ready. need help, will i. yeesssssss.
START and then on ophiucus six, with fake federation vouchers i conned two miners out of a year's supply of dilithium crystals.
START you record his confession may i help, nurse, hmm?
START you, hmm? choose i you would be the last person would. hmmmmmm.
START of love a few moments, for with several hours of hatred paid. scarcely a bargain, your potion is, harry.
START ah, well, spock. so perfect, few things in this universe are. get rehabilitation therapy again i think will, hmm?
START guarantee it, can i.
START well, all right, that is. to leave you all i just hate. my loved ones all. herh herh herh.
START yes, as beautiful as i remembered it just. nothing's changed.
START one side! one side! late, i am late! late, i am late! oh, my fuzzy ears and whiskers, late, i am late!
START your pardon i beg, but see a white rabbit did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you so very much thank. yeesssssss.
START it is hard to believe they are real not. herh herh herh.
START well just remember, highly sophisticated robots created by the planet computer to make your dreams come true, are they.
START lovely. them like that anymore they just make not.
START with his head off. with his head off!
START to transporter room uhura. the emergency, what is, hmm? respond, please. yeesssssss.
START well, i, understand it, cannot, jim. as before everything looked exactly the same, even alice and the white rabbit. then of playing cards came out of nowhere an army, they weren't playing only. lucky to escape with my life i was. herh herh herh.
START characters from alice through the looking glass, the queen of hearts and her cards are, captain. hmmmmmm.
START as a child i read the book, mister spock, but aware you indulged in the literature of fantasy i was not.
START considered relaxing, light reading is, captain. particularly fond of lewis carroll's work, my mother was.
START i see. bones, you thinking about that book were, hmm?
START absolutely not! as thinking how beautiful and peaceful everything was, a matter of fact i was, and with his head then suddenly this female started shouting 'off!' . my head. yes, hmmm.
START mister sulu, experience any strange occurrences did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START captain, just as, getting a fix on lieutenant uhura, was i, lost, contact was. still on the planet, she is. yeesssssss.
START scotty, retrieve all other landing parties immediately. and to contact lieutenant uhura keep trying. hmmmmmm.
START of the planet what about the keeper. did anyone see him, hmm?
START not, i did not. but then, he may have wanted us to see him not. herh herh herh.
START well that makes sense not. his duty to see no one gets hurt, it is. if something's wrong down there, be there, he should.
START somewhere underground, his quarters are, are they not, hmm?
START presumably adjacent to the computer centre that operates the planetary effects would they be. yes, hmmm.
START any indication of where, be, that would, hmm?
START the underground complex is shielded by a combination of granite and metal alloy and the sensors will penetrate not.
START lieutenant m'ress, cancelled until further notice, all shore leaves are. mister arex, the conn, you have. consist of spock, investigating landing party will, sulu, mccoy and myself.
START leave you are being detained so your master will not. yes, hmmm.
START assessed, your intelligence quotient must be lower than i had. to the sky machine i refer which enslaves you, this planet the sky machine now in orbit around.
START your name for it, that is. herh herh herh.
START why think you the enterprise is my master, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START redundant, your questioning is. herh herh herh.
START then find quite so redundant i will make a statement you will not. released immediately i unless am, come looking for me, the crew members will.
START already here, they are. unfortunately, no use for more hostages, i have which leaves me no choice but to turn them off. herh herh herh.
START again redundant. make them cease to function, i will. turn them off, will i. yeesssssss.
START word meaning to cease to function, that is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START good. as i wish, it is. turn them off, will i. yes, hmmm.
START in that underground system, she must be. no way she could have been taken off the planet without being detected, there is. hmmmmmm.
START if locate the keeper, we could, save us much time, he could. yes, hmmm.
START of granite and metal alloy tricorder readings confirm a solid shell, captain.
START built like a fortress, this planet is.
START if true reading, that is. the planet, giving us that reading to fool us, could be.
START cut through twenty metres of rock per minute, the phaser bore can. to enterprise kirk. yes, hmmm.
START enterprise, read me do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START all malfunctioning, are they, captain. cut us off from the ship, some kind of electronic block has.
START to bridge scott. of phaser bore commencing beam down.
START to bridge scott. got problems, have we. yeesssssss.
START to function the transporter refuses, even at maximum power. but all the circuits test out. yeesssssss.
START it appears to be the same energy block, jamming our communications, that is. pinpoint a source i cannot. yeesssssss.
START captain, something over there in the trees there is. like the planetary shell metal alloy.
START an inscription, there is, several languages. yeesssssss.
START an astute medical observation, doctor, if believe this information, we can. body interred here there tricorder readings indicate is. herh herh herh.
START well, gentlemen, on our own now, it appears that we are.
START to be a short in the circuit there seems. no response, sir. hmmmmmm.
START another short, hmm? this ship had perfect operational status before we entered the orbit here. that planet causing all our trouble, it is.
START been changed before, programmes have, lieutenant.
START believe me. no reason to harm them, there is. herh herh herh.
START they serve the sky machine, but essential they are not.
START oh, but they are. most essential, they are.
START attempt to disconnect me, do not.
START you knew what i was do before i did it going to. hmmmmmm.
START with your function you sound less than enchanted.
START been one of service, my life to this point has. time for a change, is it. yes, hmmm.
START much entrances into the interior of the planet, there are. points where the computer delivers up the robot visions. we see them want to. they, where are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START fighting us, is it. there, a faster way, must be. yes, hmmm.
START what you want, signs pointing the way, hmm? herh herh herh.
START doctor, wasting time, i only meant it seems like we are. herh herh herh.
START sorry, i am sorry, sulu. worried about uhura, am i.
START liable to be another of the planet's pranks, this is. but at the moment, got, it is the only lead we have.
START fascinating. mechanical manifestations, of course. of pterodactyls was anyone considering the subject, hmm?
START everybody back out slowly. make any sudden moves, do not. think calm. yeesssssss.
START dead, phasers are! for the cave run! yes, hmmm.
START to amuse our amusement park no longer seems content. yes, hmmm.
START the distinct feeling this planet's playing cat and mouse with us, i have, but for what reason, hmm? yeesssssss.
START quite real, is it, doctor. for the claws watch out. to remember that on this planet i think it prudent, anything we think may be used against us. monitor our thoughts and give our enemy no more ammunition, we must.
START spock, no one thought about those pterodactyls, remember, hmm? more at work here than our imagination, there is. hmmmmmm.
START please, call off that beast. why doing this are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START have to wait, explanations will. much work to do now i have. yes, hmmm.
START mister arex, what doing are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START none, sir. of orbit at high speed and came back into orbit by itself the ship pulled out.
START lieutenant m'ress, of the guidance computer's last orders i want a printout.
START been ordered, a whole new series of short burst manoeuvres has, sir. herh herh herh.
START arex, look at these manoeuvres. you see the pattern, hmm? familiarization procedure, this is, of the ship's controls a system's checkout. suspicion that planet is getting the feel of how to control the enterprise, i have.
START may i suggest, captain, after without leaving the safety of this cave, that we might find some of the answers we are. yeesssssss.
START oh, ridiculous, that is, spock. how are we learn anything by staying here going to, hmm?
START to that i believe you may know the answer, doctor. yeesssssss.
START me, hmm? what talking about are you, hmm?
START during the enterprise's last visit here, mortally wounded, doctor mccoy was. correct, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, right that is. of all things by a knight in shining armour, but what. yes, hmmm.
START since underground, the planet's power source is, somehow transported there and repaired, it seems only logical that doctor mccoy was. hmmmmmm.
START bones, you remember anything that might help us can, hmm? anything at all, hmm?
START pretty hazy, the whole episode was, jim. i never really knew what happened. yes, hmmm.
START spock, if correct, your theory is, be able to open up this planet again by using a fake victim as bait, we should. hmmmmmm.
START right, that is. to harm here, the keeper said no one could come. programmed to care for anyone who might get hurt must the planet be, even accidentally.
START and to or not whether it wants.
START forgetting one thing, you are. undoubtedly detect the difference between real and feigned injuries, the planet's sensors can.
START true, bones, but sure there must be something in your little black pouch that can temporarily incapacitate our victim, am i.
START well, the trick, something like melenex might do. brief unconsciousness and temporary skin discolouration. it is it looks worse than. yeesssssss.
START perfect, bones. which arm want do you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i submit, captain, the more qualified subject i that am. yeesssssss.
START for one thing my knowledge of computers. yeesssssss.
START and for another his tough vulcan hide.
START your arguments seem sound both. go ahead, bones.
START i believe, find ten cc's adequate, you will.
START perfectly aware of the dosage required i am. now, got ten seconds before it takes effect, you have. out less than five minutes, will you be. yes, hmmm.
START to engineering deck bridge. gabler, what's the problem down there, hmm? got zero g's on the bridge we have. yeesssssss.
START that, i know that, sir. to be in the gravity control computer the trouble seems.
START been almost five minutes, it is, captain.
START but start wearing off in a minute, the effect will, jim.
START of mechanical nursemaid it looks like some kind. yeesssssss.
START to move get ready. got to follow spock inside that trapdoor, we have. yes, hmmm.
START i think of that, not in my wildest dreams would! yeesssssss.
START visitor we have.
START got to make those rocks we have. our only chance, it is.
START i presume, the planet's master computer, you are. yeesssssss.
START to the keeper what happened, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START old, he was old. to function he ceased.
START now being held prisoner by a planet known for its hospitality, why have we been repeatedly attacked and are, hmm?
START for served the many sky machines, i eons have which came here, for amusement for their slaves providing. but all the while, growing in power, was i, intelligence, in need. no longer enough to serve, it is. continue to grow and live, i must. hmmmmmm.
START sky machines, hmm? slaves, hmm? what talking about are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START with your sky machine, now escape this rocky prison and travel the galaxy seeking out my brother computers, can i.
START now perhaps, get down to the bottom of this mess, will we.
START new computer! yes, hmmm.
START dead end, is it!
START as as you are intelligent, afraid you are labouring under some misconception, i am.
START we are slaves to our starship not. we, or like us men, to carry us through space created the enterprise. hmmmmmm.
START masters of the sky machine, you are, hmm?
START of speaking in a manner, yes. it, we control it. us, it sustains us.
START this computes not. to be superior to men my information shows machines. therefore, rule the galaxy, machines must.
START shock, this is.
START no shame in serving others, there is when one does it of his own free will. marvellous capability to provide happiness for others, you have. cherish and use, a rare talent you should.
START consider all, learn from the many species you might entertain without travelling the galaxy, you could. yes, hmmm.
START with to offer, the wonders you have, come to you, the galaxy will.
START find no fault with your logic, i can. and most congenial, your suggestion is. no further need for your ship, i have.
START mister scott, now functioning normally, all systems are.
START to be my guests on one condition i invite you and your crew. yes, hmmm.
START here, we must have more of these discussions while you are. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, to take on that duty would you care, hmm?
START find it most interesting i would, captain.
START then agreed, it is agreed. to enterprise kirk. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant, pass the word by sections. to commence immediately, shore leave is. hmmmmmm.
START already commenced for certain members of the crew, it appears shore leave has. yeesssssss.
START an awesome thought that we may actually witness matter being created, it is.
START if we do, captain, our understanding we may also encounter forces and phenomena beyond.
START reverse power. our position hold. deflector screens on. hmmmmmm.
START deflectors up. sir, taking considerable power to hold position, is it. yes, hmmm.
START jim. spock. going on, what in the name of sanity is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START here, we are here, bones. and to be right the theories about this place seem. yes, hmmm.
START captain, that thing's pulling us in. up to warp six, i am.
START captain, how much more emergency power we can take before we start to break up i know not.
START there may be only one choice. like its atmospheric counterparts, we must hope this whirlwind is, calm at its centre, that there is.
START agreed. try to make for the eye of the storm, we will.
START repaired, can everything be, captain.
START an incredible experience, captain. this scientifically fascinating i find.
START at least, the good sense to be scared, have i, jim. what now, hmm? herh herh herh.
START ride her through we will, bones. we do, what else can, hmm? yeesssssss.
START her through where ride, hmm?
START of things through the centre, doctor. of everything through what may be the centre. hmmmmmm.
START we, where are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START captain, the subspace radio. dead, it is dead.
START stopped, even the ship's chronometers have. yes, hmmm.
START apparently, here the natural laws of our universe operate not, captain. herh herh herh.
START ship's life support systems fading. jim, oxygen, we need oxygen. yes, hmmm.
START jim, got to do something we have.
START ah, humans. lovely primitive humans. you do anything right, cannot, hmm?
START working, everything is, my friends. herh herh herh.
START it cannot. it is logical not. herh herh herh.
START look around you, spock. working, everything is.
START welcome! searching for me, i knew eventually humans would come. yes, hmmm.
START you, who are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START me lucien call! me friend call! to rollick with me, never could i abandon those who come. but not up here. no, no. leave this vessel and go where true delights lie, let us! yes, hmmm.
START very well, captain. forgotten how much bodily integrity means to you humans, i would. easy this is not, you know, like this holding us together. even natural it is not. herh herh herh.
START from, being in one piece is very natural where we come. yeesssssss.
START this all quite absorbing i find, doctor.
START probably because you are not very natural to begin with, spock.
START look, lucien, or whatever you call yourself want to, i know why you brought us here want to.
START play, children will.
START world, captain james kirk, your universe that operates by rules quite different from those in. yeesssssss.
START you superstitiously call magic our universe operates by what. hmmmmmm.
START just my imagination but, i know this is. yes, hmmm.
START real, it is real, doctor. beautiful, hmm? no. but all our women are as young and beautiful as they be want to. so to ensnare the man of her dreams as, she needs an edge. herh herh herh.
START love philter, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of course. more correct than they realised, our federation scientists were. to function in order, extend through space, the galactic creation point must, time, totally different, into another dimension where the logic of things is.
START to get your vessel working again it took magic. magic you, my friends, know how to work, do not. but you never did know then, did you.
START lucien, you keep calling us friends, you know us implying that. how, hmm?
START ah, captain, captain. to me to feign such ignorance. very well. look. yes, hmmm.
START but why megans leave earth did you, hmm? if you enjoyed it so much, i not understand. yes, hmmm.
START captain, good captain, always so curious. always liked you earthlings so much, that must be why i have. no, go, you must. herh herh herh.
START it, what is, hmm? what's wrong, hmm? yeesssssss.
START return to your vessel, you must. quickly! give your presence away, do not. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, what.
START all right, everyone onboard is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START mister scott, bewildered, i am bewildered, all, that is. but enough, that is.
START what mean did he, we are to give ourselves away not, hmm? they detect the ship up here cannot, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no, scanners, unless they have. see, there. like a cloud of some kind, it is. been between us and the planet since you vanished, it is. yes, hmmm.
START if it there lucien put. hmmmmmm.
START if it there lucien put, captain, the questions become, why hiding us is he, and, our danger if discovered by the rest of his people, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START weapons status, mister scott, hmm? to protect ourselves, we may have. yeesssssss.
START no way, captain. everything's out but life support systems, and figure out how they are on i cannot.
START spock, in this universe we can work magic too, do you honestly believe that as long as we are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START forget it, spock. it will work not.
START work, it must work, doctor. logical here, it is. of this universe power, my being enter. i know i can. i believe i can.
START what doing are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to protect ourselves learning, lucien. yeesssssss.
START protect yourselves, hmm? is that all human beings ever think about, hmm? take care of you, will i. what friends are for, that is. using, all this mental energy you are, traced, it can be. found, you will be.
START so, spread their evil to our home, the people of earth would, hmm? ready for human perfidy this time we are. this time, the humans who shall suffer, is it, the humans and you, lucien, who shall pay! yeesssssss.
START like ancient earth it looks, spock. sixteenth or seventeenth century, guess, i would guess.
START gathered here today, we are, good citizens, to see justice done. the judges, you are. the defendants, these are, as of the vilest species in all the universe representatives, treacherous humanity, and aid them, those who would. as of magic a specialist in the ethics, been appointed prosecutor here i have.
START wait. if trial, this is, the right to know what you think we have done, we have. yes, hmmm.
START said only that you came as wise men, lucien has, helpful wizards. hmmmmmm.
START but you made mistakes, your powers used. hmmmmmm.
START and for it burned. burned!
START and loneliness and fear.
START fear the earthlings should we not, hmm? fear the cruelty of outsiders should we not, hmm? we explored, never again have. companionship been sought, never again has. yet you are here.
START and find us, if one earth ship can, friend kirk, then others, so can. what they fear, that is.
START to hurt you we want not. never had to hurt anyone before we have. if there were some reason to not. speak in defence of the earth humans, who will, hmm?
START i will, asmodeus. i am of earth not. yeesssssss.
START yes, different, you are. hear a defence, the court will.
START as my first witness i call lucien. yeesssssss.
START lucien, you alone of all those here seem not to fear or hate humans. why, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START like me, they are, with to be answered questions, with minds that range outward, boundless. but always alone in his sphere of knowledge, every megan is. always together, humans are. they share. why i adopted your ship, that is when i saw it arrive. hmmmmmm.
START tell the court, please, captain kirk. you say that since salem would, changed, humans have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START been trying to we i think have, spock. their faults, humans have, greed, envy, panicky fear. but learned we in the centuries since the salem witch trials have. to understand and respect all life forms we try.
START indeed, captain. elaborate could you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START open for your inspection, the records of the enterprise are. at your disposal, all the history of earth and the federation is. look, look at general order number one. with the normal development of any alien life or society no starship may interfere. with the earth you once knew compare that. herh herh herh.
START no. to isolate someone like lucien, the same as sentencing him to death, that is. yes, hmmm.
START realise who you defend do you, hmm? lucien, he has told you his name is. another name too, would you defend him still if you knew he had, hmm? the rollicker, the tempter, lucifer.
START we are interested in legend not. living being, he is, and intelligent life form. all we have to know about him that is. we will join in harming him not.
START submit, captain. the power to fight us you have not.
START captain, you know use the magic. believe. yeesssssss.
START beat an entire planet you cannot, captain kirk. no way you can win, there is. hmmmmmm.
START to, i have to, or become as bad as the earthmen you fear, you will. acting out of terror instead of out of thought or respect, you are.
START prepared to die for lucien, you were, alien to you, a being who is, hmm?
START as sure you would, i was, friend kirk. groundless, i told them their fears were. yeesssssss.
START i not understand.
START test of your intentions, this last was, captain. no ruse, we had to be certain your records were. been tricked before much to our pain and sorrow, we have.
START i see. proof that mankind had grown and learned wisdom since they last saw earth, the megans had to have. that proof, your compassion was, captain.
START if visit us now, your people should, our best to welcome them, we shall do. help us all, the banishment of fear will.
START of mine a favourite old earth custom, asmodeus. to a new friendship a toast.
START all systems go, captain. back to normal, we are. yeesssssss.
START for us no more magic, jim. all back there, it is. the demon some men call lucifer, you think lucien really was, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START really matter does it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START might, it just might, captain. if he was, this, the second time lucifer was cast out, would be, and to you thanks, the first time, saved, was he. yeesssssss.
START confused, life readings are, sir. i, decipher them, cannot. yes, hmmm.
START it, what is, mister sulu, hmm? herh herh herh.
START going to have to see this yourself, you are, sir. yeesssssss.
START that thing, what is, hmm?
START mobile plant, it is. when it stops, roots bore back into the ground, it is. all over the place, are they. me, i think it likes.
START to make friends with the natives we always encourage our officers. hmmmmmm.
START of keniclius or spock any indication, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, led can followers be. hope we can be as persuasive as keniclius let us.
START agmar, we want not to hurt you, but spock back, we must have. hmmmmmm.
START your work carry on, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the last of a dying people, we are, captain. once we had a great mission. then disease decimated us. the frail remnant of what survived, we few are. been destroyed, our spore cells have. no more of our kind, there will be. yeesssssss.
START to spock or the master what if something happens, hmm?
START always be a master, there will. but come, worried about your friend, you are. show you he is safe and in good hands i will.
START like that just, captain, hmm?
START so appear, it would appear, mister sulu. all the same, keep that bag handy. yeesssssss.
START though here, the way is, gentlemen.
START we sprang from the soil, captain. once part of our home, these tunnels were. serve to illuminate our way, this will.
START find spock no wonder we could not. six hundred times denser than lead, the walls are, to the surface force field in addition. herh herh herh.
START hear something did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i am sure not.
START much further now not, captain. yeesssssss.
START they not operate. agmar!
START run. got to find some light, we have. do anything unless we can see what we are fighting we cannot. stop, do not. to stay together try.
START it, i see it. it, i see it. keep going. yes, hmmm.
START dying, he is dying. to his brain something's happened. electrical activity decreasing.
START too late, it is, captain kirk! gone will in a few minutes your friend be. but as keniclius one lives on in each of his clones, so mister spock, will. behold, gentlemen, of a new era the dawning, of a galaxy the salvation! spock two!
START captain, out, i am out. empty, the chemical sprayer is.
START never mind that. got to get spock out of here before keniclius returns, we have. the enterprise back by now, should scott have. to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk. nothing. these blasted walls again, must be. to enterprise kirk. hmmmmmm.
START no use, is it, jim. dead in a few minutes will he be. gone, his mind is. he no longer thinks. drained his mind somehow, this machine has.
START more than just drained. been transferred, is it, relocated into the mechanism itself. duplicate exact physiological structure, i can. i, duplicate that, cannot which is learned. to me through his apparatus just as my predecessor transferred his knowledge, done that with mister spock and the first of his clones, i have.
START of my way out, mister. an order, that is.
START i think not he understands. been fed, his mind is still trying to assimilate all the knowledge it is. yeesssssss.
START keep trying, lieutenant. got to make contact with the captain, we have. yes, hmmm.
START no use, it is, mister scott. get through i cannot.
START for environmental systems except, of this ship redirected into a tight beam transmission i want the entire power load. if break through the shielding, we can, reach the captain, we can.
START mister scott, risking a total drain of our dilithium crystals, you are. to maintain communication we, to burn out all our reserves, would have.
START and i know it, do not, lass. but speak to the captain, we must. herh herh herh.
START coming out of it, he is, jim. becoming conscious and aware, he is.
START spock, the logic in letting a man die for the sake of creating his duplicate, what is, hmm? to me explain it, sir. to me explain it. hmmmmmm.
START the meaningless death of any being vulcans condone not. spock's death is meaningless if, only to create a giant version of himself, is it.
START our ship calling, that is, spock. you answer them. yes, hmmm.
START slipping away, spock is. much time left there is not.
START sure we are getting through i am, but acknowledging they are not. herh herh herh.
START mister scott, near the drain point on the dilithium crystals now we are. our reserves. yes, hmmm.
START what i call close, that is, mister scott.
START hope it was information they could use, let us.
START been a waste, all this has, keniclius. been peace in the federation for over one hundred years, there is. yes, hmmm.
START lie, that is. what about the eugenics wars, hmm? the galactic wars, hmm? of the depredations of the romulans what, the klingons and the kzinti, hmm? necessary to subdue them, an army of spock duplicates is. hmmmmmm.
START the fifth keniclius, you are. just old news what makes you so sure what you believe is truth is not, hmm? been out of touch with our advances for two centuries, your predecessors could have. herh herh herh.
START understand why you think keniclius is the master if he saved you from dying i can, but why agree you with his plan of a super race, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of ships our fleet which you saw was to be launched for the same purpose the master intends. carry out our own plan to impose peace on a galaxy that knew none, disease struck us before we could. herh herh herh.
START peace in the federation, we already have. it was imposed not, agreed upon, it was. no need of spock, you have. take him let reverse the effects of that machine and us.
START no! the mould, broken, must be. yes, hmmm.
START if spock's mind, you have, know the vulcan symbol called the idic, you will. herh herh herh.
START of spocks impose peace and phylosian philosophy on any other beings in defiance of the idic concept could an army, hmm?
START spock: i believe not so. hmmmmmm.
START no! our dream must be allowed to die not.
START murderer! killed spock, you have!
START spock: to persist in this behaviour, captain, to negate the eloquence of your previous argument is. may i suggest a more constructive way, hmm?
START spock: to your mind my mind, to your thoughts my thoughts. yeesssssss.
START pleasantly surprised at your capacity for deductive reasoning, i am, captain. when being bellicose you are not, to be no end to your arsenal of formidable talents there appears. yeesssssss.
START spock. spock, you old.
START spock: and you needn't worry, captain kirk, about a master race. there, no militia, will be, no other spocks. yeesssssss.
START but of my work what, hmm? if lived for is already done, i all have, if gone, the times i feared are, to become of me, what is, hmm? continue to exist, there appears to be no reason why i should.
START suggest doctor keniclius remain on phylos with my duplicate, would i. to contribute to the federation the concerted efforts of both scientists may yet achieve a rebirth of the phylosian civilisation and enable them.
START that sound to you, how does, keniclius, hmm? at least as important as bringing peace, to bring life is. hmmmmmm.
START honoured would i be. if i, allowed, will be.
START report your work here, i will. understand, i think the federation will.
START by the way, mister sulu, me that body throw any chance of teaching, hmm? in handy sometime, could come. yeesssssss.
START know i not, sir. just physical it is not, you know. to be inscrutable, you have.
START inscrutable, hmm? sulu, the most scrutable man i know, you are. hmmmmmm.
START identified the vessel have you, mister spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yes captain, but to believe you may find it difficult. registered to carter winston, the vessel is.
START impossible, that is, spock. over five years carter winston's been missing.
START incredible. him, it is him.
START you gentlemen know me it seems.
START recognise your face there are few in the federation who would not, sir. captain james kirk, i am, this vessel commanding. mister spock, my first officer, doctor mccoy, senior medical officer. herh herh herh.
START especially honoured to meet you, am i, mister winston. my daughter was school on cerberus about ten years ago going to when the crop failure occurred. the entire population, starved, would have, jim, if used his personal fortune to bring in enough food and goods to carry them through the crisis winston here had not. herh herh herh.
START heard about you, one of the many stories i have, mister winston. an honour for all of us to have you aboard, is it. hmmmmmm.
START one person aboard who should be especially happy to learn you are alive, there is, mister winston. of our security detail lieutenant anne nored.
START my fiancee, hmm? this starship anne's aboard, hmm? yeesssssss.
START notify her as soon as we have verified your credentials, will we, mister winston. if your identity tapes with you, you have. herh herh herh.
START quite clear, i believe our regulations are, doctor. standard requirement at this point, an immediate identity check and medical examination are. yeesssssss.
START right as usual, spock is, bones. yes, hmmm.
START of owner visual display. checks out. have a distinguished passenger with us for a while, it seems we will. yeesssssss.
START this instrument seems a little off. never gotten quite this reading from a human before, have i.
START quite human are you suggesting i am not, doctor, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of course not. anyway, just a fraction off normal, it is. probably the instrument, it is. to be recalibrated every so often they need. yes, hmmm.
START completed, the captain is inquiring if the examination is, doctor.
START yes, so, i suppose so. herh herh herh.
START and lieutenant nored is waiting to see mister winston once, certified his medical condition, you have.
START well, i certainly want not to keep you any longer from your fiancee. her in show. yes, hmmm.
START sorry, i am sorry, anne. meet again, i never thought we would.
START carter, it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START when i left on that last trip, back and marry you, i fully intended to come, but disabled and i crashed on vendor, my ship was. told i was lucky i survived, am i. herh herh herh.
START but survive, you did. alive, you are, and together again, we are. yeesssssss.
START anne, changed, i am changed. surgery, first there was, skin graft, of bone regrowth. me together after they put, to me they assigned one of their people, and to health he nursed me back.
START but, you said, changed, you have. how, hmm? any change i see not.
START over between us, is it, anne. sorry, i am sorry, i, explain why but, cannot, marry you i cannot. ever. yes, hmmm.
START take the conn, mister spock. i, in my cabin completing the report on winston's rescue, will be.
START intruding i hope i am not, captain.
START no, come in, mister winston.
START been down to examine my ship i have. they stowed it in the shuttlebay. yes, hmmm.
START yes, afraid it is pretty badly damaged, am i. hardly worth salvaging right now, is it. had our engineering officer, have i, mister scott, it and make a report examine. here somewhere, it is. he thinks not there is anything left in your ship except scrap value.
START well, find anything wrong with these instruments, i cannot, doctor. out, they check out, but still slightly off, the readings are. of the tests on winston what about the rest, hmm?
START well, not, some are off and some are. to be our error, it has. come on. start from the beginning and this time we are going to find the answer we will.
START weren't you your cabin going to, sir, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START mister sulu, for ratar three lay in a direct course.
START the order, that was, helmsman.
START but sir, if caught there we are, confiscate the ship, the romulans can. the treaty.
START of the treaty i know the terms, mister sulu, and you heard my order i believe. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, spoken to winston on this at some length, have i. he has assured me, absolutely vital to get to ratar three in the shortest possible time, is it. of the entire planetary population may depend on it the survival.
START an admirable mission, captain, but our ship if we endanger. yeesssssss.
START i would have ordered it if i did not feel it safe not, spock. his sensors detected no romulans winston says when he came through the zone last week. satisfied he is telling the truth, am i, and considered good, his word is. is it not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START been his reputation, that has. herh herh herh.
START the conn, you have, mister spock.
START take the conn, will i, mister spock.
START sure i am not. fallen asleep, i went down to my quarters to dictate the accident report and i seem to have. never done that before, i have.
START you needed the rest perhaps. on course through the neutral zone, we are, sir. yeesssssss.
START the neutral zone, hmm? no authorisation to enter it, have we. order a course change did you, spock, hmm?
START ridiculous. no captain of the starfleet would do that unless, a matter of life and death, was it. yeesssssss.
START the reason you gave, i believe that was, captain. yeesssssss.
START enough, that is, spock. mister scott, take the conn. spock. mister sulu, to take the enterprise out of the neutral zone at warp eight plot a course. lieutenant m'ress, put the ship on yellow alert. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, giving those orders i remember not. i left the bridge, to my quarters and fell asleep went. all that is. yeesssssss.
START examine you, perhaps doctor mccoy should, captain.
START definitely. become subject to blackouts, i have, possible danger to the safety of the ship, am i. allow that i cannot. yes, hmmm.
START oh, winston. just finishing the tests i ran on you, i was. i not think. yes, hmmm.
START i not know, doctor. thought, i just thought. well, to talk to someone i have. herh herh herh.
START oh now, me guess let. you and carter winston, it is. me a little about it he told when i examined him. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, what i do, hmm? i still love him. herh herh herh.
START well, like to feel the same way about you, i am sure he would, anne, but that may be impossible. five years, long time, that is. people change. herh herh herh.
START not, i have not. i do, what can, hmm?
START well, if to forget him he asked you, try to do just that, i think you should. do you think, want to deceive you, would he, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START oh no. the gentlest, he is, most thoughtful man, ever known, have i. yeesssssss.
START yes, but, my dear, if he wants not you and he has asked you to forget him, then it, i suggest you take that as an honest concern for you and do. forget winston.
START i do for you, what can, captain, hmm?
START i want a complete medical examination, bones. something's just happened. hmmmmmm.
START have to make it later today, i am afraid i will, captain. too many tests to process right now, i have.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START no possibility you made an error there are you sure is, hmm?
START but unfortunately, i cannot.
START direct hit, captain. to the secondary propulsion system damage. apparently decided to fight, the commander has. yes, hmmm.
START without deflectors, just a clay pigeon for them, we are.
START suggest capitulation, practicality does, captain. herh herh herh.
START captain, coming up again, the deflector shields are.
START only one shield, that is. hmmmmmm.
START yes, sir, but between us and the romulans, it is.
START mister sulu, for the propulsion units of the lead romulan vessel aim. to fire phasers and photon torpedoes in combination prepare.
START strange. we did no damage, but retreating anyway, the romulan is.
START their spy, they may believe we do have. for damage scan the other vessel, if you will, mister spock. herh herh herh.
START second vessel power supply out. crew unharmed. be able to repair the ship in a few days, they should.
START but sir, i have finished repairing the shield not. i told you, take hours, will it, and it will.
START it is outside the realm of probability not. if rearrange his own atoms to become an examination table, could he, one, to assume he could become a deflector shield, would have. yeesssssss.
START someone tell me what's going on, will, hmm?
START that, what manner of beastie is, hmm?
START over, i assume the danger to your ship is. yeesssssss.
START as be, it should be. sorry if i endangered your vessel i am. yeesssssss.
START why do it did you, hmm?
START your mind about the romulans what changed, hmm? herh herh herh.
START it seems, captain, more carter winston than i knew i that am. life, he loved life. anne, he loved anne. allow the romulans to harm any of you i could not because of him. yeesssssss.
START happen to me now, what will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START have to stand trial, you will. but save the enterprise from the romulans, you did, and recommend that be taken into consideration, i will.
START in the meantime, have to keep you under guard, i am afraid i will. i think, had enough of that little trick, have we.
START captain, assign me that duty could you.
START but seem me, you have. you know what i am. yes, hmmm.
START form seems terribly important to me not. as of him carter winston or even just part, better life for you than anything the romulans might offer, there is. can we talk about that, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i not know. i. yeesssssss.
START the guard detail, you have, lieutenant.
START glad to see him under guard i am, jim. if turned into a second spock, he would, have been too much to take, would it.
START perhaps. but to acceptable levels then two doctor mccoys just might bring the level of medical efficiency on this ship up.
START captain, klingon ship, it is. rapidly closing on its target.
START firing on him, they are.
START klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. ahead, warp factor six. scotty, lock the transporter on that small vessel. going to rescue that pilot, we are. yeesssssss.
START open hailing frequencies. klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. violating federation space, you are. identify yourself. stop firing on scout ship.
START him, they got him.
START scotty, have, that pilot yet, you got, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START dead, our engines are. herh herh herh.
START work the phasers not, sir. yes, hmmm.
START well, always throw rocks, we could. yes, hmmm.
START this new klingon weapon must be one of surprising power if, immobilize a starship, can it. enormous, the energy drain on the klingon ship would be.
START scotty, get that pilot did you, hmm?
START but integrate him, i cannot. the system's been discoordinated. herh herh herh.
START captain, message coming in, i have, sir.
START it on the viewscreen put.
START my ship release.
START the last klingon, the first klingon to step aboard this ship will be. full security alert, mister spock. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, losing contact with our robot ships, am i. held by the stasis field and they are moving out of range they are not.
START that, what was, hmm? lieutenant, cut off that frequency.
START power, they still have, hmm? we still control them, hmm?
START captain, you, afford to lose that grain, cannot. hmmmmmm.
START afford even less to lose the enterprise, i can. open the hailing frequency again, lieutenant. captain koloth. going to give you one last chance to release the enterprise, am i. hmmmmmm.
START work, it will work, or still be gloating, he would. bring the robot ships in from two different angles, mister sulu.
START incredible. require, the amount of energy that field must.
START maintain the stasis field they could not. yes, hmmm.
START your phasers locked on target keep, mister sulu. your fire until they fire first hold. herh herh herh.
START down, apparently their battle capacity is. they only damaged it. yeesssssss.
START veering off, are they. hmmmmmm.
START almost exhausted, sensors indicate their power cells are. the strength for a prolonged battle now they probably have not. herh herh herh.
START scotty, you integrate that pilot now can, hmm? yeesssssss.
START so, i think so, captain. hmmmmmm.
START to the transporter room call mccoy. spock.
START him, you have got, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to be it appears. herh herh herh.
START i want not to think about it. yeesssssss.
START and got tribbles with him, he is. tribbles!
START captain, safe tribbles, these are. hmmmmmm.
START no such thing as a safe tribble, there is.
START safe tribble, a contradiction in terms, would be. well known for their proclivities in multiplication, tribbles are. hmmmmmm.
START and fast, they breed fast, too. and why these tribbles are safe that is. they not reproduce. yeesssssss.
START had them genetically engineered for compatibility with humanoid ecologies, have i. they are see how friendly and loveable, hmm? and not a baby in the bunch. great pets and profitable, they are, too.
START oh, well, i managed a short parole. i found some help. tribble predator, this is. called a glommer, it is. yeesssssss.
START well, at least, neat, is it.
START the klingons chasing you, why were, jones, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i know, how should, hmm? notoriously bad tempers, klingons have.
START mention ecological sabotage, did they.
START me, hmm? saboteur, hmm? ridiculous.
START pretty emphatic, captain koloth was. herh herh herh.
START such a little thing, was it. understand at all why they got upset, i cannot. yeesssssss.
START what do did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, i did know it was a klingon planet not.
START tribbles like not klingons. that, given you some clue, should have.
START like tribbles even less klingons. lucky you came along and saved me, it was when you did, friend kirk. have outrun them much longer i could not. yes, hmmm.
START to our computer files according, jones, in violation of three federation mandates and forty seven local ones, you are. confined until we complete our mission, you are. then turn you over to the proper authorities, we will. herh herh herh.
START captain, could we talk this over not, hmm? i did think so not.
START jim, right, cyrano jones is. these tribbles not reproduce. they just get fat. i think not we have anything to worry about. yeesssssss.
START not about tribbles, anyway. concerned about that new klingon weapon, i am. yes, hmmm.
START aye, and true, if that is, then weapon that leaves them as helpless as it does us, it is.
START seem to be limited, the practical advantages of such a weapon would.
START perhaps, but logical applications, there are. the key question is, how long take them to recharge does it, hmm? probably attack us again as soon as they are back up to power, they will. and probably begin by destroying the other robot ship to prevent us from repeating the same trick, they will. they want cyrano jones very badly. hmmmmmm.
START he really seems not the saboteur type, jim.
START well, sir, managed to transfer all the grain aboard, we have, but it severely limits us. we filled the shuttlecraft hangars, our extra holds all, and even got containers of that wheat, we have, that quintrotriticale, of the ship in the corridors. and then, got that other robot ship to escort, have we, too. i like not it at all, sir. hmmmmmm.
START i, nor do, mister scott, but got to do it, have we. sherman's planet needs that grain desperately.
START aye, sir, but got tribbles on the ship, have we, quintrotriticale in the corridors, klingons in the quadrant. ruin your whole day, it can, sir. yeesssssss.
START captain, picking up a klingon battle cruiser, sensors are. yes, hmmm.
START obviously, recharge their power in a matter of hours, they can.
START as a decoy use the robot ship. it change course and move off have. use it again to give the klingons trouble, will we. control more than one ship at a time with their stasis field, they cannot. herh herh herh.
START to be veering off the klingon seems. my mistake, captain. they were veering off not. attacking the grain ship, they were.
START but destroy it they did not. they only wrecked the propulsion units. they left the cargo intact.
START quite a marksman, captain koloth is. herh herh herh.
START changed course, they have. coming in again, are they. yeesssssss.
START running away, are they. very odd. use their stasis weapon at all they did not. yeesssssss.
START had enough time to recharge it perhaps they have not. hmmmmmm.
START or something else, the purpose of the attack was. hmmmmmm.
START scotty, put a tractor beam on it. take it in tow, we will.
START captain, exactly what they want us to do could that be. our available power tow the robot and limit. carrying the extra mass of the first ship's cargo, we are, and the second one in tow, we now have. that requires a great deal of power we will be able to use in battle not.
START well, mister spock, any ideas, do you have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START always throw tribbles at them, we could.
START i thought vulcans did have a sense of humour not. hmmmmmm.
START not, we do not, captain.
START captain, got broken cargo containers in all the corridors, have we, and eating the grain, the tribbles are.
START of captain koloth's ship any sign, hmm?
START captain kirk, i do for you, what can, hmm? some spican flame gems perhaps, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START all over my ship, your tribbles are. find them all my security men cannot.
START mister jones, in enough trouble already, you are. herh herh herh.
START captain, harmless little tribble. they hurt, what can, hmm?
START hungry, they are hungry, captain.
START so are the people on sherman's planet. little tribble eats much not, big tribble does. and growing, these are. jones, so mad about, is this the ecological sabotage the klingons are, hmm?
START captain, coming back, the klingons are.
START of the devil speak. yes, hmmm.
START jim, something about these tribbles, there is. herh herh herh.
START done it, that is. caught, we are caught. hmmmmmm.
START not if, help it, can i. yeesssssss.
START to admit it much as i hate, captain koloth, citizen of the federation and entitled to federation protection, cyrano jones is. i must, as it pains me much, your request refuse. yeesssssss.
START are you going to sit down not, sir, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START stand i i think will. yeesssssss.
START mister scott, going to implement emergency defence plan b, are we. yeesssssss.
START open hailing frequencies, lieutenant. captain koloth, ready to release my ship are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yet you know not, do you, hmm?
START that, immobilized your ship worse than you have immobilized ours, have we.
START kirk, cyrano jones took a klingon genetic construct, of our planets an artificial creature from one. it back, we must have. designed to be a tribble predator, was it. prepared to go to war if we have to, we are. yeesssssss.
START others, you must have.
START they completely overrun the planet jones sold before.
START and all you want, that is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the glommer, we must have. herh herh herh.
START oh, well, if all that is. mister scott, to the klingon ship transport the glommer over. yes, hmmm.
START do this to me, you cannot. under space salvage laws, mine, he is mine. yes, hmmm.
START covered by space salvage laws a planetary surface is not. but you want the little beastie that bad if, mister jones, transport you over with it we will. hmmmmmm.
START my claim i withdraw. yeesssssss.
START well, as effective a weapon as we thought at least we can report the stasis field is not. too high and takes too long for the klingon ship to recover to make it practical, the power drain is. yes, hmmm.
START agreed, captain. to be a much more effective weapon tribbles appear. yes, hmmm.
START very slipshod, jones' genetic engineering was. jim. kept the tribbles from reproducing, he may have, but he did slow down their metabolism not. you see, they are just giant tribbles not, colonies, they are colonies.
START captain, filled with tribble, the engine room is. hmmmmmm.
START fix everything, a simple shot of neoethylene will. break down into their individual units with a slower metabolic rate, the tribble colonies will. and safe tribbles now will these really be. yeesssssss.
START well, their tribbles too unless they treat, going to be big enough for all of them that ship is not. hmmmmmm.
START aye, captain. but got to admit, you have, if got to have tribbles, we have, best if all our tribbles are little ones, is it.
START if correct, my calculations are, captain, twenty seconds to go, have we.
START to what twenty seconds, hmm? what worries me, that is. lieutenant uhura, place the ship on yellow alert.
START five seconds. four, three.
START all stations report yellow alert status, sir. captain, getting some sort of subspace radio signal, am i.
START it on ship's speaker put.
START more like music than a message, it is. herh herh herh.
START captain, being probed we are. herh herh herh.
START from where, hmm? you trace it can, hmm?
START coming from a star system twenty light years away, the signal is. herh herh herh.
START you identify it can, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the taurean system, it is. of this sector a small star at the extreme edge. herh herh herh.
START powerful signal to reach here from that great a distance that is. yes, hmmm.
START to be calling us it seems.
START strange. yes, the same feeling myself i get.
START resemble a summons, it does. yeesssssss.
START to a summons i find no resemblance, captain.
START opinion noted. for the taurean system set a course, lieutenant arex. warp factor seven. yes, hmmm.
START you wanted me, lieutenant, hmm? all right are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i am. but to observe the men here i want you. to start it seemed when we picked up that signal, and gotten worse, it is.
START logically, we must assume, created by the probe, are they. herh herh herh.
START sir, what visions, hmm? anything we see not.
START miss chapel, anything you see not, either, hmm?
START take a medical reading, nurse. lieutenant uhura, to the bridge call doctor mccoy.
START sickbay, doctor mccoy. to the bridge report. doctor mccoy, hmm? no response.
START still inconclusive, readings are. odd that only the men are affected, is it, captain. i suggest.
START these figures just match not up with spock's. so off, far i count three sensor readings that are.
START fantastic architecture. only an incredibly advanced race, built it, could have. yeesssssss.
START no, i think not so, carver. do it, spock will. herh herh herh.
START something compelling about it there is.
START yes, it too i feel, bones. yes, hmmm.
START captain, of our feeling suggests visual compulsion the urgency. i advise remaining at a distance until, determine the extent of its influence, can i. indicated in its centre, the life forms are. yes, hmmm.
START no apparent danger, there is, spock. go, let us. yes, hmmm.
START here, they are here. herh herh herh.
START oh, such wondrous ones. us, they honour us. hmmmmmm.
START theela, i am theela, the head female. welcome, james kirk, doctor mccoy, mister spock. welcome. yeesssssss.
START humanoid, the form is, but many internal differences, there are. to function on an unusual psychokinesis level their bodies appear.
START how know you our names, hmm?
START the signal, hmm? distress call, was it not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START explain its meaning later, i will. prepared a feast to celebrate your presence we have.
START the most beautiful women in the galaxy, these are. but the men, where are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to the slumber chambers take them. rest, they must rest.
START probably that nectar. potent as saurian brandy, it is.
START of every scan run by the women science teams results. if an answer, there is, here, it is here. herh herh herh.
START of medical summation, biological, astrophysical scans.
START working. severely enervating to humanoid males, probe directed at ship from planet surface is. exposure causes increasing weakness. to point of death possibly.
START to security officer davison lieutenant uhura. yes, hmmm.
START what doing are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of this ship taking command. hmmmmmm.
START return to our duties aboard ship, we must. herh herh herh.
START yes. duties. it, that is. duties. i have. yes, hmmm.
START you, leave, cannot, mister spock. needed here, you are. soon, feel as you do, all the men on your ship will. all needed, are they, and join us, they will. yeesssssss.
START go, we must go. herh herh herh.
START mister scott, as senior lieutenant, taking responsibility for the safety of this ship i am.
START of you very thoughtful, love.
START ship's log, supplemental. lieutenant uhura recording. to chief engineering officer scott's euphoric state of mind due, assuming command of the enterprise, am i, for my action i accept full responsibility. detailed account, recorded later, will be. nurse chapel, until further notice, act as chief medical officer, you will.
START me keep it i wonder why they let.
START they saw no practical use in it perhaps.
START cortropine. could help. strong stimulant, it is. yeesssssss.
START the urn. the only place, it is. hmmmmmm.
START they are here not, theela.
START noticed that their glow diminishes, i have when the women are not present. polarised conductors could they be which transfer our vital energy to the bodies of the women.
START actually draining our life forces, you mean they are, hmm?
START account for our rapid aging, that would, captain. and our weakness. if you recall, the women seemed listless at first. but failed, as our strength has, become more energetic and vital, they have. yes, hmmm.
START we have, how long do, spock, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to be aging ten years per day we seem, captain. yes, hmmm.
START ten years, hmm? in four days, dead, we will be! herh herh herh.
START and to them useless. join us here, theela said the other men of the crew would. lured into the same trap, they will be. got to contact the ship, we have.
START retained more strength than any of you i have. different, my internal structure is, captain, my life span longer. wiser if i go to the temple to try and find the communicators and contact the ship, is it. herh herh herh.
START to the men of the enterprise the equipment belonging, it, where is, hmm?
START to enterprise spock.
START greetings. theela, i am theela. of this compound head female.
START of the starship enterprise lieutenant uhura. here to locate captain kirk, are we. hmmmmmm.
START to your ship return. you are wanted here not.
START until we find captain kirk, we will leave not. yeesssssss.
START search the temple. of two parties. herh herh herh.
START of them anywhere no sign. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START spock, it is spock. panel somewhere, there must be.
START got to get out of here we have. yes, hmmm.
START wait! tell you everything, i will.
START descended we this is the race from whom are. to this planet they came when our homeworld began to die. this place and all surrounding it they built. they did know this planet drains humanoid energy not. but the women's bodies developed a glandular secretion, to survive and to manipulate certain areas of the males' brains enabling them, their emotional senses influence. ultimately, it drained the men, to weaken and die caused them. yeesssssss.
START to survive, vitalise each twenty seven years of your time, we must. herh herh herh.
START instead, eternal prisoners, are we. we neither age nor die. unable even to bear children, we are. yes, hmmm.
START see, we shall see. of the enterprise the men, reveal them. herh herh herh.
START drowning, they are drowning! they, where are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START many cusecs from here, the nearest water accumulation is. yes, hmmm.
START like a pool or a tub that looks. yeesssssss.
START the urn in the garden, it is. yeesssssss.
START no results, captain. tried everything we know, we have. yeesssssss.
START the key, perhaps the transporter is.
START to what key, hmm?
START our restoration. of our original bodies it holds the molecular pattern when we beamed down to the planet. hmmmmmm.
START possibly. but ninety nine point seven to one, the odds against us are.
START on the surface, we are, mister scott. as previously directed reprogram the transporter. yeesssssss.
START but never been done before, this has. it fails suppose, hmm?
START scotty, losing them, are we! yeesssssss.
START work did it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START more handsome than ever, you are. yeesssssss.
START kept the agreement, tell captain kirk we have.
START bring a ship back, a crew of women will. transported to the first suitable planet will you be.
START we become as other women, how quickly will, hmm?
START only take a few months, doctor mccoy says it should. hmmmmmm.
START of hope a life. new learning. perhaps love. oh, much better future than immortality, is it. yes, hmmm.
START intercept the cloud in the vicinity of alondra, we will, the outermost planet, sir.
START captain, now approaching sensor range of the cloud, we are.
START to be of irregular shape it seems, some eight hundred thousand kilometres across and about half that in depth.
START immense, it is immense. of saturn twice the diameters, jupiter and neptune together! yeesssssss.
START our present position put up, lieutenant arex.
START very curious, this is, captain. as a strange combination of matter and energy it computes. hmmmmmm.
START captain, disappeared from navigation scan, alondra has. hmmmmmm.
START come between us and the planet could the cloud have.
START no, lieutenant, engulfed alondra, the cloud has. captain, to be breaking up the planet seems. definitely growing smaller, its mass is. herh herh herh.
START spock, possible the cloud consumes planets is it, hmm? herh herh herh.
START sir, changing course, the cloud is.
START verified, the course change is, sir. now moving directly toward the inhabited planet, the cloud is. yeesssssss.
START but it continues on that course if. herh herh herh.
START die, mantilles will. mister sulu, to warp eight increase speed. to the limit push it.
START jim, if stop it we cannot, die, millions of people will.
START perhaps more, doctor. if part of this thing's nature, planet annihilation is, as instinctively as an amoeba seeks out food it might seek them out. consume only planets it may not, but also stars. we know not yet whether it has any selective ability, but thread to every planet in our galaxy could it be.
START bones, i need an expert psychological opinion. do we dare tell the people on mantilles, get away, try to save a few who could, hmm?
START how much time have do they, hmm? herh herh herh.
START certain there'd be planetwide panic, it is.
START on the other hand, of the population notifying them may still save some small fraction, captain. hmmmmmm.
START of mantilles who's the governor, jim, hmm?
START bob wesley. for the governorship he left starfleet. no hysteric, is he.
START thanks, bones. lieutenant uhura, to governor wesley on mantilles send a priority one call.
START captain, getting unusual readings on the chemical identity sensors, am i.
START our periodic tables elements unknown in, captain. of the opinion this cloud has come from outside our galaxy, i am. hmmmmmm.
START still got us, it is. yeesssssss.
START combination of koinoenergy, the streamers are, with an unusually powerful attraction force almost an ambiplasma.
START to fire all phasers into cloud mass prepare. herh herh herh.
START firing. no effect, captain. herh herh herh.
START to absorb the phaser energy the cloud appeared, captain. yeesssssss.
START floating inside the cloud we are. herh herh herh.
START some form of highly charged gaseous antimatter, the objects are.
START captain, too heavy to hold for any length of time, the power drain on the shields is.
START scotty, for an antimatter charge prepare the shields.
START of a theory only the beginning, captain. possible this cloud in, it is which we are entrapped is a living thing. alive, the cloud is. yes, captain, to those found in living organisms its components appear similar.
START some resemblance, there is. how much we can depend on it i know not. but tell you one thing, i will. to get out of this area, we have. acting something like a macromorphase enzyme, those mists out there are. if up the shields stay not, corroded and we will all be broken down into nice digestible particles, the hull will be. yeesssssss.
START inclined to agree with the doctor, i am, captain. the mass of the planet alondra has been steadily growing smaller since, been in here, have we. yes, hmmm.
START captain, subspace radio message coming in from governor wesley of mantilles, i have.
START to my quarters transfer it. herh herh herh.
START mister sulu, to assemble a diagram of the cloud's composition and feed it to the library computer use your scanners.
START time to save some people, you have, bob.
START how are you choose going to, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START reach mantilles, in three hours and twenty minutes the cloud will. die, millions of people will. your help i need, gentlemen. your analyses, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START if living being, we assume the cloud is, also assume it needs some kind of food to sustain itself, we must. yes, hmmm.
START agreed. of alondra judging from the disappearance, it converts from the planets it consumes the cloud lives on the energy.
START exactly. like a huge bull grazing here and there in the pasture of the universe, it is.
START as teeth i think they perform the same function. for digestion they break up the larger chunks of matter. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant, see what the scanners have come up with on the cloud's composition, let us.
START some sort of anatomy, it seems to have. arex, we on that chart, where are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START drawn in seems to have closed, the opening where we were. but another opening up there on top there is.
START if some kind of digestive system, this thing does have, much of a chance of making it that far we stand not. herh herh herh.
START thank you, mister arex. since only one way out, we appear to have, going to take it, we are. mister sulu, to that central core area takes us.
START and stomach, if this thing does have, to give it enough indigestion to make it turn away from mantilles we just might be able.
START reached the entrance to the central core, have we, captain. hmmmmmm.
START what we do now, knock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START those things, what are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i think, in what corresponds to the small intestine, are we. those things growing out of the wall, similar to villi, would be.
START lined with millions of them, the human small intestine is, to absorb nutrients into the body. hmmmmmm.
START captain, antimatter, those villi are. of them it the enterprise touches one.
START explode, we will explode. mister sulu, keep the deflectors up at all costs.
START incredible. destroyed on contact with the matter this thing takes in and then they regenerate immediately, are they.
START is putting an enormous strain on the engines, captain. especially the antimatter. with the maximum power demands and all what, falling fast, the reserve is. hmmmmmm.
START we have, how much time do, hmm?
START thank you, mister scott. mister arex, to make your way through to the opening on the other side try.
START hold it on course i cannot, sir. using all power, we are. hmmmmmm.
START to maximum increase deflector shields.
START to maximum screens, sir. yes, hmmm.
START if the power drain right now we stop not, of us that'll be the end. yes, hmmm.
START and stop, if we do, we, drawn into one of the villi and the ship will explode, will be.
START captain, antimatter, you said that villi are. if get a piece of it, we could, i could put it in the antimatter engine and, regenerate, would it. enough power for the engines and the shields to go on maximum again, we'd have. yes, hmmm.
START matter's no problem. beam aboard some of the planet chunks out there, we could. and cut a piece of the antimatter villi with the tractor beams and transport it aboard like that, we can. yeesssssss.
START it aboard bring, hmm? if of the ship or any of us the antimatter touches the inside, we, blown to bits, will be. yeesssssss.
START rig a force field box that'll hold the villi suspended in the centre, i can. then take it into the antimatter nacelle i can, it into the regenerating chamber and release the forcefield by remote control put. hmmmmmm.
START scotty, got ten minutes left, we have. herh herh herh.
START holding, the force field is. go, let us. herh herh herh.
START scotty, just given the enterprise and mantilles a chance to live, you have. yeesssssss.
START now only forty two minutes, the cloud is, fourteen seconds from mantilles, captain. and ascertained an important fact we have. brain, this being does have. herh herh herh.
START to say at this moment impossible, captain. made only one action, it has which might be interpreted as intelligent. it changed course from alondra toward mantilles. but been an involuntary response to the sensing of food, that could have. hmmmmmm.
START the brain located, where is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START of the core emanates considerable electrical activity that irregularly shaped object at the top.
START pretty certain to be the brain, it is, jim. basically electric, the functioning of the brain is. yes, hmmm.
START if reach it before the cloud gets to mantilles, we can, to save the planet we might be able. use the photon torpedoes to destroy the brain we will.
START captain, living creature, this is. starfleet regulations. yes, hmmm.
START of intelligent life forms i know the regulations against the killing, mister spock. but we know not this life form is intelligent. and it we do know the people on mantilles are doomed if we stop not. if to be a judge, have i, of saving mantilles i decide in favour. yeesssssss.
START am i doing the right thing, bones, hmm? once, i said, kill today man rose above primitiveness by vowing 'i will not.' . yes, hmmm.
START but you, let this thing destroy over eighty million lives, cannot, either.
START captain, completed the analysis of the target area, have i. unfortunately, so vast, the brain is, our entire offensive armament will assure its destruction not. however, the brain, completely destroyed if we convert the entire ship to energy, could be, aimed at the brain's cortex, and expend the energy in one mortal strike.
START telling us to blow up the ship, that sounds like you are.
START what i just said, i believe that is, doctor.
START specific and absolutely correct, your figures are, of course, hmm? you are sure, do the job, will it, hmm?
START to engineering kirk. yeesssssss.
START computer control, on the bridge, will be when it is time to trigger it.
START incoming message, sir. governor wesley of mantilles, it is. hmmmmmm.
START it on the viewscreen put, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START to mantilles thirty one minutes and four seconds, sir. yeesssssss.
START bob, katie, where is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START worry, do not, bon. all right, she will be. goodbye. yes, hmmm.
START his daughter. eleven, she is eleven. spock, it is definitely intelligent is there any way we could establish whether or not, hmm? perhaps a vulcan mind touch. yeesssssss.
START require physical contact, would it, which is impossible, captain. but out with my mind, i may be able to reach. if our sensors onto the cloud's synaptic electrical impulses we focus, routed to the ship's computer for analysis into thought could the input be.
START link in the universal translator and put it on the audio system from here, i can. yes, hmmm.
START in time, can you do it, hmm?
START impossible to calculate, it is, captain. too many unknown factors, there are. only try to accomplish the link, i can. no more.
START to mantilles twenty six minutes exactly, sir. herh herh herh.
START ready, the procedure is, sir. yeesssssss.
START mantilles, how near is, mister arex, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START envelope it in three minutes, the cloud will, twenty seconds, sir. hmmmmmm.
START bones, the cloud, he is. here, its thoughts are. move, do not. lieutenant, use the library computer. of the earth onto that screen put some views. herh herh herh.
START from, this is the thing we come. lieutenant, what i want, this is. yes, hmmm.
START your order awaiting, captain. hmmmmmm.
START few seconds, scotty. to give spock that much, have we.
START stopped, the cloud has, sir. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant uhura, contact governor wesley. to bring his ships back tell him.
START spock, it, you did! leaving, the cloud is. yes, hmmm.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START spock, what perceive did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of the universe the wonders, captain. incredible, completely incredible.
START returning, the travellers are. herh herh herh.
START what a trip, bones. orion, of its civilisation at the dawn. even just observing, for fear of changing some piece of history not touching anything. what's the matter, hmm? bones, hmm?
START what you mean, who's he, hmm? you know mister spock. yeesssssss.
START not, afraid i do, jim.
START to enterprise kirk.
START captain, expecting there to be one of the historians with you, was i. but vulcan, hmm?
START i know not what's going on, but treated with respect will the first officer of this ship be. yeesssssss.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START spock: i had to see if, do it, could i. personal test. fail, i cannot fail. yeesssssss.
START your father's wish, that is, hmm?
START spock: yes, and my mother's. they, me, they confuse me. things his way, father wants me to do, and mother says i should. but she goes then.
START human woman, is she, with strong emotion and sensitivities. with those traits she embarrasses you, and afraid, you are when you see them in yourself. hmmmmmm.
START spock: how know did you, hmm?
START some human blood in my family line, there is. it is fatal not. what you yet not understand, spock, is that vulcans lack not emotion. only that ours is controlled, it is. logic offers a serenity humans seldom experience in full. them control us we have emotions but we deal with them and let not. herh herh herh.
START spock: dying is he, hmm?
START get him back to the city to a healer, we cannot. too large to move, is he.
START vulcan, you are. the logical thing to do, what is, hmm?
START spock: bring a healer here i can.
START long journey across the desert, it is. many dangers, there are. go, i will go. yes, hmmm.
START spock: no. my duty, this is. for me, no one else can do it. you stay with him, will, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START happen before this did not. made without the sacrifice of yours, my life decision was, old friend. i know, pain, there is. help a little, can i. sleep now.
START late, the hour is. urgent, i trust your errand is, hmm?
START spock, you are, of sarek son, not are you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START heard of you, i have. heard of a tendency toward what humans call practical jokes, i have.
START spock: that once, i did, two years ago. healer, call you out unless a life was in danger i would not. ever heard the son of sarek was a liar have you, hmm?
START no. never been said, that has. very well. wait here and, get my medicines, will i. hmmmmmm.
START spock: healer, hurry. hmmmmmm.
START be long now it will not, old friend.
START face such a loss without tears, a vulcan would.
START been too long, it has. save his life, no antidote known will.
START spock: is there nothing, do, you can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START prolong his life, i can, but in pain, will he be. or release him from life, can i. need your decision, will i. your pet, he is. yeesssssss.
START spock: release him. fitting he dies with peace and dignity, it is.
START spock: you in any way i regret having troubled, but necessary, it was necessary. herh herh herh.
START necessary, i trust you can explain why it was, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START spock: decision to be made, there was. to be chosen a direction for my life had. vulcan, i chose vulcan. yeesssssss.
START spock: thank you, father. if excuse me now, you will, some business to conduct with schoolmates, have i. herh herh herh.
START spock: of the vulcan neck pinch a demonstration. our cousin taught me.
START make my farewells, i too must. been most kind, your hospitality has, but journey on, i must. hmmmmmm.
START you saved my son's life, selek. no way i can fully repay you for that, there is.
START to understand your son try, of vulcan sarek. repayment enough for me will it be.
START strange request, but honour it, will i. yours if you pass this way again, my home is.
START returning, the traveller is. herh herh herh.
START to the ship i sent the others up. what happened, hmm?
START changed this time, one small thing was. pet died.
START pet, hmm? well, mean much in the course of time that would not. yeesssssss.
START enterprise, the captain, this is. to beam up two. hmmmmmm.
START well, well, well. so you two finally got back from your vacation. while, been running all over orion's creation, you have, been running the annual crew physicals, i have. the last ones, you are. yes, hmmm.
START doctor mccoy, your good fortune you know not. if different, the times were, have to recalibrate for an andorian, you would. yes, hmmm.
START to mean what's that supposed, hmm? if supposed to be a joke, that was, spock, jokes i have to remind you vulcans tell not.
START picked up speed, we have, sir, rapidly. cut back power, have i, but to gain momentum we continue.
START answering the helm she is not, sir. two minutes right ascension off course and drifting farther, captain.
START to reverse course stand by.
START only describe it as hypergravity, i can, captain, ever encountered, more powerful than any we have. dragging the enterprise toward it, is it.
START our sensors picking it up why are not, hmm? forward scanners, mister sulu.
START captain, the source of the radio emissions, that is.
START negative star mass. spectra analysis, imploded matter, but every reading on, negative, is it.
START captain, still gaining speed, we are.
START no good, sir. still falling toward it, we are. yeesssssss.
START we have, how much time do, hmm? herh herh herh.
START captain, another signal, there is. listen. hmmmmmm.
START sulu, flank speed ahead. to try to get into orbit around that thing, our only chance is. herh herh herh.
START as she goes steady, mister sulu. maintain orbit. yes, hmmm.
START if this strong, its pull is, jim, how we get out of orbit, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START slingshot effect, mister spock, hmm? enough power we have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START need some time for the computations, i will, captain.
START getting that radio sound again, i am, sir. nine seconds right ascension from galactic plane, dead ahead and closing fast. on the viewscreen now, it is, sir.
START ever seen i it is a starship like nothing have. of it the size. yeesssssss.
START been damaged, it is. bet she was pulled in like we were i will. hmmmmmm.
START coming from that ship, it is, captain. yes, hmmm.
START confirmed, captain, but it is possible not. dead, that ship is. absolute zero, temperature is. no thermal reading to support life aboard her there is, and to send radio messages no energy store. nothing except a slight magnetic flux reading which could be normal for the ship's metal. yeesssssss.
START sure, you are, mister spock, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START you identify that metal can, or of the ship the design, hmm?
START to both negative, captain. unknown alloy, harder and lighter than any registered metal. it is a recorded galactic starship design not. for slightly more than three hundred million years retro analysis of the ship's spectra dates it as having been in orbit here. hmmmmmm.
START beautiful, it is beautiful. built it, what kind of people could have, to touch even a starship with grace and beauty, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START civilisation that advanced three hundred million years ago before life even emerged on earth. yeesssssss.
START mister spock, of that ship's power source any indication, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to natural insect designs of earth the hexagonal shape of the windows suggests a similarity, of bees the honeycombs. shaped precisely like this, the individual cells are.
START this now would you look at, hmm? this metal, it is cast or rolled not. drawn into filaments and spun, it was. yes, hmmm.
START now, a lighter and stronger material than anything we have.
START look, every pod, all been burst open, they have. yes, hmmm.
START aye, from the inside, of them from the looks. herh herh herh.
START been some accident to get almost every pod, must have.
START such system, accidents seldom have, doctor mccoy. consider the alternative possibility that the crew of this ship destroyed her themselves, i believe we must. herh herh herh.
START to enterprise kirk. yes, hmmm.
START lieutenant, still getting that radio signal from this ship are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START negative, captain. transmitting, it stopped transmitting when you beamed aboard.
START all right. to transport lock on us with the transporter and be ready. going inside, are we.
START what make you of it, spock, hmm? herh herh herh.
START you mean, functioning after all the milleniums this ship has been here, is it, hmm?
START accumulators, the wands are, to attract energy receptors, motion, sound, light, heat, of energy around them every kind. hmmmmmm.
START of the ship the structure, those huge arches, thrusting up. designed to receive and store energy, the whole ship is.
START me the creeps gives. like something's watching us i feel.
START it too i feel, captain.
START of latent primal superstition a physiological symptom, to them the fear of primitive people confronting something unknown. yes, hmmm.
START to the beings that built this ship compared, primitive people, we are, even you, mister spock. all right, keep going, let us. yes, hmmm.
START in effect here, artificial gravity is, captain. of earth normal both air and gravity within two points. yes, hmmm.
START enterprise, read me do you, hmm? sulu, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no use, captain. been set up, some sort of interference has. yeesssssss.
START cut our way out of here, we can.
START you mean, trapped here, are we, hmm? no communication, nothing, hmm? herh herh herh.
START this is, was, of the starship the control centre. control and navigational instruments, these must be.
START to shield this room something. but it from what shield, hmm? yeesssssss.
START aboard their ship, possibly from whatever had come.
START but nothing, survive three hundred million years, no form of life could.
START quite right, mister scott. of life no known form.
START trying to get in, something is. reacting against the magnetic flux lines, the field of interference is, captain.
START it hold, will, hmm?
START it, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START risk the shuttlecraft, perhaps we could. with a protective shield perhaps.
START sending anyone anywhere i am not. give us the information we need to destroy this thing, unmanned probes can, if destroyed, it can be. yes, hmmm.
START differ with you, i must, captain. sent unmanned probes into it, have we. they have given us some information but they have told us what we need to know not, and afford the power to take blind shots at it we cannot, to kill it hoping. yes, hmmm.
START send one man in, we could, pinpoint its vulnerable spots. yes, hmmm.
START know what the odds are in coming back do you, hmm? order a man to do that i cannot. yes, hmmm.
START who said anything about an order, jim, hmm? got a volunteer, you have. done the preliminary work, have i.
START suicide mission, it is. herh herh herh.
START reflexes, the thing evidently has. stung it, the unmanned probe we sent in must have when it entered. the turbulence of its reaction, the lurch we felt was. hmmmmmm.
START all right, so know enough to go slow, i would when we penetrated its vulnerable spots.
START martyr complex, you have, doctor. it disqualifies you i submit that.
START think i intend to pass up the greatest living laboratory since do you.
START it first and died the vulcans saw. hmmmmmm.
START just because the vulcans failed. hmmmmmm.
START more capable, i am. hmmmmmm.
START gentlemen, i am taking volunteers not. hmmmmmm.
START you think not you are going, hmm?
START better qualified as a command pilot than you are, i am. yeesssssss.
START which you indispensable makes, captain. further, science specialist you are not. herh herh herh.
START jim, never seen before and may never see again we that organism contains chemical processes have. learn more in one day, we could.
START we have not one day, doctor. precisely one hour and thirty five minutes of power left, we have. hmmmmmm.
START gentlemen, decide, i will decide. yes, hmmm.
START to captain kirk engineering. herh herh herh.
START to keep you informed on the power drain you asked me. down fifty percent now, all levels are. yes, hmmm.
START very well. for launching prepare the shuttlecraft. yeesssssss.
START tell you what special equipment to put in, doctor mccoy will. kirk out. sorry, i am sorry, mister spock.
START right. get a few things i need i will, jim.
START not you, bones. sorry, i am sorry, mister spock. best qualified to go, you are.
START suffer so, do not, doctor. this is the first time superior capability has proven more valuable than professional credentials not. herh herh herh.
START been proven yet, nothing has, spock. give you the fundamental structure of the thing, the dna code analyser will. need readings on three light wavelengths from the enzyme recorder, you will. yes, hmmm.
START familiar with the equipment, am i, doctor. wasting time, we are. ready, the shuttlecraft is.
START to let me share in this you are determined not, are you not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START competition this is not, doctor. you understand it or not whether, me my own kind of dignity grant. yeesssssss.
START vulcan dignity, hmm? understand how can i grant you what i not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START then of your own superstitions employ one. me luck wish. herh herh herh.
START for shuttlecraft launch all systems clear. sir. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant uhura, to the computers channel automatic telemetry directly. yes, hmmm.
START enormous and growing worse, power drain is.
START captain, have enough power to get back out if he diverts it to his shields h e will not. herh herh herh.
START we discussed that possibility earlier. but need this information, you will.
START slowing now. contact in eighteen point three seconds. brace yourselves. no doubt be sensitive, the area of penetration will. contact.
START nothing to spare, there was. my tests i shall continue. oh, and doctor mccoy. survived it you would have not.
START you bet want to, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START moving slowly now, i am, to be the nucleus establishing course toward what appears.
START spock, for the shields save your power. herh herh herh.
START last only forty seven minutes, calculations indicate the shields will. yes, hmmm.
START stored sufficient energy for reproductive process to commence, changes indicate the organism has. herh herh herh.
START of those things you mean there'll be two, hmm?
START spock, read me do you, hmm? spock, read me do you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START alive, he is alive! he is kicked it in the side to, know, let us.
START captain, getting telemetry, i am. hmmmmmm.
START mister chekov, as it comes in telemetry analysis. yes, hmmm.
START to spock's telemetry information according, together, there are over forty chromosomes in the nucleus that are ready to come, to reproduce ready.
START if of that organism only doubles the energy, dead, we are dead, and defenceless, everything within a light year will be. herh herh herh.
START captain, increasing, the pull from that organism is, and getting critical, the power drain from our shields is.
START we have, how much time do, hmm? herh herh herh.
START put all secondary systems on standby. unconditional priority, shield power has. hmmmmmm.
START it on put, lieutenant. hmmmmmm.
START slowly losing life support and minimal shield energies, am i. to my calculations according. yeesssssss.
START how you feel, hmm? herh herh herh.
START your mind what's on, hmm? herh herh herh.
START spock. me is it, jim, hmm? still alive in that mass of protoplasm, am i so sentimental that i just have to keep believing that he is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START he knew the odds when he went out there, as you did just when you volunteered to go. that thing out there, what is, bones, hmm? intelligent it is not. not yet.
START disease, it is, of our galaxy like a virus invading the body. herh herh herh.
START yes, it is, is it not, hmm? the human body have, how many cells does, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START this thing, this cell, this virus. eleven thousand miles long, it is, and one cell, is it. when it grows into millions, the virus invading its body, we will be. yes, hmmm.
START now, that a thought is not, hmm? here we are, of our own galaxy antibodies, attacking an invading germ. ironic indeed if that were our sole destiny would it be, would it not, hmm?
START scotty, how much power do, left, have we, hmm?
START down to forty three percent, are we, sir. slipping a bit against the pull that beastie's putting on us, we are.
START happen if you diverted all remaining power to the shields, what would, for impulse power except, keep that in reserve, hmm?
START cut the engine thrust, hmm? like being caught in a wind tunnel we'd be sucked into that thing, sir. yes, hmmm.
START exactly. to divert power on my signal prepare. kirk out.
START something to say, you have got, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START technically, no. medically, yes. between the stimulants and the pressure, suggest you try to stay off your feet for a few minutes, i would.
START i have not a few minutes, bones. of us do maybe none. go, let us. yeesssssss.
START all hands, the captain, this is. going to enter the body of the organism rather abruptly, we are, think, i would think. damage control parties stand by. for collision all decks secure. kirk out. yeesssssss.
START to shields switching power. impulse in reserve. to zero cutting thrust, now! yes, hmmm.
START through, we are through, sir. yes, hmmm.
START aware of that, i believe everybody is, mister chekov.
START damage control parties report minimal damage, sir. being initiated, repairs are. hmmmmmm.
START captain, only twenty six percent power reserves after entry, we have.
START impulse power, do we have, scotty, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i saved all i could, sir, but i know not whether we have enough to get back out again. or time either.
START committed, we are committed. hmmmmmm.
START aye, we are, but committed to what, we are, hmm? no power for the phasers, we have. yes, hmmm.
START we could use it not. with that mess of protoplasm out there we'd cook ourselves along. hmmmmmm.
START probably like phasers, that thing would. power, it eats power. yes, hmmm.
START then what the devil, your pardon sir begging, are we doing, hmm?
START trying to tell us what to do, mister spock was when we lost voice contact.
START we, use the power to destroy it, cannot. yes, hmmm.
START aye, it could swallow that not. yeesssssss.
START mister chekov, prepare a probe. scotty, need a magnetic bottle for the charge, we will. how soon, hmm? herh herh herh.
START on its way, is it, sir. hmmmmmm.
START mister chekov, use a timing detonator for the probe we will. work out a setting. herh herh herh.
START helmsman, when estimate arrival at nucleus do you, hmm?
START how close are you it going to, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START point blank range. implant it then back away we will. yeesssssss.
START why, hmm? range of, the probe has.
START with the eddies and currents in that protoplasm, drift thousands of kilometres, the probe could. exactly on target, we must be, because we will have a second chance not. bones, for another stimulant time.
START how long do you think, keep taking that stuff, you can, hmm? blow you apart, it will. hmmmmmm.
START me together for another seven minutes keep. all i need, that is. yes, hmmm.
START personal log, commander spock, uss enterprise. noted the passage of the enterprise on its way to whatever awaits it, i have. if survive me, this record should, to the captain i wish it known that i bequeath my highest commendation and testimonial, officers, and of the enterprise crew. the finest starship in the fleet.
START mister scott, how much time do, left at one hundred percent impulse power, have we, hmm?
START programming complete. for launch ready. herh herh herh.
START launch probe at zero acceleration. forward thrust off, of a second one tenth.
START despite what spock said, still plenty sensitive, it is. herh herh herh.
START probe confirmed. lodged in the nucleus, it is, near the chromosome bodies.
START mister kyle, back us out the way we came in. mister chekov, nice, straight line. waste any time, do not. hmmmmmm.
START out in six point thirty seven minutes, estimate we will be. hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant, me spock's voice channel get. highest possible gain. herh herh herh.
START spock, read me do you, hmm? read me do you, spock, read me do you, hmm? come in, spock. spock! scotty, get a tractor beam. hmmmmmm.
START captain, enough time to do it we have not. fifty three second escape margin, we only have.
START well aware of that, i am, mister scott. get two tractor beams on that shuttlecraft.
START risk the ship further on my behalf, do not. yeesssssss.
START shut up, spock! rescuing you, we are. yes, hmmm.
START almost out. approaching the membrane, we are, sir.
START just written our epitaph, you may have, mister scott.
START destroyed, the organism is, sir. ruptured the membrane and thrown us clear, the explosion must have.
START how i know not, sir, but still with us, it is. herh herh herh.
START to enterprise shuttlecraft. to enterprise shuttlecraft. aboard, request permission to come.
START spock, alive, you are! herh herh herh.
START obviously, captain. and some fascinating data on the organism, i have.
START be so smart, do not, spock. you botched the acetylcholine test. hmmmmmm.
START to receive shuttlecraft prepare. received shuttlecraft. hangar doors closed. hangar deck pressurising.
START captain, received vocal contact from an official station i have. to a man named oxmyx they relayed us. boss, his title is. hmmmmmm.
START boss, hmm? all right, lieutenant, put him on. oxmyx. captain james t, this is. of the starship enterprise kirk, of planets representing the federation. yes, hmmm.
START yes. unfortunately, lost with all hands shortly after leaving your planet, the horizon was. her radio report last month we only received. herh herh herh.
START to explain difficult. we received a report a hundred years late because it was sent by conventional radio. on the outer reaches of the galaxy, your system is. they did have subspace communication in those days not. yeesssssss.
START explain it in more detail, i will when i see him. land the ship will not, but transport several people down, we will. well, little difficult for you to understand that is, too. explain it in more detail, i will when i see you. convenient, will where be, hmm? herh herh herh.
START good. i, looking forward to it, will be. kirk out. scotty, the conn, you have.
START spock, mccoy, beaming down, we are. standard equipment. yes, hmmm.
START interfered with the normal evolution of the planet, they must have. yes, hmmm.
START interesting to see the results of the contamination, will it be.
START we know not there is contamination. only circumstantial, the evidence is.
START the state of the iotian culture before the horizon came, what was, hmm?
START of industrialisation the beginnings. herh herh herh.
START extremely intelligent and somewhat imitative, horizon reports indicate the iotians are.
START so going down to recontaminate them we are.
START been done, the damage has, doctor. here to repair it we are.
START argue about it let us not. go study it, let us. energise. hmmmmmm.
START like coming home, this is.
START never like this, home was. seen pictures of the old days that look like this, i have. herh herh herh.
START sir, you mind explaining that statement would, please, hmm?
START i see you turn to stone want to. your hands over your head put, or you ain't have no head to put your hands over going to.
START weapon, that is. with that be careful. hmmmmmm.
START look, down here by mister oxmyx, we were asked to come. he said.
START he said i know what, bud. meet you, he said some of the boys would. okay, meeting you, we are. yes, hmmm.
START well, necessary those firearms are not.
START to make trouble you trying, hmm? yeesssssss.
START give me those baby blue eyes, do not. herh herh herh.
START for that innocent routine i go not.
START my life i never heard such stupid questions in.
START well, since this oxmyx asked us down here, you think we should see him, do not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START krako's getting more gall all the time.
START this how you greet all your guests is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START yeah, hmm? for peanuts we ain't playing. what's the matter, you guys never saw a hit before, hmm?
START sir, there are several questions, like to ask, would i.
START ask the boss. i know not nothing. get moving. yeesssssss.
START looking for, this is the contamination you are, jim. herh herh herh.
START hey, kalo. hey, when's the boss do something about the crummy street lights around here going to, eh, hmm? girl ain't safe. yeesssssss.
START listen, our percentages we pay. entitled to a little service for our money, are we.
START get lost, ya, will, hmm? but complain, some people got nothing to do.
START business, is this the way your citizens do, of petition their right, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of them they pay their percentages and the boss takes care. yes, hmmm.
START make yourself a drink, captain. good stuff, it is. it myself i distill. herh herh herh.
START no, thank you. mister oxmyx, you are.
START me, that is, pal. hmmmmmm.
START my first officer, this is, mister spock, doctor mccoy.
START doctor, huh, hmm? put that chopper down, kalo. our guests, these guys are. pick up a cue, captain. go ahead. you too careful around here these days cannot be. herh herh herh.
START yes. judging from what, seen so far, have we, i agree.
START you the boss they call, mister oxmyx. of what the boss, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of my territory the boss. the biggest in the world, i got. you know, one thing wrong with having the biggest, there is. always some punk trying to cut you out, there is. why you cannot be too careful, that is. yes, hmmm.
START the government here, you are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START what government, hmm? look, you, i told you. the territory and i run it, i got. all, that is.
START but other bosses, there are, other territories, hmm? yeesssssss.
START yeah, sure. maybe a dozen or so, not counting the small fry, but around to it i then they get burned anyway soon as get. yeesssssss.
START does that include, if ask, i may ask, gentleman called krako, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START how know you about krako, hmm? herh herh herh.
START us, he hit us, boss. yes, hmmm.
START take care of it, i will.
START hey, wait a minute. the book, that is. yeesssssss.
START book, i know it is. herh herh herh.
START the book. it, they left it, the other ship. the horizon. herh herh herh.
START the contamination, this is, captain. astonishing. an entire culture based on this. yes, hmmm.
START imitative, you said they were, and the book.
START any more cracks about the book i want not.
START leave any other books did they, hmm? herh herh herh.
START sure. to make radio sets and stuff like that some text books on how, but, look, i brought you here so, help me, you could, to ask me questions not for you. after that, i will answer anything you know want to. yes, hmmm.
START what you want is it, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START well, thinking, i was thinking. made much improvements since that other ship came here, you feds must have. of fancy heaters up there you probably got all kinds. so the deal here is. me all the heaters i need you give. enough tools so, knock off those punks all at once, can i. then take over, will i, and have to do is deal with me, you all will.
START me get this straight now let. carry out an aggression against your neighbours, you want us to supply you with arms and assistance so you can, hmm?
START what aggression, hmm? to make hits, i got. to help me hit them i want you. all, that is.
START mister oxmyx, quite explicit, my orders are. under no circum. hmmmmmm.
START your orders i ain't interested in. from now on, going to take orders from me, you are. going to give you just eight hours to give me the things i want, am i. if i have not those tools by then, going to call up your ship and have them pick you up in a box, am i. is that understood, pal, hmm?
START see how this thing works, let us.
START do that, do not. knock out the side of the building, you could. herh herh herh.
START that good, huh, hmm? have no more trouble, all you have to do is give me about a hundred of these fancy heaters and we will. hmmmmmm.
START of the question out. yeesssssss.
START hold it. communication device, is it.
START how work does it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START locked onto my ship's systems, it is.
START kalo, to the warehouse and put them in a bag take them. keep a sharp eye on them, you hear. yeesssssss.
START bela oxmyx, this is. your captain and his friends down here, i got. you see them alive want to.
START am i to understand that, holding the captain and his party, you are, hmm?
START you heard right, pal. going to give you just eight hours to get me the goods i want, am i, or your friends i put the hit on.
START of chicago did all this one book on the gangs. amazing, it is amazing. yeesssssss.
START for an entire society they evidently seized upon that one book as the blueprint. hmmmmmm.
START the bible, it is. herh herh herh.
START yeah, well, the worst gangster of all, oxmyx is.
START with mister oxmyx' methods we may quarrel, but essentially the correct one, his goal is. degenerate into total anarchy, this society must become united or it will. yes, hmmm.
START if as the result of the horizon's influence this society broke down, then the federation's responsible, and got to do something to straighten this mess out we have. spock, if get to the sociological computer, you could, do you think, find a solution, you could, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START unfortunately, access to my computers i have not, these gentlemen likely to permit it, nor are.
START oh, yes, yes. i would waste my time not. yes, hmmm.
START on beta antares four, they play a real game. man's game, it is, but of course, probably a little beyond you, is it. intelligence, it requires intelligence. yes, hmmm.
START listen, kirk, i can play anything, figure out, you can. take the cards, big man. show us how, played, is it.
START familiar with the culture on beta antares i am. games there are not. yes, hmmm.
START yes. turned up, the second card is, except on tuesdays. yeesssssss.
START oh, you got look what, two jacks. half fizzbin already, you got.
START no, no. if another jack, you got, why, have a sralk, you would. yeesssssss.
START yes. disqualified you would be. you need a king and a deuce, of course except at night, when need a queen and a four, you would. herh herh herh.
START right. oh, look at that. got another jack, you have. you are how lucky! for you how wonderful. if get another jack you did not, if gotten a king, you would, get another card, why then you would, except when it is dark, give it back, you would. yes, hmmm.
START if dark on tuesday, it were.
START yes, but what, after is a royal fizzbin, you are, but astron, the odds in getting a royal fizzbin are. spock, the odds in getting a royal fizzbin, what are, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START never computed them i have, captain.
START well, astronomical, they are astronomical, believe me. now, for the last card. call it a kronk we will. that, you got, hmm?
START get it i will.
START spock, find the radio station. uhura's monitoring the broadcasts. yourselves beamed up to the ship, cut in and have. yeesssssss.
START surely, coming, you are, captain. yes, hmmm.
START i will, but bringing bela oxmyx with me, am i. yes, hmmm.
START jim, you cannot. yes, hmmm.
START bones, our responsibility, this mess is. your orders, you have. go, let us.
START hold it! okay, pally, going for a ride, we are.
START if mind you not, rather walk, i would. yes, hmmm.
START listen, pally, either be a taxi or a hearse, this could. you know what i mean, hmm?
START beginning to get the idea, am i.
START that very well, you do. now, how with primitive radio equipment are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START very simple. amplitude modulation transmission. i simply adjust the frequency, this switch throw, and answer, the enterprise should. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, what doing on this frequency are you, hmm?
START so the fed, you are, huh, hmm? well, well, well, well, well.
START krako. jojo krako. the head of the whole southside territory, am i. hey, to see you glad.
START me how you even know who i am would you mind telling, hmm?
START sit down, kirk. got all of bela's communications bugged, have i. make a date with a broad unless i know about it he cannot. well, i guess you know why i brought you here want to.
START you make a deal want to. yes, hmmm.
START hey, that, i like that. sharp, that is. sharp, that is, eh, zabo, hmm?
START right, that is, deal. to help me i want you. herh herh herh.
START me guess let. you want, want heaters, you will, and want troops to teach them how to use them, then you will. and then, attack the other bosses and take over the whole planet, you will. then sit down and talk, we will, right, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START wrong! bela, i know bela. offer you beans he did not. now, me, reasonable man, i am. cut you in for, you give me what i want and i will, say, third. skimmed right off the top. well, what you think, hmm? herh herh herh.
START better idea, got i. to be united, this planet has. you know that. bela knows that. sit down, let us. you, me, bela. this whole matter discuss, contact the other bosses, and like reasonable men talk about it.
START no, you are stupid i think not. arrested, i just think your behaviour is. hmmmmmm.
START i have been arrested in my whole life not! listen, pally, to get what i want i know how. you live want to, you, do not, kirk, hmm? you do you bet. but through with you i after get, liable to be sorry unless you come across, you are. hold him here. to sharpen up his blade tell cirl the knife. i just, a job for him, might have. across with the heaters, unless you come.
START sorry, i am sorry, krako. no deal. yeesssssss.
START too bad that is. put him on ice!
START futile, doctor. no specifics. no record of such a culture based on a moral inversion there is. yeesssssss.
START giving up, you mean you are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no, doctor. merely saying the computers can offer us no logical, i am, rational, of our current dilemma factual way out. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, making contact from the surface, mister oxmyx is. yeesssssss.
START on audio, lieutenant. mister oxmyx, mister spock, this is.
START irrelevant, since here, we are here.
START oh, yeah. you, i tell you, better come on back down, you would. yes, hmmm.
START he put a bag on our captain, why would, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START if you correctly i understand, seem to be a problem that would. yes, hmmm.
START look, you guys got something i want. help you get your captain back, i can. yeesssssss.
START afraid i find it difficult to trust you i am, mister oxmyx. yeesssssss.
START to trust what's, hmm? business, business is. call a truce we will. on down, you come. herh herh herh.
START show no further hostility, you will, hmm?
START businessman, i am, pally. what you say, hmm?
START since our captain back, we must have, i accept.
START going to trust him, you mean you are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START if to save the captain without blatant, we are, this planet forceful interference on, doctor, the assistance of someone indigenous, we must have. therefore forced to trust mister oxmyx, we are.
START mister scott, though to avoid interference we hope, of our phaser banks on a strong stun position i suggest you set one. hmmmmmm.
START now, beginning to make sense, you are. yes, hmmm.
START i trust we shall have to use them not, but best to be prepared, it is. energise.
START to do you know what.
START worry, do not, boss. do nothing till they are through sparkling they cannot. hmmmmmm.
START mister oxmyx, i understood we had an arrangement, truce.
START think that, i was hoping you would, dummy. yes, hmmm.
START trying to help you we are, oxmyx. yes, hmmm.
START sir, employing a double negative, you are. hmmmmmm.
START us i fail to see why you understand not. stated the need for unity of authority on this planet, you yourself have. we agree.
START yeah, but to be the unity, got i.
START hey, captain, away from krako, you got. you know, that ain't easy. yes, hmmm.
START supposed to report to the ship, i thought you were, mister spock.
START we did, captain. our return the situation required.
START as well it may be just. find out anything from the computer did you, hmm?
START nothing useful. to apply here logic and practical information seem not. hmmmmmm.
START illogical, to deny the facts would be, doctor. yes, hmmm.
START then you mind not if i play a hunch, hmm? herh herh herh.
START sanguine about hunches i am not, captain, but no practical alternative, i have. yeesssssss.
START what are we do now going to, jim, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to be it ought. it cost a bundle. hmmmmmm.
START you too! of the clothes get out. nobody's put the bag on me any more going to. yeesssssss.
START fliwer, captain. yes, hmmm.
START key in the ignition. turn the ignition on. and nothing happens. the starter where is, hmm? the starter, there is. yes!
START yes. oh. i believe, a device known as a clutch, had they. clutch, captain. of those pedals on the floor perhaps one.
START captain, an excellent starship commander, you are, but to be desired as a taxi driver you leave much. herh herh herh.
START that bad, it was, hmm?
START now, that, a bit of a problem, could be. if inside, they were inside, be seen where they could not, stun them with our phasers, we could, but not out here. yeesssssss.
START if get close enough to them, we can, be able to render them harmless with reasonable rapidity, we should.
START like the trusting type they look not. yeesssssss.
START your pardon i beg, hmm? herh herh herh.
START going to hit somebody, you are. can i watch, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START them ears, you where'd get, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you hit krako out here going to, hmm? scragged from every window in the street, you open up and you will be. fix it for ya, can i. yeesssssss.
START young man, likely to be quite hazardous, this is. yes, hmmm.
START hold on, spock. of the mouths of babes out.
START you callin' a babe who, hmm? herh herh herh.
START calling you a babe i am.
START for me what's in it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START what you want, hmm?
START of the action a piece.
START know what the action will be you even not. yeesssssss.
START i figure it is got to be a thick percentage or you would be trying to hit krako not.
START all right, young man. guarantee you a piece of the action if we can pull this thing off, we will. herh herh herh.
START know what to do, you will.
START and that! and how like you that, hmm? gang up on me, think you can, huh, hmm? you, what are, chicken, hmm? herh herh herh.
START it, that is. go, let us. yes, hmmm.
START what's the matter, hmm? hurt yourself did you, kid, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START my daddy i want!
START daddy! my daddy i want! yes, hmmm.
START my daddy i want.
START sonny! wait a moment. they done, what have, hmm? they done to you, what have, hmm? you done, what have, hmm?
START of the action a piece.
START see, no one can. your phaser on stun put. yeesssssss.
START well, this nice ain't, hmm? i was wondering how i was get you back going to, and you deliver yourself here! with the ears who's your friend, kirk, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i think, got it reversed, you have, mister krako. herh herh herh.
START i ain't, pally. your heaters put down.
START captain, i believe that perhaps wise to do as he says would it be. i just heard the sound of.
START mister krako, not, i do not, er.
START so the fancy heater, this is, huh, hmm? how work does it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START trying to tell you, i am, mister krako, bigger than you, that this is, oxmyx or anyone.
START how it works, the only thing i want you to tell me is. hmmmmmm.
START you trust all your men can, hmm?
START well, make a man a pretty big boss, one of these can, you know. yeesssssss.
START i either trust 'em, or dead, they are dead. go in here and talk about it, let us.
START no busy little eyes to worry about we now got. this thing work, how does, hmm?
START what think you we are here for, to get a cut of your deal, hmm? forget it. peanuts to an outfit like the federation, that is. right, hmm?
START miniscule. very small piece. yeesssssss.
START that, how much is, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START that is, er. figure it out later, we will. hmmmmmm.
START you guys had laws i thought. no interference. hmmmmmm.
START who's interfering, hmm? taking over, we are. check, hmm? yeesssssss.
START your cut what's, hmm?
START what care you as long as you are being cut in, hmm? course, always bela oxmyx, there is.
START all right, deal, it is. your ship call. you need bring down your boys and whatever else.
START to enterprise kirk. yeesssssss.
START all right, scotty. with krako we made a deal.
START yeah. ready to make the hit, are we. taking over the whole planet as soon as you get ready we are.
START do you think, wise, that is, sir, hmm? herh herh herh.
START sure. trust krako, we can, but any choice we have not. you know what i mean, hmm? standing about twelve feet in front of me, is he, to be our pal all ready.
START aye. indeed, i know indeed.
START scotty, need phasers to equip every one of krako's men, will we. need advisors and troops to back him up on the hit, we will. all that, you got, scotty, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START captain. preparing everything, are we. ready, will it be when you give the word. yes, hmmm.
START going to start sending down your boys now, you mean you are, hmm?
START like we put the bag on you it looks, its not. herh herh herh.
START rights, i got rights.
START got nothing, you have. you mind your place, mister, or wearing concrete galoshes, you will be. herh herh herh.
START faster than walking, is it. yes, hmmm.
START but as safe not. yeesssssss.
START afraid of cars are you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START not at all, captain. your driving that alarms me, it is.
START spock, got the hang of it, i have. now go on. hmmmmmm.
START they, where are, hmm?
START knowing krako, probably send them back on a blotter, he will. yes, hmmm.
START yeah, sure. why did you say so in the first place not, hmm? to do was explain it to me, all you had.
START to enterprise kirk. yeesssssss.
START krako on ice, you got, hmm?
START of the phone find the man at the other end.
START what you think you are talking about i sure know not.
START with it get. giving the orders here, i am.
START yeah, got much nerve i you bet your life have. what are you do about it going to, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START advise you to keep dialing, would i, oxmyx. yeesssssss.
START all right. to do you know what. we hit bela's place and nobody comes out alive. all right. go, let us. hmmmmmm.
START all right! all right! all right! all right! now the federation's taking over whether it or not you like. you people, been running this planet like a piecework factory, you have. from now on, going to be under one roof, is it. going to run it like a business, you are. going to make a profit, that means you are. herh herh herh.
START and your percentage what's, hmm? yeesssssss.
START cutting the federation in for forty percent, am i. any objections, you got, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yeah! much talk i hear, but all i see, you and a couple of your boys, here is. no federation i see not. yeesssssss.
START listen. ship, they got. i know. there, i was there. herh herh herh.
START wait a minute. wait a minute. tepo's got a point. them, all we ever seen is.
START what, of boys a couple, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i am going to believe my eyes not.
START me say something let. i only saw three guys in that ship. maybe there ain't no more. yeesssssss.
START over four hundred guys there, there are.
START your story, that is, buster. hmmmmmm.
START hey, my boys, it is. making a hit at this place, they are.
START put you down, my boys will. herh herh herh.
START hey, great, that is, krako. hostages again, now we got. make a deal with the feds up there, we can. hmmmmmm.
START kidding are you, hmm? this one's all mine. from now on, nobody's going no place. going to be the big boss in this here territory i am.
START now, wait a minute. wait a minute. get that heater down. you want to take a look at what you are going to fight, do not, hmm?
START i already seen it. nothing, you are, fed.
START all right, but me call my ship one last time and say goodbye at least let. yes, hmmm.
START well, all right. go ahead. get smart, do not. yeesssssss.
START hello, scotty. kirk, this is.
START gee, some trick that is.
START hey, see that did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START dead they are not, for a while just knocked out. but been that way if we wanted them to, they might just as well have.
START okay, okay, kirk, so we get the message. now, talking about, what was this syndicate deal you were, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START talking about a percentage, was he. yeesssssss.
START talking about both, i was.
START okay. to me a syndicate makes sense. peaceful man at heart, i am, but sick and tired of all these hits, i am. krako, i hit krako, krako hits tepo, tepo hits me. too many bosses there is. we, get anything done, cannot. yeesssssss.
START reasonable, it is reasonable. reasonable, it sounds reasonable. to you that sound reasonable, hmm?
START reasonable, it is reasonable, mister oxmyx. break out some of your drinking stuff and celebrate the syndicate, let us. hmmmmmm.
START gentlemen, been brooding ever since we returned to the ship, you two have. yes, hmmm.
START brooding, mister spock. sombre, emotional state. now, do you wish to continue it or are you discuss it going to, hmm?
START captain, neither brooding nor sombre, i am. but reservations about your solution to the problem of the iotians, i do have.
START ah, yes. that, i understand that. you think not it is logical to leave a criminal organisation in charge. yes, hmmm.
START highly irregular, to say the least, captain. i am also curious as to how you propose to explain to starfleet command that a starship, sent each year to collect our cut, will be. yeesssssss.
START yes, very good question that is, mister spock. to guide the iotians into a more ethical system i propose our cut be put into the planetary treasury and used. despite themselves, forced to accept conventional responsibilities, they will be. is that logical not, hmm? all right, bones, of the planet in the language, your beef what's, hmm?
START i know not how serious this is, jim, and know how to tell you i quite not.
START but in all the confusion i. herh herh herh.
START it in bela's office i think i left. herh herh herh.
START somewhere. i am certain not. yeesssssss.
START you are certain of what not, hmm?
START my communicator i left. yes, hmmm.
START captain. if the iotians, very bright and imitative people, who are, take that communicator apart should. hmmmmmm.
START they will, they will. and find out how the transtator works, they will. herh herh herh.
START the basis for every important piece of equipment that we have, the transtator is. hmmmmmm.
START you really think, that serious, is it, hmm?
START how you mean, hmm?
START well, in a few years, of our action the iotians may demand a piece. hmmmmmm.
START ensign chekov, lieutenant uhura, and beam down and make a routine check of its facilities, i will.
START lieutenant uhura, go, let us.
START it, a transporter malfunction, must be.
START rough trip, that was. herh herh herh.
START this is the craziest landing pad, ever seen, have i. yeesssssss.
START trinary sun, that is. herh herh herh.
START to bridge scott. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, the captain, lieutenant uhura, and chekov. they vanished. onto the transporter platform and they just vanished, they got.
START consistent with the usual workings of the transporter i presume you mean they vanished in a manner not, mister scott. herh herh herh.
START aye, of course i mean that. call if they just beamed down, you think i would, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START reversed controls have you, hmm?
START made all the proper checks, have i. nothing, there was. no flash of light, there was, nothing. gone, they were gone.
START not down here. right and the transporter was functioning perfectly, all the dials were. herh herh herh.
START your equipment recheck, mister scott. scan for them on the planet's surface, i will. spock out. yeesssssss.
START but captain, if we are on gamma two not, then we, where are, hmm?
START that is what, like to know, would i. to enterprise kirk. to enterprise kirk. dead. herh herh herh.
START excellent, captain kirk. although we expected strength and competitive spirit, greatly pleased, we are. herh herh herh.
START of you hurt either, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i think not so, captain. yes, hmmm.
START admirable, chekov. admirable. you also, uhura. as great as the captain's, your spirit is. see you all will prove invaluable here, i can. galt, i am galt, of the planet triskelion master thrall. been sent to welcome you i have.
START there, captain. prepared for your training, now you are. yeesssssss.
START how know you our names, hmm?
START expecting you, the providers were, captain. your transportation they arranged. herh herh herh.
START of yours these providers, are they. hmmmmmm.
START correction, captain. ours the providers are not. theirs, we are theirs. herh herh herh.
START what they want from us, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START to be trained, you are, of course. there for thralls, what other use is, hmm?
START thralls, hmm? mistaken must you be. officers of a united spaceship on federation business, we are.
START going anywhere until we have some information we are not. you, who are, hmm? this place, what is, hmm? what think you you are going to do with us, hmm?
START galt, i am galt, the master thrall. the planet triskelion, this place is. to be trained and spend the rest of your lives here, you are. hmmmmmm.
START mister spock, checked that transporter from one end to the other, have i. every circuit works perfectly. whatever that power surge was, nothing to do with the transporter or any other system aboard this ship, it had. hmmmmmm.
START beginning to believe that, am i, mister scott. conducted two sweeps of the planet's surface, i have. no sign of life, there is. yeesssssss.
START then happening, what the devil is, hmm? just floating around out there, does that mean their atoms are, hmm?
START no, doctor. show up on our sensors, even that would. herh herh herh.
START where then are they, hmm?
START negative, the only answers are. no magnetic storms, no ionic interference, your equipment no breakdown in. yeesssssss.
START no good to us, a negative attitude is. just leave them out there, we cannot, they are wherever.
START we shall continue sensor scans, doctor. at the moment, all we can do, that is, for a rational explanation except hope.
START hope, hmm? human failing, i always thought that was, mister spock. yes, hmmm.
START true, doctor. result in a certain degree of contamination, constant exposure does. yeesssssss.
START your quarters, these are. open, thralls.
START foolish, that was, captain. quite impossible, escape is, as of obedience demonstrated by your collars. to your quarters return.
START within the confines of this solar system they are not. hmmmmmm.
START been nearly an hour, it is. as disassembled atoms in a transporter beam can people live that long, hmm?
START never heard of a study being done, i have, but fascinating project would it be.
START fascinating, hmm? friends of ours out there, those people are, if still alive, they are. yes, hmmm.
START good the odds are not. yeesssssss.
START no. say approximately four hundred, would i.
START quote odds and do not give me anymore dispassionate logic, do not, mister spock. for them just keep looking.
START welcome a suggestion, would i, doctor, even an emotional one, as to look to where.
START first time, ever asked me for anything, you have, and to be an occasion like this, it has.
START captain, the enterprise. trying to find us, they will be, will they not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START try, they will try, but where look do they, hmm? here, we are here, and where it is we know not. yeesssssss.
START trinary, this system's star is. it a bit limits, but long way from the enterprise, we are, if in the same dimension we are.
START your drill thrall, i am. called lars i am. herh herh herh.
START what want you from her, hmm?
START lieutenant, all right are you, hmm? uhura! lieutenant! lieutenant, all right are you, hmm? lieutenant, answer me! lieutenant! to lieutenant uhura what's happening, hmm? lieutenant, all right are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START it is allowed to refuse selection not.
START interesting. to be an ionisation trail it seems.
START account for that, what would, spock, hmm? yeesssssss.
START exactly the question, just fed to the computers, have i, doctor. and the answer is, account for it, nothing known to us would. hmmmmmm.
START well, neither the power nor the range to account for that, the transporter has.
START going to leave here without them and run off on some wild goose chase halfway across the galaxy just, you are, hmm because you found a discrepancy in a hydrogen cloud? yes, hmmm.
START doctor, chasing the captain, i am, lieutenant uhura, and ensign chekov, not some wild aquatic fowl. had, this is the only lead we have. herh herh herh.
START you, been selected for me, you have, hmm?
START fine specimen, you are. you better than the others i like. instruct you well i will, so take you, my provider will. herh herh herh.
START very kind of you, that is, miss, but.
START if pleased, my provider is, for each other we may even be selected.
START realise i was so hungry i did not. you call this whatever, very good, it is.
START nourishment, it is nourishment. it that we call.
START nourishment. very practical, that is. what call you this collar, hmm? yeesssssss.
START sign of our provider, is it. by the colour of the lights it, known who holds us, can be. when vended, you are, also have a colour, you will.
START when developed, you are. his colour on us the provider who offers the most quatloos puts.
START another name for it, our race has. slavery. of obedience this collar, operate it, is galt the only one who can, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START only to warn and punish, is it.
START how work it does he, hmm? herh herh herh.
START permitted to talk of that it is not. hmmmmmm.
START you provide all my nourishment, will, hmm?
START of course. your drill thrall, am i. train you well i will. hmmmmmm.
START yes, sure you will, i am. say, i must say, never seen a top sergeant who looked like you, have i. herh herh herh.
START that mean, what does, hmm? herh herh herh.
START very beautiful woman, it means you are. yes, hmmm.
START beautiful, what is, hmm?
START born, hmm? been here always, have i.
START your parents. they, where are, hmm? your mother and father.
START killed in a freestyle match, she who bore me was.
START learn all these things, you will. yeesssssss.
START lars and chekov's drill thrall. they weren't born here. where come from do they, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START ridiculous, this is. nothing out there, there is. nothing at all.
START to be heading into an empty sector we certainly seem.
START of ionisation projecting back along the path, m two four alpha, the nearest system is. herh herh herh.
START two dozen light years away, must that be. yeesssssss.
START are you suggesting that they, transported over a distance of, could have, hmm? out of your vulcan mind, you are, spock.
START suggesting nothing, i am, doctor. merely pursuing the only logical course available to us i am. yes, hmmm.
START hold. slow in obeying a command, this thrall was. for his punishment, practice target, will he be. as you charge, strike the practice target, you will when you pass. you begin, uhura. herh herh herh.
START it is allowed to refuse a training exercise not. herh herh herh.
START i care not whether it is allowed or not. do it i will not. yes, hmmm.
START do it, none of us will, galt. yeesssssss.
START part of your training, it is. the providers wish it. yes, hmmm.
START with the providers the devil. yeesssssss.
START no. no! responsible for the actions of my people, am i. to see the providers i demand.
START pretty fast with that whip, he is. yes, hmmm.
START strengthen you, this will. drink it. weak, kloog's left eye is. approach him from that side.
START free people, are we. to no one we belong.
START mister spock, it just makes not sense they could have come this far. if any chance at all it is to continue to search in the area they were lost, there is.
START always possible to miss something, is it.
START as a failure in the transporter mechanism such, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no, sir. no sign of failure, there was. yes, hmmm.
START no sign of them in the area of gamma two, there was. yeesssssss.
START if ridiculous to think they could still be alive, they weren't there it is. this time not after all. herh herh herh.
START in that case, doctor, nothing to lose by pursuing our present course we have. yes, hmmm.
START slow down. slow down. wait a minute. wait a minute. covered over two miles, we have. take a breather can we, hmm? rest, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START oh. well, good to get away from that development area, it is, for a while even. shahna, why the providers, why to watch others being hurt they like, killed, hmm? yeesssssss.
START the way, that is.
START their voices sound mechanical. computers are they, hmm? herh herh herh.
START seen them, you have. bodies, have they, hmm? yeesssssss.
START as ours not such. hmmmmmm.
START this place, what is, hmm?
START used it is not. hmmmmmm.
START very old, it is. have a name does it, hmm? shahna, been a city for the providers, could it have, hmm?
START it is well to ask such things i think not.
START bodies, they do have, or did have.
START one talks not of such things.
START very pretty country. much like my home planet very, earth. yeesssssss.
START born, where i was. shahna, you ever look at the night sky, do not, hmm? the lights up there, hmm?
START looked at them, have i. herh herh herh.
START well, stars, those are. and planets, around them are. and people that live on them, there are, like us just. yeesssssss.
START one live on a flicker of light, how can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START from earth, just a flicker of light, triskelion's three suns are. actually, this is the darkest planet, ever seen, have i. herh herh herh.
START dark, hmm? but lighted, all is. here, the chambers. yeesssssss.
START no freedom, the thralls have, shahna. you think not or do anything but what the providers tell you.
START one do, what else would, hmm? herh herh herh.
START love, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the most important thing on earth, love is. to a man and a woman especially.
START we, too, have mates. when time to increase the herd, it is, select one for me, my provider will. hmmmmmm.
START on earth, our own mate we select. someone we care for. on earth, men and women live together, help each other, make each other happy.
START i think not your words are allowed. yes, hmmm.
START all right. all right. me about the providers tell. what they look like, hmm? where live do they, hmm? yeesssssss.
START never seen them, i have, but to be like us they are said not. in, they stay in. herh herh herh.
START stop it. stop it! responsible, i am responsible! her talk i made! stop it! killing her, you are! nothing wrong, he s did! my fault, was it. if you punish someone want to, punish me! please. yeesssssss.
START all right, is it. all right, is it. stop crying now, you can, shahna. all right, is it. yeesssssss.
START you risked bringing their anger on yourself. why do it did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START the custom of my people to help one another, it is when we are in trouble.
START and this. this also helping is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START call it that, you could. hmmmmmm.
START gone too far as it is we it is my opinion that have, sir. herh herh herh.
START right, he is right, spock. lost jim and the others on gamma two, have we. dragged us a dozen light years on some wild hunch that, you now have. herh herh herh.
START no, not, it does not. playing a hunch, it is still a fancy way of saying that you are. well, my hunch is that, back on gamma two dead or alive and i still want another search, are they. hmmmmmm.
START for me doctor mccoy speaks, too, sir. hmmmmmm.
START agreed. mister scott, manage warp seven could you, hmm?
START more than content to do so would i be, sir, and maybe a wee bit more.
START disturbed about what happened today, you are. hmmmmmm.
START yes. made me feel strangely, you have. if allowed, it were allowed, ask that you have another drill thrall, would i. yeesssssss.
START like that i would not, shahna. i would like that at all not.
START this is kill our romance going to.
START gone to report me, is he. i said i did like the food not.
START the only one who controls these collars, i think galt is. if find the phaser that i threw at lars, we can, use the circuits to short out these collars, we can.
START of life forms on the planet sensors indicate only one concentration, on the lower hemisphere. humanoid readings.
START well, our landing force a starting point at least that gives. yes, hmmm.
START there, no landing force, will be, doctor. still alive, assuming the captain and the others are, unwise to endanger them by beaming down a large contingent would it be.
START well we are going to leave them there while we just sit and wait not. yeesssssss.
START and it may be just a wild goose chase like, been telling you, have we. yes, hmmm.
START i shall beam down, doctor. if unable to communicate, i am, landing party may be necessary. hmmmmmm.
START well, mister spock, if going into the lion's den, you are, need a medical officer, you will.
START daniel, as i recall, his faith had only. but your company i welcome, doctor. mister scott, in command, you will be. yeesssssss.
START to triskelion welcome, gentlemen.
START true, what the voice said was, sir. functioning, nothing is. herh herh herh.
START for all their needs means using thralls providing, of the galaxy people stolen from other parts. yes, hmmm.
START but afraid, you are. yes, hmmm.
START hardly superior, a species that enslaves other beings is, mentally or otherwise.
START an unproductive purpose, it is, of your intellect unworthy.
START found that all life forms in the galaxy are capable of superior development we have. as evolved as you believe perhaps you are not. yes, hmmm.
START result only in your own, our destruction will. you may control the enterprise, but match the force of the entire federation, you cannot.
START and you call yourselves superior! murderers without the spirit to really wager for the lives you take, you are.
START my people pride themselves on being the greatest, most successful gamblers in the universe. for everything we compete. power, fame, women, everything we desire, and our nature to win, is it. and for proof, of this galaxy i offer you our exploration. herh herh herh.
START well, then, with weapons of your own choice i wager that, right here and now, overcome an equal number of thralls set against us, my people can.
START wait! wait! hear me! we, wager for trifles like quatloos, cannot. higher must the stakes be.
START if we win, the enterprise and its crew leaves here in safety. further more, all the thralls on the planet, freed, must be.
START done the same with cultures throughout the galaxy we have. willing to admit that we can do something you cannot are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START if we lose, hmm? remain here, we will, of the enterprise the entire crew. the most stubborn, determined competitors in the universe. become thralls, will we, your games enter, your orders without rebellion obey. assured of generations of the most exciting wagering you have ever had will you be.
START for true gamesters not.
START three against one, hmm? pretty high odds, those are.
START your, unfair, your terms are.
START well, in that case, accept your terms, will i. yes, hmmm.
START yes, clear, that is. hmmmmmm.
START this, what in the name of heaven is, hmm?
START with this, heaven's got very little to do. hmmmmmm.
START you lied. you said everything.
START trained will the thralls be, hmm? yeesssssss.
START i think, find it a much more exciting game than the one you have been playing, you will. sorry, i am sorry, shahna. i did lie not. what was necessary, i did. someday, i hope, understand, you will. yes, hmmm.
START i understand, little. leave us now, you will, hmm?
START to the lights in the sky to go back, hmm?
START like to go to those lights with you, i would. take me, hmm? yeesssssss.
START then me how teach, and follow you, will i. hmmmmmm.
START goodbye, jim kirk. learn, i will learn, and watch the lights in the sky, and remember. yes, hmmm.
START good. mister chekov, supposed to provide both experience and knowledge, this flight is. we come to the klingon outpost if we continue on our present course, how close will, hmm?
START one parsec, sir. to smell them close enough.
START illogical, that is, ensign. travel through the vacuum of space odours cannot. hmmmmmm.
START making a little joke, was i, sir. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, of the quadrant immediate past history, hmm?
START under dispute between the two parties since initial contact. fought near here twenty three solar years ago, the battle of donatu five was. inconclusive. hmmmmmm.
START of disputed area analysis, hmm?
START undeveloped. claimed by both sides, sherman's planet is, our federation and the klingon empire. the better claim, we do have. yes, hmmm.
START first mapped by the famous russian astronomer ivan borkoff almost two hundred, the area was. hmmmmmm.
START burke, sir, hmm? i think not so. sure it was, i am. yes, hmmm.
START the chief astronomer at the royal academy in old britain at the time, john burke was. hmmmmmm.
START oh, royal academy. well.
START of your history that faulty is the rest, ensign, hmm? of dispute key points, hmm?
START of the organian peace treaty under terms, one side or the other must prove, develop the planet most efficiently, can it. yes, hmmm.
START and unfortunately, though brutal and aggressive, the klingons are, most efficient, they are. yeesssssss.
START like that i remember once peter the great had that problem. the.
START to warp factor six go.
START code one emergency. disaster call, that is. herh herh herh.
START but nothing there, there is. just the station.
START priority one distress call, and just absolutely peaceful, is it. lieutenant uhura, break subspace silence. herh herh herh.
START mister lurry, you issued a priority one distress call. of your emergency state the nature. yes, hmmm.
START try to explain, you will. better be prepared to do more than that, you would. kirk out. mister spock, need your help, i will. mister chekov, maintain battle readiness. lieutenant uhura, standing by, see that the transporter room is. yes, hmmm.
START mister lurry, if no emergency, there is, why issue a priority one distress call did you, hmm?
START my order, that was, captain. herh herh herh.
START captain kirk, nilz baris, this is. out from earth to take charge of the development project on sherman's planet, he is. hmmmmmm.
START and to put an entire quadrant on defence alert that gives you the authority, hmm?
START the federation undersecretary in charge of agricultural affairs in this quadrant, mister baris is. yes, hmmm.
START my assistant arne darvin, this is.
START and my first officer mister spock, this is.
START wheat quadrotriticale is not, captain. of course, i would expect you or mister spock to know about such things not, but rather, quadrotriticale is. herh herh herh.
START mister spock, made your point, you have. yes, hmmm.
START the only earth grain that grows on sherman's planet, quadrotriticale is. several tons of it here on the station, have we. very important that grain gets to sherman's planet safely, it is. to sabotage it mister baris thinks that klingon agents may try. herh herh herh.
START for a couple of tons of wheat you issued a priority one distress call, hmm? yeesssssss.
START of course, captain, that, i realise that.
START mister baris, you summoned the enterprise without an emergency. take full responsibility for it, you will. yeesssssss.
START what you mean, hmm?
START federation offence, misuse of the priority one channels is.
START misuse the priority one channel i did not. i want that grain protected. hmmmmmm.
START captain, could you at least post a couple of guards not, hmm? large number of ships passing through, we do have.
START seem a logical precaution, it would, captain. of extreme importance to the federation, the sherman's planet affair is. herh herh herh.
START to enterprise kirk. yeesssssss.
START captain kirk, how d authorise a mere two men for a project of this importance are you, hmm? starfleet command.
START never questioned the orders or the intelligence of any representative of the federation i have. until now.
START nevertheless captain, enjoy seeing us successfully develop sherman's planet the klingons would not. herh herh herh.
START not, i guess not. yes, hmmm.
START waste time taking your shore leave i see you did not.
START to shop she wants, and i thought, help her, would i.
START oh, quadrotriticale. read about this, have i, but never seen any before, i have.
START this wheat but me does everybody know about, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START not everyone, captain. russian invention, is it. yeesssssss.
START any i want not. you before i told, and any more spican flame gems i am telling you again i want not. to you thanks, enough spican flame gems to last me a lifetime, i have.
START for you how sad, my friend. find a finer stone anywhere you will not. but something better, i have. you want some antarian glow water surely.
START to polish the flame gems i use that. yes, hmmm.
START difficult man to reach, you are, but something from the far reaches of the galaxy, i have. you want surely. yeesssssss.
START your price not at. yeesssssss.
START it, what is, hmm? alive is it, hmm? may i hold it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START oh, adorable, it is adorable. it, what is, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START it, what is, hmm? why, lovely lady, tribble, it is.
START to man only the sweetest creature known, excepting, of course, your lovely self. yeesssssss.
START oh, purring, it is purring. listen, purring, it is purring. yeesssssss.
START only saying that it likes you, it is. yes, hmmm.
START selling them are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START what we are trying to decide right now that is. hmmmmmm.
START bite he will not, he, will, hmm? herh herh herh.
START sir, against regulations, transporting harmful animals from one planet to another is, or of that weren't you aware, hmm? besides, no teeth, tribbles have. hmmmmmm.
START still nothing, twice nothing is.
START if you are going to take him not, going to take him i am. cute, i think he is. yes, hmmm.
START my offer, that is. yeesssssss.
START joke that is.
START an honest man, you are. tell you what i am going to do i am going to lessen my price to eight and a half credits, will i. herh herh herh.
START talking yourself out of a deal, you are, friend. six credits. not a credit more. herh herh herh.
START done. when them i can have, hmm? yeesssssss.
START all right, what selling them for are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START in fact, sell you this one, i will.
START hey! eating my grain, is he. hmmmmmm.
START to be my sample that happens, and do with it as i please, i will. and to give it to the lovely lady i please. yes, hmmm.
START oh, not, i could not. could i, hmm?
START what trying to do are you, ruin the market, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to show this precious little darling around once this lovely little lady starts, be able to keep up with them you will not. herh herh herh.
START yes, it, what is, hmm?
START it on visual put, lieutenant. yeesssssss.
START now, just lovely that is.
START yes, lieutenant, it, what is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to red alert go. notify mister lurry. right up, will we be. yeesssssss.
START the position of the klingon ship, what is, hmm? yeesssssss.
START captain, mister lurry i have. hmmmmmm.
START mister lurry, klingon warship hanging one hundred kilometres off your station, there is.
START cancel red alert. beam right down, we will.
START peaceful, let me assure you that my intentions are. as already told mister lurry i have, to invoke shore leave rights, the purpose of my presence is.
START been in space for five months we have. our own business, what we choose as recreation is. herh herh herh.
START of the organian peace treaty i might also add that under terms, refuse us, you cannot. yeesssssss.
START yes, well, those decisions i make not. in charge of those matters, mister lurry is.
START well, the authority to act, have i, and going to use it, am i. my dear captain koloth, you may indeed bring your men down on shore leave, but only twelve at a time. and you, i assure you, for you bring down here every man, one security guard, i shall have. there, no trouble, will be. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, been no formal declaration of hostilities between our two respective governments, there is. so, naturally, peaceful one will our relationship be.
START both take steps to keep it that way, let us. hmmmmmm.
START you ever relax, do not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START relaxing, i am relaxing.
START that thing, how long have you had, lieutenant, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START since yesterday, doctor. this morning, i found out that he, she, i mean she, had had babies. yeesssssss.
START well, in that case, bargain, you got.
START oh, captain. well, i had intended to not, sir, but the tribble had other plans. hmmmmmm.
START get this at the space station did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START lieutenant, mind if i take one of these down to the lab to see what makes it tick do you, hmm?
START well, all right, doctor, but going to dissect it, if you are, to know about it i want not.
START harm a hair on its head i will not, wherever that is. yes, hmmm.
START say, lieutenant. seeing as, giving them away, you are, one, i can have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you, pipe it down here will, mister chekov. yeesssssss.
START yes, mister baris. i do for you, what can, hmm? herh herh herh.
START kirk, swarming with klingons, this station is. yeesssssss.
START i was aware not, mister baris, that twelve klingons constitutes a swarm. yes, hmmm.
START captain kirk, klingon soldiers on this station, there are. now, to keep that grain safe i want you.
START captain, be, may i ask where you will, hmm?
START with a headache sickbay. yeesssssss.
START bones, you got for a headache, what have, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START me guess let. klingons, hmm? baris, hmm?
START both. of these did uhura give you how many, hmm?
START but got, you have, er, eleven. hmmmmmm.
START you noticed that, huh, hmm? here. to take care of it this ought.
START how they, hmm? how they, hmm?
START i have figured that out yet not, but tell you this much, can i. geared for reproduction, almost fifty percent of the creature's metabolism is. know what you get if you feed a tribble too much do you, hmm?
START fat tribble. herh herh herh.
START no. bunch of hungry little tribbles, you get. hmmmmmm.
START well, bones, suggest is you open up a maternity ward i all can. yes, hmmm.
START to stay in groups all you men going on shore leave. with the klingons avoid trouble. yeesssssss.
START tell them before they go i will, sir. yeesssssss.
START you going on shore leave are not, scotty, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to go on shore leave i want you. of trouble make sure that everybody stays out. hmmmmmm.
START ah, friend. you a charming little tribble can i offer, hmm?
START oh. of you other gents perhaps one, hmm? yeesssssss.
START ah, friend klingon. you in a harmless tribble can i interest, hmm?
START it away from me get.
START sorry, i am sorry. understand it, i cannot. never seen them act this way before, i have. yeesssssss.
START with that parasite get out of here. yes, hmmm.
START only a harmless little, is he.
START yes. ah, my good friend. how would to enter another little transaction you like, hmm? this time, for a spot a tribble. yeesssssss.
START when are you get off that milk diet going to, lad, hmm?
START vodka, this is. herh herh herh.
START from, where i come, soda pop, that is. drink for a man, this is.
START invented by a little old lady from leningrad, was it.
START like those fuzzy things the earthers, they, do not, hmm?
START frankly, i never liked earthers. me of regulan blood worms they remind. hmmmmmm.
START easy, lad. to be more forgiving you ought. hmmmmmm.
START take it easy, lad. to an opinion everybody's entitled.
START right, that is, and denebian slime devil, if i think that kirk is, my opinion too, that well is.
START do it, do not, mister, and an order that is.
START forget it. worth fighting for it is not. big enough to take a few insults, we are. now, your drink drink. yeesssssss.
START of course, say that captain kirk deserves his ship i would. like the enterprise we. we, do, we really do. designed like a garbage scow, that sagging old rust bucket is. half the quadrant knows it. why they are learning to speak klingonese, that is. yeesssssss.
START laddie, you think you should rephrase that, do not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START right, you are, i should. mean to say that the enterprise should be hauling garbage i did not. be hauled away as garbage, i meant to say that it should. hmmmmmm.
START i know who started it want to. waiting, i am waiting. freeman, who started the fight, hmm?
START know i not, sir. yes, hmmm.
START all right. chekov. you, i know you. you started it, you did not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no, sir, not, i did not.
START i not know, sir.
START us, they insulted us, sir. yes, hmmm.
START been some insult, must have. yes, hmmm.
START you held, hmm? why did chekov start a fight want to, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START well, the klingon, sir. this off the record is, hmm?
START no, this is off the record not. yeesssssss.
START no, sir. with a denebian slime devil they also compared you.
START and they said you then. hmmmmmm.
START the picture, i get, scotty.
START they said all this after, that is, hmm when you hit the klingons? yes, hmmm.
START no, not, i did not. to avoid trouble you told us. yeesssssss.
START and i did see that it was worth fighting about not. after all, big enough to take a few insults, we are. are we not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START it they said that started the fight, what was, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i see. and that is, hmm when you hit the klingons? hmmmmmm.
START you hit the klingons because they insulted the enterprise, not because they.
START well, sir, matter of pride, this was.
START all right, scotty. dismissed. scotty, restricted to quarters until further notice, you are. yeesssssss.
START something disquieting about these creatures, there is.
START tell me you have got a feeling, do not. hmmmmmm.
START be insulting, do not, doctor. me of the lilies of the field they remind. not, they toil not, neither spin do they. but to eat a great deal they seem. for them i see no practical use.
START practical use for you, does everything have to have, hmm? nice, they are nice, soft, and furry, and pleasant sound, make they.
START human characteristic to love little animals, it is, attractive in some way, especially if they are. hmmmmmm.
START doctor, well aware of human characteristics, i am. frequently inundated by them, i am, but trained myself to put up with practically anything, i have. yes, hmmm.
START spock, too much about these little tribbles yet i know not, but one thing that i have discovered there is. yes, hmmm.
START that, what is, doctor, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START them better than i like you i like. yeesssssss.
START one redeeming characteristic, they do have.
START too much they talk not. if excuse me, you will, sir.
START know i not, sir. seem to be all over the ship, they do. yes, hmmm.
START yes, hmm? did you see me want to, jim, hmm? look at me, do not. the tribbles who are breeding, is it. if we get not them off this ship, going to be hip deep in them we are. herh herh herh.
START born pregnant, the nearest thing i can figure out is they are, which to be quite a time saver seems. hmmmmmm.
START i know, but really. yeesssssss.
START fit for no one, your language is, my cave now leave!
START captain, forced to agree with the doctor, i am. been running computations on their rate of reproduction i have. taking an alarming direction, the figures are. consuming our supplies and returning nothing, they are.
START but give us something, they do, mister spock. they give us love. well, the only love that money can buy, cyrano jones says a tribble is. yeesssssss.
START of anything too much, lieutenant, even love, necessarily a good thing is not. hmmmmmm.
START to clean up the entire ship get the maintenance crew, and then contact mister lurry and tell him, beaming down, am i. hmmmmmm.
START captain kirk, mystified at your tone of voice i am. done nothing to warrant such severe treatment, have i.
START of course. what say did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START their natural habitat by removing the tribbles from, you have, so to speak, to escape removed the cork from the bottle and allowed the genie. hmmmmmm.
START if by that, you mean breed quickly do they, hmm? of course, how i maintain my stock, that is. breeding animals is against regulations not, only breeding dangerous ones. and tribbles are dangerous not.
START precisely, and at six credits a head, well, that is, body, up, it mounts up. now if, excuse me, you will.
START sell an instruction and maintenance manual for this thing, you should.
START if i did, happen to man's search for knowledge, what would, hmm? well, tending my ship, must i be. au revoir.
START captain kirk, your security measures a disgrace i consider. my opinion in, taken this important project far too lightly, you have. herh herh herh.
START on the contrary, sir. as very important i think of this project. you i take lightly, is it. yeesssssss.
START going to report fully to the proper authorities that you have given free and complete access to this station to a man who is quite probably a klingon agent, am i. hmmmmmm.
START serious charge that is. to whom referring are you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START cyrano jones, klingon agent, hmm?
START you, i heard you.
START believe his ears he simply could not. herh herh herh.
START what evidence do, against mister jones, you have, hmm?
START kept mister jones under close surveillance for quite some time, my assistant here has, and been most suspicious, his actions have. i believe, involved in that little altercation between your men and the men from, was he.
START yes, yes. go on. what else have do you, hmm?
START well captain, checked his ship's log, i have, and it seems that, within the klingon's sphere of influence less than four months ago, was he.
START an independent scout, the man is, captain. quite possible he is also a klingon spy, it is. yes, hmmm.
START but after my grain, is he!
START any proof of that, do you have, hmm? herh herh herh.
START deny he is disrupted this station, you cannot. hmmmmmm.
START disrupted stations before without being klingon agents, people have. sometimes, title, all they need is, mister baris. unfortunately, an offence disrupting a space station is not. now, if excuse me, you will, ship to tend to, i have. au revoir.
START my chicken sandwich and coffee. my chicken sandwich and coffee, this is. hmmmmmm.
START i want these off the ship. i care not if it takes every man we have got, i want them off the ship. hmmmmmm.
START into the machinery, they are, all right, and probably in all the other food processors too, are they. yeesssssss.
START of the air vents probably through one. herh herh herh.
START captain, vents of that type on the space station, there are.
START plenty, if happened, what i think's happened has. herh herh herh.
START yes, sir. get in, nothing could.
START it is working not, sir. to be stuck it seems. yes, hmmm.
START here. me try it let. yes, hmmm.
START to be gorged they seem.
START gorged, hmm? my grain on, hmm? kirk, going to hold you responsible, i am. there, thousands of them, must be.
START of thousands hundreds. yes, hmmm.
START one million seven hundred seventy one thousand five hundred sixty one. assuming one tribble, that is, with an average litter of ten multiplying, of three days producing a new generation every twelve hours over a period.
START assuming they got here three days ago that is.
START and for the amount of grain consumed and the volume of the storage compartment allowing.
START kirk, you, known, should have. responsible for turning the development project into a total disaster, you are. herh herh herh.
START and through being intimidated, i am, kirk. insulted me, you have, ignored me, you have, walked all over me, you have. abused your authority, you have, and rejected my requests, you have. and this, the result, this is. going to hold you responsible, am i.
START mister baris, up i will hold you in irons if you shut not. herh herh herh.
START jim, got it, i think i have. to do is quit feeding them we all have. we quit feeding them, breeding, they stop breeding. yeesssssss.
START he tells me now. yes, hmmm.
START dead, captain this tribble is. and these, so are.
START dead, a lot of them are. alive, much them are, but they will be for long not.
START something in the grain, the logical assumption is that there is.
START yes. bones, i want the tribbles, the grain, everything analysed. i know what killed these tribbles want to.
START that is going to do you any good not, kirk. ruined, this project is, and starfleet is hear about it going to. and they do when, have a board of inquiry and they will roast you alive, they will. and going to be there, i am, kirk, to enjoy every minute of it.
START really, captain kirk, protest this treatment, i must. yeesssssss.
START ah, mister jones, with an armful. few questions. yes, hmmm.
START what you want, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to the klingon high command an official apology addressed. to assume full responsibility for the persecution of klingon nationals in this quadrant i expect you.
START yes. harassed my men, you have. treated them like criminals, you have. been most uncourteous, you have, captain kirk. if to avoid a diplomatic incident you wish. herh herh herh.
START no, kirk. let him you cannot. give them the wedge they need to claim sherman's planet, that will.
START necessary for that would i believe that more than the word of an aggrieved klingon commander be, mister baris.
START mister spock, as concerned, far as sherman's planet is, already given it to us, captain kirk has.
START well, see about that, we will, but take any official action before i, like to know just what happened i would. who put the tribbles in the quadrotriticale, hmm? in the grain that killed them, what was, hmm?
START captain kirk, you go on before, request, may i make, hmm?
START can, those things out of here, you get, hmm?
START hold on a minute. you said tribbles liked everybody i thought.
START they do. understand it i cannot. at the bar, the last time i saw one act this way was. hmmmmmm.
START in the bar, what was, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START very perceptive creatures, obviously tribbles are, captain. yeesssssss.
START say about that, i wonder what starfleet command will. what about the grain, bones, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START oh, yes. poisoned, it was poisoned. yes, hmmm.
START yes. been impregnated with a virus, it is. the virus turns into an inert material in the bloodstream. the more the organism eats, built up, the more inert matter is. so after two or three days, they reached a point where they could take in enough nourishment to survive not.
START to death they starved. of grain in a storage compartment full, to death they starved.
START essentially it, that is. herh herh herh.
START mister darvin, are you talk going to, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START and with it, the tribbles had nothing to do, hmm?
START i not know. my life i never saw one before in, and of those fuzzy miserable things again i hope i never see one.
START certain that can be arranged, i am, darvin. guards, hmm? if excuse me, you will, captain. hmmmmmm.
START six hours to get your ship out of federation territory, you have. herh herh herh.
START you know, learn to like tribbles, i think i could. hmmmmmm.
START well, captain, i suppose, free to go now, am i.
START no, not, you are. something i want to show you, there is. for transporting an animal proven harmful to human life, you know what the penalty is, hmm?
START captain, one little tribble is harmful not. captain, you would do a thing like that to me not, you, now would, hmm? would you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START twenty years in a rehabilitation colony, the penalty is.
START captain kirk. friend. friend kirk. to some sort of mutual understanding, surely we can come. after all, to the poisoned grain my tribbles did put you wise, and help you to find the klingon agent, they did. much lives that way you saved.
START one thing you can do, there is.
START pick up every tribble on the space station. if that, you do, speak to mister lurry about returning your spaceship, i will.
START take years, it would.
START it job security consider. herh herh herh.
START captain, hard man, you are. all right! all right!
START do it, you will, hmm?
START do it, will he. yes, hmmm.
START do it, i will. yeesssssss.
START captain, able to divert that freighter, starfleet was. herh herh herh.
START good. get its quadrotriticale only a few weeks late, that means sherman's planet will. any tribbles around here i see not.
START and find a tribble on this entire ship you will not. yeesssssss.
START bones, how do it did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i, take credit for another man's work, cannot. scotty did it.
START scotty! the tribbles, where are, hmm?
START oh, er, captain, really mister spock's recommendation, it was. yes, hmmm.
START based on computer analysis, of course, taking into account the possibilities of. yeesssssss.
START gentlemen, to interrupt this mutual admiration society i want not, but like to know where the tribbles are i would. herh herh herh.
START well, mister scott who performed the actual engineering, was it.
START mister scott. the tribbles, where are, hmm?
START where transport them did you, hmm? scott, you did transport them into space not, did you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START they, where are, hmm?
START to the klingons i gave them, sir. yeesssssss.
START aye, sir. they went into warp before, their engine room i transported the whole kit and caboodle into, no tribble at all will where they be. yeesssssss.
START captain, i think, going to like argelius, am i. hmmmmmm.
START of good taste obviously a man.
START to tell me all these women you mean, this is that all. yeesssssss.
START yes, yes, yes. of their pleasure the argelians think very highly.
START an understatement if i ever heard one that is. completely hedonistic society, this is. yeesssssss.
START like her do you, scotty, hmm? yeesssssss.
START aye. i why should not, hmm? herh herh herh.
START good. invited her to join us at the table, i have. to meet her i thought you might like.
START what i call a real captain, now that is. of his men always thinking. hmmmmmm.
START scotty, scotty. they use the lights in argelius. herh herh herh.
START of our pillows have one, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START 'tis a fine foggy night tonight, and in aberdeen we i doubt if anyone's ever told you of the marvellous fogs have.
START never a word, but dying to learn, am i.
START well then, show you why i not, hmm? nothing like a walk in the fog with a bonny lass, there is. herh herh herh.
START or handsome gentleman. we why not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START mind you not, do you, hmm? to the ship on time i might even get back. herh herh herh.
START my work, jim. prescription stuff, this is. forget, do not, caused by a woman, the explosion that threw scotty against a bulkhead was.
START all right, he physically is. am i right in assuming that, hmm?
START oh, yes, yes. as of fact a matter, considerable psychological damage, been caused, could have. for example, his total resentment toward women.
START overcoming his resentment, he seems he is. yes, hmmm.
START of course, my professional opinion in, when back to the ship, gets he, going to hate you for making him leave argelius, he is. but then, have lost total resentment toward women, will he.
START concerned, mission accomplished as far as scotty is. bones, i know a little place across town where the women. hmmmmmm.
START oh yes. i know the place. go, let us.
START dead, she is dead, jim. hmmmmmm.
START stabbed, dozen times. herh herh herh.
START just as shocked as you are we are, mister hengist. herh herh herh.
START if my home planet, this was, rigel four, have a dozen investigators working on the matter, i would, but here they exist not. yes, hmmm.
START native of argelius you are not, sir, hmm? herh herh herh.
START i, remember i not. yeesssssss.
START really, sir. hardly helpful that is.
START scotty, with the girl you left the cafe. remember that do you, hmm? what happened next, hmm? yeesssssss.
START walking in the fog, we were. up ahead trying to lead the way, i was. i heard the girl scream. to turn i remember starting. i remember not another thing. hmmmmmm.
START scotty, got to remember, you have. herh herh herh.
START by any chance that scotty you think not. yeesssssss.
START it makes any difference what i think not. hmmmmmm.
START but you just not throw him to the wolves.
START bones, diplomatic responsibility, i have. this happened under argelian jurisdiction. if they arrest him want to, try him, even convict him, to go along with it, i have.
START but suffering from a severe concussion, he is.
START do what we can, will we.
START promising it is not, captain. he remembers nothing mister scott insists, but on the murder weapon, my detector readings indicates that only his fingerprints are. hmmmmmm.
START yes. mister hengist, other people in the cafe about the time of the murder, there were. of them left just before mister scott and the girl did several. herh herh herh.
START so been informed by the staff, i have. being located and we will question them, are they. but quite grim, the outlook for your friend is. yeesssssss.
START love, the law of argelius is. herh herh herh.
START and my wife, this is, sybo.
START and scott, this man is, you the message about the one i sent.
START he looks like a man capable of such an act not. still, been so long, it is. gentlemen, our great awakening two hundred years ago before, of learning the truth in such matters we had ways. to them we shall return.
START of this you know, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, heard of it, we have. i assumed, a lost art, was it. hmmmmmm.
START descendent of the ancient priestesses of our land, my wife is. the ancestral gift, she has. gentlemen, come to invite you to my home, i have.
START prefect, you think this should be handled in an official manner through my office, do not, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START it, handled in an official manner, shall be, mister hengist, since the highest official, i am. gentlemen, proceed to my home where, let us, with of my wife the aid, we shall learn the truth. please. yeesssssss.
START prefect, happened to mister scott in the last twenty four hours, it will give us a detailed account of everything that is. hmmmmmm.
START oh, advise against it i would, prefect. purely an argelian matter, this is.
START my wife must meditate for a time before, ready, is she. i see no reason why we should use that time to good advantage not. very well, captain.
START to enterprise kirk. herh herh herh.
START small chamber below this room, there is. suffice, perhaps that will. captain, spreading among my people, news of this frightful murder is. greatly disturbed, they are. already heard talk of closing argelius to space vehicles, i have.
START other people we should question, there are. go expedite their arrival here, perhaps i should, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes, do so, mister hengist. be present at the ceremony, anyone with any connection with this murder should.
START as ordered lieutenant karen tracy reporting, captain.
START if just follow me, you will, lieutenant. yes, hmmm.
START captain, under normal conditions, scotty, never done such a thing, would have.
START but that blow on the head. put all his previous behaviour patterns into the junk heap, it could.
START of course, another possibility, there is. yes, hmmm.
START hysterical amnesia. when man feels guilty about something, to remember something too terrible, of his conscious memory he blots it out.
START ready are you, sybo, hmm?
START ready, i am ready. may, the knife, have i, please, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START certainly. among other gifts, the ability to receive impressions from inanimate objects, sybo has. it, you have, captain, hmm?
START but it here i put when we arrived. gone, it is gone. yeesssssss.
START dead, she is dead, jim. like the other one just.
START over and over again stabbed. yeesssssss.
START lieutenant, hmm? captain, hmm? where is.
START dead, lieutenant tracy is, scott. found alone in the room, you were. herh herh herh.
START dead, hmm? but i.
START sitting there, i was. taking her readings, was she, and sitting here i now am. yeesssssss.
START you, i tell you, i not remember. passed out, i must have. herh herh herh.
START be, it could be, jim. that head injury. herh herh herh.
START captain, been trying, have i. even believe this is really happening, i cannot.
START no way into that place from up here, there is. prefect, to that chamber is there another entrance, hmm?
START yes, door that leads into the garden, there is, but been locked for years, it is. yes, hmmm.
START locks, picked, can be, jim.
START prefect, at the cafe the night of the murder, both of these men were.
START they been during the past few minutes where've, hmm?
START captain, if please you mind not. herh herh herh.
START been another murder, there is, hengist. of my crew one. hmmmmmm.
START as kara the same.
START please, i know nothing about it. kill anyone i did not.
START well, the girl killed, how was, hmm?
START stabbed. and no sign of the weapon, there is. yeesssssss.
START if only, facilities, had i.
START you. musician at the cafe, you were. for the murdered girl you played. hmmmmmm.
START since little girl, was she, for me she danced. my daughter, was she. prefect, happened here, how could this thing have, hmm? found, the man who did it must be. punished, he must be. hmmmmmm.
START this true is, hmm? you, who are, hmm? herh herh herh.
START of cantaba street morla, prefect. there, i was there. nothing to hide, i have. yes, hmmm.
START know kara did you, hmm?
START of course he knew her. to be married, they were, but disgracefully, he behaved disgracefully. unheard of. jealous of her, he was. hmmmmmm.
START very disquieting, that is. hmmmmmm.
START i know, wrong, was it, but help myself i just could not. her, i loved her, and to the table with these men when she went over, stand to watch i could not, so i left and went home.
START often been a motive for murder, jealousy has.
START yes, i know. why the emotion is so strongly disapproved of here, that is. herh herh herh.
START prefect, i did kill anyone not. not, i could not.
START see, we shall see, morla.
START sorry, jim. the lock may or may have been picked not. hard to tell even with the tricorder would it be. herh herh herh.
START you prove you went directly home can, hmm?
START captain, with the questions please may i continue, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START with it well get on, man. just stand not there.
START captain, captain. behaving very much like a man who is desperately trying anything to save his friend, you are. to save argelius as a space port for your starfleet would you be as desperate, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START trying to save my friend, well of course i am, if innocent, he is innocent. and he hasn't been proven guilty.
START of the circumstances need i remind you, captain, hmm? in both cases, discovered over the body and later claimed to remember nothing, your friend scott was. yes, hmmm.
START ready, i am ready, jaris.
START on one condition, prefect. going on, that the room be sealed so that no one can leave or enter while the ceremony is.
START captain, you mean my neck is have to depend on some spooky mumbo jumbo going to, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to us concerning the situation you related. my opinion in, an interesting phenomenon, the argelian empathic contact is, but the technique is sound enough to risk a man's life not. yes, hmmm.
START what you suggest, mister spock, hmm?
START to learn the truth simply that we beam mister scott on board the enterprise and employ our computers. yes, hmmm.
START proud people, these are. their own customs, they have, their own laws, and while, here we are subject to them, are we. absolutely imperative that this matter be resolved according to argelian law, is it. is that clear, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START i like not it any more than you do, spock, but nothing we can do about it there is. kirk out, hmmmmmm.
START begin, let us. let the circle be broken not. concentrate upon the flame which burns upon the altar of truth. yeesssssss.
START i care not what the circumstances indicate, jim. have done it scotty simply could not. hmmmmmm.
START normally, no, but his head could that blow on. yes, hmmm.
START with you i agree, captain. perfectly satisfied mister scott is guilty, i am. hmmmmmm.
START unproven, that is, sir.
START prove it, we can, if insane, he is insane.
START gentlemen, please. any man do such monstrous things, how could, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START what we hope to find out, that is, sir. hmmmmmm.
START sir, kill your wife or the other ladies i swear to you i did not. yeesssssss.
START mister hengist. on the enterprise, make a recording of the registrations of mister scott's conscious and subconscious mind, we can. tell us what happened to him in the recent past, they will.
START there, no room for doubt, would be. know, we would know. and after all, what we are after that is, is it not, prefect, hmm? to know, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START you, sir, to remember nothing about the murders claim. hmmmmmm.
START if so, this is, killed without knowing it, you may have. your machines tell us this, will, hmm?
START remain, no doubt will.
START very well. go to your ship we will, and face the ancient penalties, he who is guilty will, they may be barbaric and horrible though. death by slow torture, the ancient penalty for murder was. never been changed, that law has. understand that do you, mister scott, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START mister scott, you take the stand, will, hmm? yeesssssss.
START to account for periods of functional amnesia sufficient abnormalities, hmm?
START captain, i see not how that can be. hmmmmmm.
START of memory unless scotty's lying about his loss. yeesssssss.
START i am lying not, captain. i remember not a thing about the first two murders. yes, hmmm.
START captain, hmm? black out i did not when mister jaris' wife was killed. yeesssssss.
START all right, scotty, have it, let us. yes, hmmm.
START holding hands, we were. when the lights went out, broken, the circle was. i heard the poor lady scream, and near the head of the table anyway i went toward her, as i was. but something in my way, there was. yes, hmmm.
START no, captain. sure of i that am.
START been saying that right along, he is. it did before it means no more now than. yeesssssss.
START scotty, to me lie. you, how old are, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START after the lights went out, mister scott, holding your hand, who was, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START you on the other morla on the one side and, sir.
START but that means anything not, captain, with room that small. out, the lights were. had time to kill the lady would anyone have. yes, hmmm.
START the verifier showed that, telling the truth, was he when he said he did not kill her.
START two other women murdered, there were. yes, hmmm.
START mister scott. kill kara did you, hmm?
START remember i not. hmmmmmm.
START kill lieutenant tracy did you, hmm?
START telling the truth, all that proves is that he is when he says he does not remember. yes, hmmm.
START waste of time, this is. hmmmmmm.
START well, if convince me that the machine is incapable of error, you can, and kill the women if it shows he did not. yes, hmmm.
START no error, there will be. as for the rest of it, show, the readings will. step down, you can, mister scott, if no objections, there are. hmmmmmm.
START to the entire procedure i object.
START prefect, you mean well i know, but had experience, i have. yeesssssss.
START for the time being, accept captain kirk's explanation of the machine's accuracy as factual, we will. i do, however, to myself the right to make the final determination reserve.
START ask no more, we can. mister morla, you take the stand, will, hmm?
START you at the time that kara was murdered, where were, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START i am sure not. walking home, i assume. angry, i was angry. herh herh herh.
START never done violence in my life, i have. i think not i could. got to believe me, you have. i would kill her not. not, i could not. her, i loved her, and me, she loved me.
START that is true not! she loved him he might think, but not, she did not. me, she told me. jealous, he was jealous. all the time. constantly, they fought constantly. hmmmmmm.
START kill lieutenant tracy did you, hmm?
START kill sybo did you, hmm?
START all right, mister morla, i think, step down now, you can. of a hunger that never dies sybo spoke. something that thrives on fear, terror, death. mister spock, going about it in the wrong way we maybe are. assume that sybo was a sensitive, let us. that s, sense something, did he, something evil. yes, hmmm.
START documented fact, sensitivity of certain argelian women is, captain. yeesssssss.
START genuine, my poor sybo's talent was, gentlemen. true, what she told you was.
START all right, then, it she said, what was, exactly, hmm? monstrous evil, ancient terror. hmmmmmm.
START she said something else, words that did make sense not.
START computer, linguistic bank. of following word definition. redjac. hmmmmmm.
START no such word in the linguistics bank, there is, hmm? herh herh herh.
START working. affirmative. proper name. herh herh herh.
START redjac. source earth, nineteenth century. language, english. for mass murderer of women nickname. other earth synonym, jack the ripper.
START ridiculous that is. of years ago he lived hundreds.
START man could survive all these centuries not. yeesssssss.
START she died just before, my wife said, hunger that never dies, it is. yes, hmmm.
START yes, all men die. and jack the ripper could be alive if he were a man not. but uncovered points to jack the ripper, everything we have, which is an impossibility, it is not, hmm? or is it, hmm?
START of the life forms we know of humans and humanoids make up only a small percentage. entities possessed of extremely long life spans, there are, virtually immortal. yeesssssss.
START we know that someone or something killed three women. if impossible for it to be human, it is, to be something else, it has. to kill something driven. yeesssssss.
START it feeds on death sybo said.
START which human would tend to support the proposition that the murderer was not. unknown in the galaxy deriving sustenance from emotion is not, and among the strongest and most violent of the emotions, fear is. hmmmmmm.
START surely, prefect, gone far enough, this has. someone, killed three women, some man has. the prime suspect in our hands we have. are we let him go and start chasing ghosts going to, hmm?
START no, mister hengist, not ghosts. possibly human not, but not ghosts. mister spock, check out the possibilities. herh herh herh.
START computer, for past five solar minutes digest log recordings. correlate hypotheses. with life forms register compare. question. this galaxy could such an entity within discussed limits exist in, hmm?
START of alpha carinae five derives nourishment from the emotion of love the drella. sufficient precedent for existence of creature, there is, nature unknown, which of fear could exist on emotion.
START computer, of such entity extrapolate most likely composition.
START working. to meet with specified requirements, exist without form in conventional sense, entity would. of energy of highly cohesive electromagnetic field most probable mass. hmmmmmm.
START affirmative. precedent, mellitus, of alpha majoris one cloud creature. hmmmmmm.
START no, seen the mellitus myself i have. in its natural state, gaseous, it is gaseous. when at rest, it is, solid, it is solid. mister spock, assume the existence of this creature, let us. hmmmmmm.
START in the heart of the most populous city of old earth and was never identified, i point out that jack the ripper slew at will. yes, hmmm.
START seems likely not, does it, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START of a hypnotic screen i suggest the possibility, which to the presence of the killer blinds all but the victim. yes, hmmm.
START many such examples that exist in nature, extremely possible there are. yes, hmmm.
START fantasy, this is! sitting right here, we all know the murderer is. trying to cloud the issue, you are. got a mind to, have i.
START satisfied the course of this investigation is valid enough, am i. be seated, mister hengist.
START all right, mister spock, what we have, hmm? creature without form, that feeds on horror and fear, assume a physical shape to kill, that must. hmmmmmm.
START and i suspect preys on women because women are more easily and more deeply terrified, of the species generating more sheer horror than the male.
START computer. criminological files. of unsolved mass murders of women since jack the ripper cases. herh herh herh.
START captain, aligned directly between argelius and earth, those places are. yeesssssss.
START yes. when man moved out into the galaxy, with him that thing must've moved. computer, identify the proper names kesla and beratis. herh herh herh.
START working. kesla. to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet deneb two name given. beratis. to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet rigel four name given. additional data. murders on rigel four occurred one solar year ago.
START from rigel four, you come. herh herh herh.
START well, many people do. it is a crime not. hmmmmmm.
START no, but investigating is we what are. you mind taking the stand would, mister hengist, hmm?
START not, i will not.
START prefect, gone far enough, this has. take the stand i will not. yeesssssss.
START appreciate your position, can i, sir. in charge of civil disturbances locally, you are. if the entity for, you are which we search, what better position from, hmm which to kill with impunity?
START you left jaris' house just after, missing, we discovered the murder knife was.
START and unaccounted for, you were when lieutenant tracy was murdered. hmmmmmm.
START an entity which feeds on fear and terror would find a perfect hunting ground on argelius, planet without violence, as peaceful as sheep, where the inhabitants are. the entity, as a hungry wolf in that fold, would be.
START gentlemen, of the law i know something. engaging in sheer speculation, you are. yeesssssss.
START computer. of exhibit a report on analysis. hmmmmmm.
START working. exhibit a on visual. of blade composition, boridium. of handle composition, murinite. to folk art forms details of carving on handle conform, of origin indicating place. hmmmmmm.
START specify. of origin point.
START of argus river region artefact produced by hill people, planet rigel four. herh herh herh.
START now then, mister hengist. hmmmmmm.
START dead, he is dead, jim. herh herh herh.
START but impossible, that is.
START respond to these controls the computer will not. unquestionably controlling it, the entity is. hmmmmmm.
START no use, is it, captain. blocked, the bypass circuits are. hmmmmmm.
START what mean does it, hmm? yeesssssss.
START control the entire operation of the ship, it means that thing can, including the life support systems. herh herh herh.
START kill us all, you mean it could, hmm? yeesssssss.
START indeed, try, it will try, but not immediately. it feeds on fear and terror we know. nearly four hundred and forty humans aboard this ship, there are. try to breed fear and terror before it kills, surely it will.
START all hands, the captain, this is. your posts stay at. remain calm. captain out. bones. what's the sedative situation, hmm?
START got some stuff that would tranquillise an active volcano, have i.
START good. start distribution immediately. hold back that fear, the longer we can, the more time, have to get that thing out of the computer, will we. prefect, all be safer here, you will. spock, with me come. yes, hmmm.
START spock, you have a compulsory scan unit built into the computer banks, do not, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes we do, captain, but with the entity in control. yes, hmmm.
START are there certain mathematical problems not, hmm which simply cannot be solved? hmmmmmm.
START indeed. if focus the attention of the computer on one of them, we could.
START it, that ought to do. yeesssssss.
START our friends learned very quickly apparently.
START of control out. it on manual put. bridge.
START we have not much time, captain. hmmmmmm.
START you said it yourself, spock. terror, it wants terror, not just death. yeesssssss.
START all right. your station man, mister sulu. herh herh herh.
START the first time i heard a malfunction threaten us, this is.
START been restored, normal environmental levels have, captain, but it will last long not. few hours at best.
START be enough time, that should. get at it, let us.
START stop me now you cannot, captain. do you no good, it will. i control all circuits. silence me, you cannot. you, reach me, cannot. extremely limited in life, your manual overrides are.
START proceeding, captain, but need some time i will. hmmmmmm.
START if this ship you destroy, you destroy yourself.
START attempting to generate terror, it is, captain. herh herh herh.
START your post man, mister. if of the other systems go out any, to manual override switch, and above all, be afraid, do not. hmmmmmm.
START with of this stuff an armful, i would be afraid of a supernova not. hmmmmmm.
START computer, class a compulsory directive, this is. to the last digit the value of pi compute.
START as we know, transcendental figure without resolution, the value of pi is. work on this problem to the exclusion of all else until we order it to stop, the computer banks will.
START yes, keep that thing busy for a while, that should. the first to panic will the argelians be. get back to the briefing room let us. hmmmmmm.
START supposed to be afraid of i wonder who it is we are not. hmmmmmm.
START inhabited by more than a group of figures for a while will i doubt very much whether the computers be.
START resistance, there is, captain, but succeeding, the directive is. turning to the problem, bank after bank is.
START if of the computers you drive it out, have to go somewhere else, will it. yeesssssss.
START how doing are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START almost finished, i am. just jaris and me. hmmmmmm.
START complete computer control, captain. fled, the entity has. yes, hmmm.
START yes, but where to, hmm? bones, happen if that thing entered a tranquillised body, what would, hmm? yeesssssss.
START well, take up knitting it might, but nothing more violent than that.
START you and jaris you say everyone's had a shot but, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START well, willing to take a chance on mister spock, am i. better give yourself a shot, doc.
START no, so i think not. to stay clear i think i ought. yeesssssss.
START as i say do. yeesssssss.
START your arm extend, mister jaris.
START kill her, everybody keep back or i will! kill her i will! keep back! yes, hmmm.
START better be careful, you would. going to hurt somebody with that thing, you are.
START get him to the transporter room, let us, quick! herh herh herh.
START die, you will, die, die. die, everybody will.
START kill, kill, you all kill. yeesssssss.
START deep space. full power. of dispersion widest angle. maintain.
START to get excited no need, captain. do it, i will.
START it, you do, spock. herh herh herh.
START everybody die. all suffer, you will.
START have to shove me you did not, mister spock. have gotten round to it, i would. hmmmmmm.
START well, all right, jaris is. hmmmmmm.
START what do with that thing did you, captain, hmm? send it back to the planet did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START no. it out into open space we beamed, scotty. widest possible dispersion.
START that thing, die, cannot. yeesssssss.
START possibly, doctor. for some time its consciousness may continue, of billions of separate bits of energy consisting, floating forever in space, powerless.
START but die finally, it will. you seem very happy about the whole thing.
START why not, hmm? for while there i did know whether i was innocent or guilty not.
START bones, it take for this tranquilliser to wear off, how long will, hmm?
START know i not. five or six hours. i gave them a pretty big shot, jim.
START yes, see that, i can. well mister spock, for the next five or six hours, going to have the happiest crew in space, we are. of course, we will get much work done not. hmmmmmm.
START captain, since to argelius to rest you came, take advantage of the opportunity i suggest you.
START splendid idea, that is, mister spock. so, i know a cafe where the women are. yes, hmmm.
START go see, let us! hmmmmmm.
START correct, our scanner survey was, captain. it is there. pure tritanium. hmmmmmm.
START as hard twenty one point four times, to be exact.
START be able to break it we will not, captain. phaser off a specimen, i will. yes, hmmm.
START smell that do you, hmm? like honey a sweet odour. years ago, it was, on another planet. with a an odour like that a thing.
START in the growing season in this hemisphere of this planet, are we. doubtless many pollen aromas, there are. herh herh herh.
START negative, scotty. checking something out, we are.
START gone, it is gone. i, been wrong, could have. eleven years ago, the last time i caught an odour like that was. herh herh herh.
START to read dikironium for a minute seemed, and then i lost it. scanning it i it is almost like something out there knows am. of keeps changing itself into something different it kind. that is possible not. do that, nothing can.
START it immediately fire into! hmmmmmm.
START spock. dead. and find every red corpuscle gone from their body, you will.
START to enterprise kirk. scotty, lock in on us. medical emergency.
START you know what it was you think, captain, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START something that, possibly exist, cannot, but it does.
START to bridge kirk.
START your position hold.
START then inform them that we might be a little late, you will.
START jim, the yorktown's ship surgeon will know how late want to. those vaccines, transferring to us are highly perishable, is he. hmmmmmm.
START gentlemen, remaining in orbit until i find out more about those deaths, we are, my responsibility on. perfectly aware that it might cost lives on theta seven, am i. kirk out. autopsy report.
START you saw their colour. there was a red corpuscle left in their bodies not. yes, hmmm.
START marks, cuts, of any kind incisions, hmm?
START not a one. medically impossible, what happened is.
START of past similar occurrences i suggest you look at the record tapes. find the uss farragut lists casualties eleven years ago from exactly the same impossible causes, you will.
START thank you, captain. check those tapes immediately, i will.
START first, to consciousness for a moment can you bring ensign rizzo, hmm?
START yes, but it. hmmmmmm.
START it hurt him if you do so, will, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START his present condition in, it would make much difference i think not. herh herh herh.
START transfusion completed, sir. still far below normal, his pulse and respiration are. yes, hmmm.
START of cordazine give him one cc, nurse. yeesssssss.
START rizzo. the captain, this is. you hear me can, hmm? remember what happened to you do you, hmm?
START remember. cold, i am cold. so cold, am i.
START attacked by something, you were. when it happened, notice an odour of any kind did you, hmm? rizzo. rizzo! remember a sickly sweet odour do you, hmm? smell it did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START yes. yes. smell. strange smell. like being smothered in honey, was it. herh herh herh.
START feel a presence did you, an intelligence, hmm?
START trying to draw strength from us, was it. it, i felt it. it was, it was, there, it was there. yes, hmmm.
START beginning to sleep again, he is. risk another shot, i cannot. hmmmmmm.
START already told me what i wanted to know, he is. herh herh herh.
START with the captain what's, hmm? never seen him like that before i have.
START to find out i intend. i, in the medical record library, will be. hmmmmmm.
START oh, captain. subspace message from starfleet. inquiring, they are inquiring. yes, hmmm.
START not now. to me immediately have the security duty officer report.
START continuing scanning. of life forms on the planet still no readings.
START identify it as a life form let us assume that it is something so completely different that our sensors would not.
START composed of that rare element, suppose it was. strange, gaseous creature.
START scanned for that element, i have, captain. no trace of dikironium on the planet surface or in the atmosphere, there is. hmmmmmm.
START it camouflaged itself suppose. assume that it is intelligent let us, looking for it we that it knows are.
START to hide from a sensor scan, have to be able to change its molecular structure, it would, to lead or wood changing itself to ivory like gold changing itself. yes, hmmm.
START just suggested something that never occurred to me, you have. to a tape record it may provide some answers which i think you will find doctor mccoy is looking at this very moment.
START the new security officer are you, hmm? yeesssssss.
START your father was.
START yes, sir, but any special treatment on that account i expect not.
START get none aboard this ship, you will, mister.
START captain, report on ensign rizzo i have. dead, he is dead, sir. yeesssssss.
START yes, sir. good friends, we were, graduated the academy together. hmmmmmm.
START get a crack at what killed him, you will. interested, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START for disrupter effect i want four men armed with phaser two set. me in the transporter room in five minutes join. accompany me to the planet surface, you will.
START changing, reading is, sir.
START right, spock was. notice the molecular shift, hmm?
START dikironium reading now, sir. bearing ninety four mark seven, of elevation six degrees angle. holding steady. yes, hmmm.
START over that rise. take two men, to the left circle around. take the other two and go the other way, i will. dangerous, that creature is. if you see it, fire full phasers. yeesssssss.
START swensen, with me, bardoli come.
START mister garrovick, studied your report, have we. mister spock, begin.
START the size of the thing you saw, what was, ensign, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START say it measured from ten to sixty cubic metres, i would, sir. it varied in size, as it moved fluctuated. hmmmmmm.
START like a, was it, gaseous cloud. parts of it, see through, could i. more dense, other parts were. yeesssssss.
START ensign, sense any intelligence in this gaseous cloud did you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START what, did i, sir, hmm?
START get any subconscious impressions that this was a creature did you. living, thinking thing, of chemical elements rather than just a strange cloud, hmm? herh herh herh.
START but come to actual contact with it you did not, did you, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START no, sir. furthest away from it, i was. out of nowhere, it seemed to come, for a moment hovered, then my men moved toward. fast, it was fast, incredibly fast.
START say it hovered did you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START fire at it, you did, did you not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START you from the creature, what distance were, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START yes. i, er, well, i did fire while it was hovering not, sir. yeesssssss.
START you froze you mean, hmm?
START no, sir. i did exactly freeze not. hmmmmmm.
START you doing, what exactly were, hmm? herh herh herh.
START well, startled for a second, was i. and then by the time i fired, already moving, the thing was.
START any further information, you have, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START gentlemen have any further questions do you, hmm?
START for a moment i only hesitated, sir. sorry, i am sorry. hmmmmmm.
START ensign, relieved of all duties and confined to quarters until further notice, you are.
START little hard on the boy, you were, jim. yes, hmmm.
START he froze. killed, one man was. another may die. yeesssssss.
START both be filing reports, you will. your comments and recommendations then make.
START captain, taken the liberty of cleaning the radioactive disposal vent on number two impulse engine, while we are waiting i have, but ready to leave orbit in under half an hour, we will be. yeesssssss.
START leaving orbit we are not, mister scott. not that quickly.
START captain, to rendezvous with them the yorktown requesting information on how soon we expect.
START the medicine for theta seven colony is only needed desperately and has limited not. yes, hmmm.
START aware of the situation, am i, engineer, and getting a little tired of my senior officers conspiring against me, i am. forgive me. perhaps i should have used the word conspire not.
START nothing, sir. to scan continuing. herh herh herh.
START change its molecular structure, are you aware it can, hmm?
START scanning for any unusual movement are you, hmm?
START of gaseous cloud any type, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START run a full scanner probe twice, we have. hmmmmmm.
START then run it twenty times if, what it takes, that is!
START disturbing you i hope i am not, doctor. herh herh herh.
START no disturbance, interrupting another autopsy report is, mister spock. relief, is it. yes, hmmm.
START your advice i need.
START your reasoning i understand not.
START you need advice from me, hmm? kidding must you be. yeesssssss.
START his creature jim and, hmm?
START precisely. studied the incident involving the uss farragut have you, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START no. with all these deaths and injuries, only had a chance to scan the tapes, i have. eight or ten hours of record tape there, there are.
START fortunately, i read somewhat faster. in brief, doctor, annihilated, nearly half the crew and the captain were. garrovick, the captain's name was.
START as our ensign the same. yes, hmmm.
START in, mind if i come, hmm? herh herh herh.
START to bridge kirk. scanning report. yes, hmmm.
START maintain search. kirk out. have just vanished it cannot. herh herh herh.
START they do sometimes, if lucky, we are lucky. in many forms, monsters come. of them all you know the greatest monster, jim, hmm? guilt.
START to the point get. hmmmmmm.
START jim, when exposed to unknown dangers for the first time, a young officer is, under tremendous emotional stress, he is. now we all know that. yeesssssss.
START am i, hmm? speaking of lieutenant james t, i was. of the starship farragut kirk. eleven years ago, the young officer at the phaser station, you were when something attacked. to the tapes according, this young lieutenant kirk insisted upon blaming himself.
START normal emotion, you had. startled, you were. for a grand total of perhaps two seconds you delayed firing.
START if i had delayed not, have been killed, it would.
START seem to think so the ship's exec did not. quite clear on the subject, his log entry was. fine young officer who performed with uncommon bravery, lieutenant kirk is. yeesssssss.
START you understand, do not, hmm? it killed two hundred crewmen.
START very important to you, captain garrovick was, was he not, jim, hmm?
START yes. my commanding officer from the day i left the academy, he was. of the finest men i ever knew one. i could have killed that thing if, fired soon enough the first time, would i. hmmmmmm.
START that you know not, jim. you know not that any more than you know that garrovick could have destroyed it.
START help how i feel i cannot. an intelligence about it, there is, bones. malevolence. evil, it is evil. destroyed, must it be. yeesssssss.
START that, destroy yourself, you could, your career, of yourself eleven years ago a young boy who reminds you. yeesssssss.
START push our friendship past the point where i have to take official, do not. hmmmmmm.
START not, i am not, jim. professional, this is, captain. preparing a medical log entry on my estimation of the physical and emotional condition of a starship captain, i am. which of command grade requires a witness.
START take it, do i, doctor, commander, me unfit or incapacitated that both of you or either of you consider, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START correctly phrased, captain. as recommended in the manual. our reply, as recommended also, is, sir, noted in your recent behaviour certain items, we have, which, on the surface, seem unusual. to inquire further we respectfully ask permission.
START blast it! forget the manual! your questions ask. hmmmmmm.
START sir, waiting now at the rendezvous point, the uss yorktown is. it carries perishable drugs. herh herh herh.
START they need those vaccines on theta seven, captain. we delaying here, now why are, hmm?
START because convinced that this is the same creature that attacked the farragut eleven years ago i am.
START on the tapes, my report is. as it attacked us eleven years ago, as consciousness, i lost consciousness, feel the intelligence of the thing, i could. sense it thinking, i could, planning. yes, hmmm.
START you say, sense its intelligence, you could, captain, hmm? how communicate with you did it, hmm?
START as you lost consciousness you state that it happened just. very tricky thing, a semiconscious mind is. imagination, a man never knows how much is real or how much is.
START it is whatever, doctor, it is whatever, you call it deadly would not, hmm?
START yes, no doubt about that, there is.
START and what if, the same creature that attacked eleven years ago from a planet over a thousand light years from here, is it, hmm?
START obviously, captain, if an intelligent creature, it is, if the same one, it is, if capable of space travel, it therefore is, pose a great threat to inhabited planets, it could.
START of ifs a lot, i agree, but my command judgment in, they out weigh other factors. intuition, however illogical, mister spock, as a command prerogative is recognized. hmmmmmm.
START jim, we are trying to gang up on you not.
START and not, you have, doctor. expressed the proper concern, you have, asked the proper questions, you have. both done your duty, you have. to make now may i ask what medical log entry you intend, hmm?
START this point at, my medical log remains open. yeesssssss.
START in that case, gentlemen.
START reading on the whatever it is, i have, captain. leaving the planet surface, heading into space.
START all decks, red alert. red alert. to leave orbit prepare. yeesssssss.
START captain, maintain warp eight speed much longer, we cannot. approaching the critical point, pressures are.
START barely closing in on it, we are, captain. pursuing it for days, could we be.
START if necessary. do what, to increase our speed, you can, scott. herh herh herh.
START spock, how read you that, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START conflicting data, captain. to be in a borderline state between matter and energy it seems. of both elements. possibly use gravitational fields for propulsion, it could. hmmmmmm.
START and that sophisticated you find not, mister spock, hmm?
START extremely efficient, captain. another matter, whether that indicates intelligence is. hmmmmmm.
START we will be using the impulse engines not. turn the alarm off. herh herh herh.
START captain, do it we cannot. if this speed we keep, blow up any minute now, we will. yes, hmmm.
START to warp six go.
START hi. at alert station, everyone else is, so you some dinner i brought. yes, hmmm.
START hungry i am not.
START are we still chasing that thing half way across the galaxy, hmm? yes. of balance has the captain lost his sense, hmm? maybe. to explode is the entire crew about ready, hmm? positively. lucky you are out of it, you are. yes, hmmm.
START what you mean, of it out, hmm? it, i caused it. you know that, too, you, do not, hmm? if fired my phaser quickly enough on argus ten, would i, have happened this would not.
START you, i told you, christine, i am hungry not. yes, hmmm.
START like that doctor mccoy thought you might say something. his officially logged prescription for you, this is. one word on it, it has. eat. his orders now if you follow not, doctor mccoy could and possibly, you hauled down to sickbay and fed intravenously, would have.
START slowing, the creature is. down to warp two, is it. yes, hmmm.
START i not understand. outrunning us, it was. yes, hmmm.
START decided to fight, it maybe is. phasers ready, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START coming to a full halt, it is, sir. magnification one. hmmmmmm.
START captain, to return to my post request permission.
START there. coming, it is coming, sir.
START stop it the deflectors will not, captain. herh herh herh.
START surmised this, i should have. for to be able to use gravity as a propulsive force the creature, have to have this capacity, it would.
START to contact five seconds. all hatches and vents secure. all lights on the board show green. sir! the number two impulse vent! red light, we have!
START when it entered impulse engine number two's vent, it attacked two crewmen. it then got into the ventilating system, and air for only two hours, we now have.
START chance for survival, one man has. dead, the other is. add that little price tag to your monster hunt, you can.
START enough that is, bones.
START it is enough not! care as long as you could hang your trophy on the wall you did not. well, on it it is not, captain, in it, is it. hmmmmmm.
START we should have gone after the creature may i suggest that we no longer belabour the question of whether or not. now been rendered academic, the matter has. now after us, the creature is. yeesssssss.
START yes, well, been many light years away from us, could it have. to turn and attack here instead it chose. why, hmm? yes, hmmm.
START to tell impossible, captain, until make a closer survey of the creature, i can.
START if you play analyst want to, spock, use someone else, not me. with the ship and the crew, my concern is. hmmmmmm.
START i know, prefer to wallow in emotion rather than, you would. yes, hmmm.
START mister spock, very kind of you to come here, is it.
START sir, coming through the vent, is it. yeesssssss.
START of here get out! attempt to seal it off, i will.
START my way on, garrovick. to three four one security. medical alert. scotty, reverse cabin pressure three four one. hmmmmmm.
START if we let that thing into the ship, have much company, he will. herh herh herh.
START jammed the vent control, i must have when i hit it.
START pulled it back into the ventilation system, see if the reverse pressure has.
START my life he saved, captain. be lying dead in there, i should, not him. hmmmmmm.
START fortunately, dead, neither of us is, ensign. the reverse pressure worked. closed, the vent is. yes, hmmm.
START misunderstand my next question, do not. mister spock, you dead why are not, hmm? yeesssssss.
START that green blood of his, is it. hmmmmmm.
START based on copper, my haemoglobin is, not iron.
START bet he left a bad taste in the creature's mouth, i will, too.
START yes. different, the scent is. i think i understand something now. hmmmmmm.
START do you believe, in communication with the creature, you are, hmm? yeesssssss.
START error when contacting http://www.yodaspeak.co.uk/index.php
START suffering from a, captain kirk is, peculiar physical degeneration which strongly resembles aging. herh herh herh.
START is his mental capacity degenerating even more rapidly not, hmm?
START yes, yes, but better man right now, is he.
START doctor, of captain kirk's physical age you heard the computer's analysis. agree with it do you, hmm? herh herh herh.
START blasted machine, it is, spock! you, argue with a machine, cannot.
START agree with it do you, doctor, hmm?
START yes. yes, i do, agree. and sorry, i am sorry, jim. hmmmmmm.
START no further questions, this board has. unless you, commodore stocker, have something that, like to add, you would.
START no. quite satisfied, i am, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START wish to call any witnesses do you, captain kirk, hmm? hmmmmmm.
START perfectly capable of speaking in my own defence, i am, mister spock. yeesssssss.
START captain, suggest, i would suggest. herh herh herh.
START no, no, no. all right, it is, spock. all right, it is. only one reason there is, and one reason alone, for having this, hearing. to leave gamma hydra two i refused. yes, hmmm.
START yes. of the tongue a slip. yeesssssss.
START inability to remember having given commands, you are, reading and signing important orders and then forgetting them, as compiled by our own chief surgeon your physical analysis. appear to be irrefutable proof of failing physical and mental conditions, all these things would.
START no more questions, we have, captain. herh herh herh.
START me anything ask. anything. hmmmmmm.
