(Noel hides as guards search for her, and when they go she pulls down the master high voltage switch. A guard grabs her)

[Treatment room]
MCCOY: It looks right.
SPOCK: The nitrogen cycle, it has to be.
MCCOY: But the question is, what's the dosage?
SPOCK: That is a very good question.
KIRK: Where is she, Miri? Where is she, Miri? Where's Janice?
MIRI: What's the matter with you? How should I know?
KIRK: Where is she? Has something happened to her?
MIRI: Don't you feel all right?
KIRK: No, I don't feel all right! None of us feel all right! Can't you see what's going on?
MIRI: Jim, I don't want anything to happen to you.
KIRK: I've got to find Janice.
SPOCK: That's not all, Captain. We've got to find those communicators.
KIRK: We're trying, Mister Spock. We're trying very hard.
MCCOY: That's not good enough! This could be it, but we can't test it without the ship's computers.
SPOCK: We've got to have those communicators, Jim.
KIRK: This is the vaccine?
MCCOY: That's what the computers will tell us.
SPOCK: Without them, it could be a beaker full of death.
KIRK: Did you hear them? We only have a few hours left.
MIRI: I don't care.
KIRK: You've got to care. Miri, I'm going to tell you something. You, your friends, all the Onlies are going to get the disease unless we succeed in what we're doing. You've seen your friends get it.
MIRI: Sometimes it happens.
KIRK: Not sometimes. All the times, Miri! As soon as you start growing up the way you are. Don't you know why you don't like to play games anymore, why you don't see your friends the way you used to? It's because you're becoming a young woman, and the moment you become a young woman, you get the disease. All of you.
MIRI: That's not true. It just happens sometimes.
KIRK: All the time, Miri! It's happening to you right now! Look at it. Look at it, Miri, it's in you!
MIRI: No! No! No!

[Bridge]
SPOCK: Check the circuit.
TYLER: All operating, sir.
SPOCK: It can't be the screen then. Definitely something out there, Captain, headed this way.
TYLER: It could be these meteorites.
ONE: No, it's something else. There's still something out there.
TYLER: It's coming at the speed of light, collision course. The meteorite beam has not deflected it, Captain.
ONE: Evasive manoeuvres, sir?
PIKE: Steady as we go.
GARISON: It's a radio wave, sir. We're passing through an old-style distress signal.
PIKE: They were keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way.
GARISON: A ship in trouble making a forced landing, sir. That's it. No other message.
TYLER: I have a fix. It comes from the Talos star group.
ONE: We've no ships or Earth colonies that far out.
SPOCK: Their call letters check with a survey expedition. SS Columbia. It disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago.
TYLER: It would take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here.
SPOCK: Records show the Talos group has never been explored. Solar system similar to Earth, eleven planets. Number four seems to be Class M, oxygen atmosphere.
ONE: Then they could still be alive, even after eighteen years.
PIKE: If they survived the crash.
SPOCK: We aren't going to go, to be certain?
PIKE: Not without any indication of survivors, no. Continue to the Vega Colony and take care of our own sick and injured first. You have the helm. Maintain present course.
ONE: Yes, sir.

[Pike's quarters]

BOYCE [OC}: Boyce here.
PIKE: Drop by my cabin, Doctor. (Boyce enters with bag) What's that? I didn't say there's anything wrong with me.
BOYCE: I understand we picked up a distress signal.
PIKE: That's right. Unless we get anything more positive on it, it seems to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent. I'd like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, too.
BOYCE: Oh, I concur with yours, definitely.
PIKE: Good. I'm glad you do, because we're going to stop first at the Vega Colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also. What the devil are you putting in there, ice?
BOYCE: Who wants a warm martini?
PIKE: What makes you think I need one?
BOYCE: Sometimes a man'll tell his bartender things he'll never tell his doctor. What's been on your mind, Chris, the fight on Rigel Seven?
PIKE: Shouldn't it be? My only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
BOYCE: Was there anything you personally could have done to prevent it?
PIKE: Oh, I should have smelled trouble when I saw the swords and the armour. Instead of that, I let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one of their warriors.
BOYCE: Chris, you set standards for yourself no one could meet. You treat everyone on board like a human being except yourself, and now you're tired and you
PIKE: You bet I'm tired. You bet. I'm tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives. I'm tired of deciding which mission is too risky and which isn't, and who's going on the landing party and who doesn't, and who lives and who dies. Boy, I've had it, Phil.
BOYCE: To the point of finally taking my advice, a rest leave?
PIKE: To the point of considering resigning.
BOYCE: And do what?
PIKE: Well, for one thing, go home. Nice little town with fifty miles of parkland around it. Remember I told you I had two horses, and we used to take some food and ride out all day.
BOYCE: Ah, that sounds exciting. Ride out with a picnic lunch every day.
PIKE: I said that's one place I might go. I might go into business on Regulus or on the Orion colony.
BOYCE: You, an Orion trader, dealing in green animal women, slaves?
PIKE: The point is this isn't the only life available. There's a whole galaxy of things to choose from.
BOYCE: Not for you. A man either lives life as it happens to him, meets it head-on, and licks it, or he turns his back on it and starts to wither away.
PIKE: Now you're beginning to talk like a doctor, bartender.
BOYCE: Take your choice. We both get the same two kinds of customers. The living and the dying.
SPOCK [on monitor]: Mister Spock here. We're intercepting a follow-up message, sir. There are crash survivors on Talos.

[Bridge]

GARISON: (reads) Eleven survivors from crash. Gravity and oxygen within limits. Food and water obtainable, but unless. The message faded at that point, sir.
PIKE: Address intercraft.
TYLER: System open.
PIKE: This is the captain. Our destination is the Talos star group. Our time warp, factor seven.
TYLER: Course computed and on the screen.
ONE: All decks have acknowledged, sir.
PIKE : Engage.
TYLER: On course, sir.
(Colt enters. Pike turns around and bumps into her)
PIKE: Yeoman.
COLT: Yes, sir.
PIKE: I thought I told you that when I'm on the bridge
COLT: But you wanted the reports by oh five hundred. It's oh five hundred now, sir.
PIKE: Oh, I see. Thank you.
ONE: She's replacing your former yeoman, sir.
PIKE: She does a good job, all right. It's just that I can't get used to having a woman on the bridge. No offence, Lieutenant. You're different, of course.
(The Enterprise arrives at a planet)
TYLER: We've settled into orbit, sir.
GEOLOGIST: Geological lab report complete, Captain.
SPOCK: Preliminary lab survey ready, sir.
PIKE: Spectography?
GEOLOGIST: Our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, heavy with inert elements but well within safety limits.
PIKE: Gravity?
GEOLOGIST: Zero point nine of Earth.
TYLER: Captain? Reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. As I read it, they polarise out as rounded metal bits. Could be parts of a spaceship hull.
PIKE: Prep a landing party of six. You feel up to it?
SPOCK: Yes, sir.
TYLER: Yes, sir.
PIKE: Sorry, Number One. With little information on this planet, we'll have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us.
ONE: Of course, sir.

[Transporter room]

PIKE: There's no indication of problems down there, but let's not take chances.
PITCAIRN: Yes, sir. There's a canyon to the left. We can set you there completely unobserved.

[Planet surface]

(the group explores until they find a rough settlement)
GARISON: Sir.
OLD MAN: They're men. They're humans.
PIKE: Captain Christopher Pike, United Space Ship Enterprise.
HASKINS: Doctor Theodore Haskins, American Continent lnstitute.
SURVIVOR: Is Earth all right?
PIKE: The same old Earth, and you'll see it very soon.
TYLER: And you won't believe how fast you can get back. Well the time barrier's been broken. Our new ships can
(He's struck dumb by the sight of a lovely young woman)
HASKINS: This is Vina. Her parents are dead. She was born almost as we crashed.
(The reunion is being watched on another screen, by three people with big bald heads)
PIKE: (as the survivors pack up the settlement) Enterprise.
ONE [OC]: Landing party, come in.
PIKE: We'll begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly.
ONE [OC]: Quarters are being prepared, sir. Have I permission to send out scouting and scientific parties now?
PIKE: That's affirmative on the
VINA: You appear to be healthy and intelligent, Captain. A prime specimen.
ONE [OC]: I didn't get that last message, Captain.
PIKE: Er, affirmative on request. Landing party out.
HASKINS: You must forgive her choice of words, Captain. She's lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists.
BOYCE: If they can spare you a moment, I'd like to make my medical report.
VINA: I think it's time to show the Captain our secret.
BOYCE: Their health is excellent. Almost too good.
HASKINS: There's a reason for our condition, but we've had some doubt if Earth is ready to learn the secret. Let the girl show you. We'll accept your judgment.
(Pike follows Vina up a slope to a ledge by a rock face)
VINA: You're tired, but don't worry. You'll feel much better soon. Don't you see it? Here and here.
PIKE: I don't understand.
VINA: You will. You're a perfect choice.
(Vina vanishes, and so do all the survivors and their encampment. A door opens in the rock face, Pike is knocked out and taken inside. At the settlement -)
TYLER: Captain!
(Everyone rushes over in time to see the door closing in the rock. They fire their phasers at it but it just blasts away the rock covering to show the metal underneath.)
SPOCK: Spock here.
ONE [OC]: Landing party, come in.
SPOCK: There is no survivors' encampment, Number One. This is all some sort of trap. We've lost the Captain. Do you read?

[Pike's cage]

(Pike wakes to find himself in a cell with a transparent wall blocking his escape. He tests it's strength, and notices other similar occupied cells. There's a fanged ape, a giant bird and other scary shadows. The three aliens arrive)
PIKE: Can you hear me? My name is Christopher Pike, commander of the space vehicle Enterprise from a stellar group at the other end of this galaxy. Our intentions are peaceful. Can you understand me?
(the aliens communicate with their minds, not voices)
TALOSIAN: It appears, Magistrate, that the intelligence of the specimen is shockingly limited.
MAGISTRATE: This is no surprise since his vessel was baited here so easily with a simulated message. As you can read in its thoughts, it is only now beginning to suspect that the survivors and encampment were a simple illusion we placed in their minds.
PIKE: You're not speaking, yet I can hear you.
MAGISTRATE: You will note the confusion as it reads our thought transmissions.
PIKE: All right then, telepathy. You can read my mind. I can read yours. Now, unless you want my ship to consider capturing me an unfriendly act
MAGISTRATE: You now see the primitive fear threat reaction. The specimen is about to boast of his strength, the weaponry of his vessel, and so on. Next, frustrated into a need to display physical prowess, the creature will throw himself against the transparency.
PIKE: If you were in here, wouldn't you test the strength of these walls, too? There's a way out of any cage, and I'll find it.
MAGISTRATE: Despite its frustration, the creature appears more adaptable than our specimens from other planets. We can soon begin the experiment.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: The inhabitants of this planet must live deep underground, and probably manufacture food and other needs down there. Our tests indicate the planet surface, without considerably more vegetation or some animals, simply too barren to support life.
ONE: So we just thought we saw survivors there, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Exactly. An illusion placed in our minds by this planet's inhabitants.
BOYCE: It was a perfect illusion. They had us seeing just what we wanted to see, human beings who'd survived with dignity and bravery, everything entirely logical, right down to the building of the camp, the tattered clothing, everything. Now let's be sure we understand the danger of this. The inhabitants of this planet can read our minds. They can create illusions out of a person's own thoughts, memories, and experiences, even out of a person's own desires. Illusions just as real and solid as this table top and just as impossible to ignore.
ONE: Any estimate what they might want one of us for?
SPOCK: They may simply be studying the Captain, to find out how Earth people are put together. Or it could be something more.
TYLER: Then why aren't we doing anything? That entry may have stood up against hand lasers, but we can transmit the ship's power against it. Enough to blast half a continent.
SPOCK: Look. Brains three times the size of ours. If we start buzzing about down there, we're liable to find their mental power is so great they could reach out and swat this ship as though it were a fly.
TYLER: It's Captain Pike they've got. He needs help, and he probably needs it fast.
ONE: Engineering deck will rig to transmit ship's power. We'll try blasting through that metal.

[Talosian monitoring room]

(As Pike continues to explore his cell)
TALOSIAN: Thousands of us are already probing the creature's thoughts, Magistrate. We find excellent memory capacity.
MAGISTRATE: I read most strongly a recent death struggle in which it fought to protect its life. We will begin with this, giving the specimen something more interesting to protect.

[Rigel Seven]

VINA: Come on, we must hide ourselves. Come, come. Hurry. It's deserted. There'll be weapons and perhaps food.
PIKE: This is Rigel Seven.
VINA: Please, we must hide ourselves.
PIKE: I was in a cage, a cell, in some kind of a zoo. I must still be there.
VINA: Come on.
PIKE: They've reached into my mind and taken the memory of somewhere I've been.
VINA: The killer!
PIKE: It's starting just as it happened two weeks ago. Except for you.

[Fortress]

(The courtyard is scattered with lances and spears)
PIKE: Longer hair, different dress, but it is you, the one the survivors called Vina. Or rather the image of Vina. But why you again? Why didn't they create a different girl?
(The killer enters - a big humanoid with shield and axe)
VINA: Quick. If you attack while it's not looking.
PIKE: But it's only a dream.
VINA: You have to kill him as you did here before.
PIKE: You can tell my jailers I won't go along with it. I'm not an animal performing for its supper.
VINA: It doesn't matter what you call this, you'll feel it. That's what matters. You'll feel every moment of whatever happens to you. Please, don't you know what he'll do to us?
(so Pike fights the killer with mace and shield)
PIKE: Why would an illusion be frightened?
VINA: Because that's the way you imagined me.
PIKE: Who are you? You act as if this were really you.
VINA: Careful.
(Pike and Vina retreat up some stairs. The killer breaks Pike's spear and they throw objects at it. Pike gets knocked down into the courtyard. The killer grabs Vina and Pike throws a spear into it's back. Then it jumps down and spears itself on a wicked harpoon that Pike grabs just in time)

[Pike's cell]

VINA: It's over.
(Vina hugs her hero, then sees the Talosians watching them. The Talosians leave.)
PIKE: Why are you here?
VINA: To please you.
PIKE: Are you real?
VINA: As real as you wish.
PIKE: No, no. No, that's not an answer. I've never met you before, never even imagined you.
VINA: Perhaps they made me out of dreams you've forgotten.
PIKE: What, and dress you in the same metal fabric they wear?
VINA: I have to wear something, don't I? I can wear whatever you wish, be anything you wish.
PIKE: So they can see how their specimen performs? They want to see how I react, is that it?
VINA: Don't you have a dream, something you've always wanted very badly?
PIKE: Or do they do more than just watch me? Do they feel with me, too?
VINA: You can have whatever dream you want. I can become anything, any woman you've ever imagined. You can have anything you want in the whole universe. Let me please you.
PIKE: Yes. Yes, you can please me. You can tell me about them. Is there any way I can keep them from probing my mind, from using my thoughts against me? Does that frighten you? Does that mean there is a way?
VINA: You're a fool.
PIKE: Since you're not real, there's not much point in continuing this conversation, is there.

[Planet surface]

(A big laser cannon is aimed at the door in the rock.
ONE: All circuits engaged, Mister Spock.
SPOCK [OC]: Standing by, Number One.
ONE: Take cover.
SPOCK [OC]: Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
(The laser cannon blasts away)
ONE: Increase to full power! Can you give us any more?
SPOCK [OC]: Our circuits are beginning to heat. We'll have to cease power.
ONE: Disengage. The top of that knoll should have been sheared off the first second.
BOYCE: Maybe it was. It's what I tried to explain in the briefing room. Their power of illusion is so great, we can't be sure of anything we do, anything we see.

[Pike's cell]

VINA: Perhaps if you asked me some questions, I could answer.
PIKE: How far can they control my mind?
VINA: If I tell you, then will you pick some dream you've had and let me live it with you?
PIKE: Perhaps.
VINA: They can't actually make you do anything you don't want to do.
PIKE: But they try to trick me with their illusions.
VINA: And, they can punish you when you're not co-operative. You'll find out about that.
PIKE: Did they ever live on the surface of this planet? Why did they go underground?
VINA: War, thousands of centuries ago.
PIKE: That's why it's so barren up there?
VINA; The planet's only now becoming able to support life again.
PIKE: So the Talosians who came underground found life limited here and they concentrated on developing their mental power.
VINA: But they found it's a trap. Like a narcotic. Because when dreams become more important than reality, you give up travel, building, creating. You even forget how to repair the machines left behind by your ancestors. You just sit, living and reliving other lives left behind in the thought record.
PIKE: Or sit probing minds of zoo specimens like me.
VINA: You're better than a theatre to them. They create the illusion for you, they watch you react, feel your emotions. They have a whole collection of specimens, descendants of life brought back long ago from all over this part of the galaxy.
PIKE: Which means they had to have more than one of each animal.
VINA: Please.
PIKE: They'll need a pair of humans too. Where do they get intend to get the Earth woman?
VINA: You said that if I answered questions
PIKE: But that was a bargain with something that didn't exist. You said you weren't real, remember?
VINA: I'm a woman as real and as human as you are. We're like Adam and Eve. If we. Don't. Please don't punish me! (disappears)
(Pike sees the Magistrate walk away)
(Pike continues to search the walls for a door when a hatch opens and a glass is placed on the floor)
MAGISTRATE: The vial contains a nourishing protein complex.
PIKE: Is the keeper actually communicating with one of his animals?
MAGISTRATE: If the form and the colour is not appealing, it can appear as any food you wish to visualise.
PIKE: And if I prefer
MAGISTRATE: To starve? You overlook the unpleasant alternative of punishment.
(Pike is surrounded by fire and brimstone, screaming in pain)
MAGISTRATE: From a fable you once heard in childhood. You will now consume the nourishment.
PIKE: Why not just put irresistible hunger in my mind? Because you can't, can you? You do have limitations, don't you?
MAGISTRATE: If you continue to disobey, from deeper in your mind, there are things even more unpleasant.
(Pike drinks the nourishment then launches himself at the glass wall. The Magistrate steps back in surprise)
PIKE: That's very interesting.
MAGISTRATE: Now to the female.
PIKE: You were startled. Weren't you reading my mind then?
MAGISTRATE: As you've conjectured, an Earth vessel did crash on our planet, but with only a single survivor.
PIKE: No, let's stay on the first subject. All I wanted for that moment was to get my hands around your neck.
MAGISTRATE: We repaired the survivor's injuries and found the species interesting.
PIKE: Do primitive thoughts put up a block you can't read through?
MAGISTRATE: It became necessary to attract a mate.
PIKE: All right, all right, let's talk about the girl. You seem to be going out of your way to make her attractive, to make me feel protective.
MAGISTRATE: This is necessary in order to perpetuate the species.
PIKE: It seems more important to you now that I begin to accept her and like her.
MAGISTRATE: We wish our specimens to be happy in their new life.
PIKE: Assuming that's a lie, why would you want me attracted to her? So I'll feel love in a husband-wife relationship? That would be necessary only if you intend to build a family group or perhaps a whole human community.
MAGISTRATE: With the female now properly conditioned.
PIKE: You mean properly punished! I'm the one who's not co-operating! Why don't you punish me?
MAGISTRATE: First, an emotion of protectiveness. Now one of sympathy. Excellent.

[Woodland glade]

(A picnic spread on a tartan rug, two horses standing by, a futuristic city in the distance)
VINA: You want some coffee, dear? I left the thermos hooked to my saddle.
PIKE: Tango! You old devil, you. I'm sorry I don't have any sugar. Well, they think of everything, don't they? (feeds lumps to the horse)
VINA: Hey, your coffee. Is it good to be home?
PIKE: They read our minds very well. Home, anything else I want, if I co-operate, is that it?
VINA: Have you forgotten my headaches, darling? I get them when you talk strangely like this.
PIKE: Look, I'm sorry they punish you, but we can't let them
VINA: My, it turned out to be a lovely day, didn't it?
PIKE: It's funny. It's about twenty four hours ago I was telling the ship's doctor how much I wanted something else not very different from what we have here. An escape from reality. Life with no frustrations. No responsibilities. Now that I have it, I understand the doctor's answer.
VINA: I hope you're hungry. These little white sandwiches are your mother's recipe for chicken tuna.
PIKE: You either live life, bruises, skinned knees and all, or you turn your back on it and start dying. The doctor's going to be happy about one part, at least. He said I needed a rest.
VINA: This is a lovely place to rest.
PIKE: I used to ride through here when I was a kid. It's not as pretty as some of the parkland around the big cities, but. That's Mojave. That's where I was born.
VINA: Is that supposed to be news to your wife? You're home. You can even stay if you want. Wouldn't it be nice showing your children where you once played?
PIKE: These headaches, they'll be hereditary you know. Would you wish them on a child or a whole group of children?
VINA: Foolish.
PIKE: Is it? Look, first they made me protect you and then feel sympathy for you. Now we have these familiar surroundings and a comfortable husband-wife relationship. They don't need all this for just passion. What they're after is respect and mutual dependence.
VINA: They say in the olden days all this was a desert. Blowing sand and cactus.
PIKE: But we're not here, neither of us. We're in a menagerie, a cage!
VINA: No.
PIKE; I can't help either one of us if you won't give me a chance. Now, you told me once they used illusions as a narcotic. They couldn't repair the machines left by their ancestors. Is that why they want us, to build a colony of slaves?
VINA: Stop it. Don't you care what they'll do to us?
PIKE: Back in my cage, it seemed for a couple of minutes that our keeper couldn't read my thoughts. Do emotions like hate, keeping hate in your mind, does that block off our mind from them?
VINA: Yes. They can't read through primitive emotions. But you can't keep it up for long enough. I've tried. They keep at you and at you year after year, tricking and punishing, and they won. They own me. I know you must hate me for that.
PIKE: Oh, no. I don't hate you. I can guess what it was like.
VINA: But that's not enough. Don't you see? They read my thoughts, my feelings, my dreams of what would be a perfect man. That's why they picked you. I can't help but love you and they expect you to feel the same way.
PIKE: If they can read my mind, then they know I'm attracted to you.

[Talosian monitoring room]

PIKE [on monitor]: I was from the very first moment I saw you in the survivor's camp.
TALOSIAN: A curious species. They have fantasies they hide even from themselves.
VINA [on monitor]: I'm beginning to see why none of this has worked for you. You've been home, and fighting as on Rigel. That's not new to you, either. A person's strongest dreams are about what he can't do. Yes, a ship's captain, always having to be so formal, so decent and honest and proper. You must wonder what it would be like to forget all that.

[Open air party]

(A band plays, and a green woman dances sensuously)
OFFICER: Nice place you have here, Mister Pike.
(The dancer is -)
PIKE: Vina? ORION: Glistening green. Almost like secret dreams a bored ship captain might have.
OFFICER: Funny how they are on this planet. They actually like being taken advantage of. Suppose you had all of space to choose from, and this was only one small sample.
ORION: Wouldn't you say it was worth a man's soul?
(Pike gets up and leaves. The door he walks through turns into a rock wall. Then Vina is there, holding a blazing torch)

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: We've located a magnetic field that seems to come from their underground generator.
GARISON: Could that be an illusion too?
ONE: Now, you all know the situation. We're hoping to transport down inside the Talosian community.
SPOCK: If our measurements and readings are an illusion also, one could find oneself materialised inside solid rock.
ONE: Nothing will be said if any volunteer wants to back out.
(Pitcairn energises but only Number One and Yeoman Colt dematerialise)
SPOCK: The women!

[Pike's cage]

ONE: Captain! Captain.
VINA: No! Let me finish!
ONE: But we were a party of six.
COLT: We were the only ones transported.
VINA: It's not fair. You don't need them.
PIKE: (grabbing Colt's laser pistol) They don't work.
ONE: They were fully charged when we left. It's dead. (communicator) I can't make a signal. What is it?
PIKE: Don't say anything. I'm filling my mind with a picture of beating their huge, misshapen heads to pulp, thoughts so primitive they black out everything else. I'm filling my mind with hate.
VINA: How long can you block your thoughts? A few minutes, an hour? How can that help?
COLT: Leave him alone.
VINA: He doesn't need you. He's already picked me.
COLT: Picked her? For what? I don't understand.
VINA: Now, there's a fine choice for intelligent offspring.
COLT: Offspring, as in children?
ONE: Offspring as in he's Adam. Is that it?
VINA: You're no better choice. They'd have more luck crossing him with a computer.
ONE: Well, shall we do a little time computation? There was a Vina listed on that expedition as an adult crewman. Now, adding eighteen years to your age then.
(The Magistrate approaches the cell)
VINA: It's not fair. I did what you asked.
MAGISTRATE: Since you resist the present specimen, you now have a selection.
PIKE: I'll break out of this zoo somehow and get to you. Is your blood red like ours? I'm going to find out.
MAGISTRATE: Each of the two new specimens has qualities in her favour. The female you call Number One has the superior mind and would produce highly intelligent children. Although she seems to lack emotion, this is largely a pretence. She has often has fantasies involving you.
PIKE: All I want to do is get my hands on you. Can you read these thoughts? Images of hate, killing?
MAGISTRATE: The other new arrival has considered you unreachable but now is realising this has changed. The factors in her favour are youth and strength, plus unusually strong female drives.
PIKE: You'll find my thoughts more interesting. Thoughts so primitive you can't understand. Emotions so ugly (stricken by pain)
MAGISTRATE: Wrong thinking is punishable. Right thinking will be as quickly rewarded. You will find it an effective combination.
(Magistrate leaves)
ONE: Captain.
PIKE: No. No, don't help me. I have to concentrate. They can't read through hate.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Address intercraft.
GARISON: Open, sir.
SPOCK: This is the acting captain speaking. We have no choice now but to consider the safety of this vessel and the remainder of the crew. We're leaving. All decks prepare for hyperdrive. Time warp factor.
TYLER: Mister Spock, the ship's controls have gone dead.
(The lights go out)
SPOCK: Engine room!
GARISON: Open.
SPOCK: Mister Spock here. Switch to rockets. We're blasting out.
PITCAIRN [OC]: All systems are out, bridge. We've got nothing.
TYLER: There's nothing. Every system aboard is fading out.

[Pike's cell]

(The group are apparently dozing when the Magistrate opens the hatch to get the laser pistols Pike dropped there. He grabs him and pulls him into the cage, and starts to throttle him)
PIKE: Now you hold still, or I'll break your neck.
VINA: Don't hurt them. They don't mean to be evil.
PIKE: I've had some samples of how good they are.
(the Talosian appears to be a vicious monster)
PIKE: You stop this illusion, or I'll twist your head off. (it stops) All right, now you try one more illusion, you try anything at all, and I'll break your neck.
MAGISTRATE: Your ship. Release me or we'll destroy it.

{Bridge]

(The senior officers have taken the navigation console apart)
SPOCK: Nothing. But for the batteries we'd lose gravitation and oxygen.
TYLER: The computers!
(The monitor shows a montage of images - space capsules, the Moon, maps of Earth)
TYLER: I can't shut it off. It's running through our library. Tapes, micro-records, everything. It doesn't make sense.
SPOCK: Could be we've waited too long. It's collecting all the information stored in this fly. They've decided to swat us.

[Pike's cell]

VINA: He's not bluffing, Captain. With illusion they can make your crew work the wrong controls or push any button it takes to destroy your ship.
PIKE: I'm going to gamble you're too intelligent to kill for no reason at all.
(Pike hands the Magistrate over to Number One and picks up the laser pistols, firing them at the glass wall. Then he puts one to the Magistrate's head)
PIKE: On the other hand, I've got a reason. I'm willing to bet you've created an illusion this laser is empty. I think it just blasted a hole in that window and you're keep us from seeing it. You want me to test my theory out on your head?
(There is a hole in the window)
COLT: Captain.
(They all leave through the hole and get into the elevator to the surface)

[Planet surface]

(The top of the rocky knoll is split apart)
PIKE: Make contact, Number One.
ONE: They kept us from seeing this, too. We cut through and never knew it. Captain.
(The communicator isn't working)
MAGISTRATE: As you see, your attempt to escape accomplished nothing.
PIKE: I want to contact our ship.
MAGISTRATE: You are now on the surface where we wished you to be. With the female of your choice, you will now begin carefully guided lives.
PIKE: And start by burying you?
MAGISTRATE: That is your choice. To help you reclaim the planet's surface, our zoological gardens will furnish a variety of plant life.
PIKE: Look, I'll make a deal with you. You and your life for the lives of these two Earth women.
MAGISTRATE: Since our lifespan is many times yours, we have time to evolve you into a society trained to serve as artisans, technicians
PIKE: Do you understand what I'm saying? You give me proof that our ship is all right, send these two back, and I'll stay with Vina.
(Number One sets her laser pistol to overload)
ONE: It's wrong to create a whole race of humans to live as slaves.
MAGISTRATE: Is this a deception? Do you intend to destroy yourselves?
VINA: What is that?
PIKE: The weapon is building up an overload. A force chamber explosion. You still have time to get underground. Well, go on! (pushes Vina away) Just to show you how primitive humans are, Talosian, you go with her.
VINA: If, if you all think it's this important, then I can't go either. I suppose if they have one human being, they might try again.
(More Talosians arrive)
PIKE: Wait.
(Number One turns off the pistol)
TALOSIAN: Their method of storing records is crude and consumed much time. Are you prepared to assimilate it?
(The Magistrate nods, and the veins on his head throb)
MAGISTRATE: We had not believed this possible. The customs and history of your race show a unique hatred of captivity. Even when it's pleasant and benevolent, you prefer death. This makes you too violent and dangerous a species for our needs.
VINA: He means that they can't use you. You're free to go back to the ship.
PIKE: And that's it? No apologies? You captured one of us, threatened all of us.
TALOSIAN: Your unsuitability has condemned the Talosian race to eventual death. Is this not sufficient?
MAGISTRATE: No other specimen has shown your adaptability. You were our last hope.
PIKE: But wouldn't some form of trade, mutual co-operation?
MAGISTRATE: Your race would learn our power of illusion and destroy itself too.
ONE: Captain, we have transporter control now.
PIKE: Let's get back to the ship.
VINA: I can't. I can't go with you.

[Transporter room]

PITCAIRN: Sir, it just came on. We can't shut the power off.
SPOCK: Mister Spock here.
TYLER [OC]: All power has come on, Mister Spock. The helm is answering to control.
(The transporter platforms light up and first Colt, then Number One are beamed aboard)
GARISON: The captain?

[Planet surface]

(Vina changes into a scarred, misshapen older woman)
VINA: You see why I can't go with you.
MAGISTRATE: This is the female's true appearance.
VINA: They found me in the wreckage, dying. A lump of flesh. They rebuilt me. Everything works. But they had never seen a human. They had no guide for putting me back together.
MAGISTRATE: It was necessary to convince you her desire to stay is an honest one.
PIKE: You'll give her back her illusion of beauty?
MAGISTRATE: And more.
(Beautiful Vina and happy Pike go up the slope and into the elevator)
MAGISTRATE: She has an illusion and you have reality. May you find your way as pleasant.

[Transporter room]

PITCAIRN: Mister Spock, the system is coming on again.
(Pike is beamed aboard)
COLT: What's happened to Vina?
ONE: Isn't she coming with us?
PIKE: No. No, and I agreed with her reasons.

[Bridge]

(Pike, Number One and Spock enter)
BOYCE: Hold on a minute.
PIKE: Oh, I feel fine, just fine.
BOYCE: You look a hundred percent better.
PIKE: You recommended a rest, a change of pace, didn't you? I've even been home. Does that make you happy?
(He bumps into Colt again)
PIKE: Yeoman.
COLT: Yes, sir.
PIKE: I thought I told you that when I'm on the bridge I
(She hands him a clip-board stuffed with papers for his signature)
PIKE: Oh. Oh yes. The reports. Thank you.
COLT: Sir, I was wondering. Just curious. Who would have been Eve?
ONE: Yeoman! You've delivered your report.
COLT: Yes, ma'am. Yes, sir.
TYLER: Eve, sir? Yes, sir.
BOYCE: Eve as in Adam?
PIKE: As in all ship's doctors are dirty old men. What are we running here, a cadet ship, Number One? Are we ready or not?
ONE: All decks show ready, sir.
PIKE: Engage.
[Planet surface outside building]

KIRK: Shall we pick some flowers, Doctor? When a man visits an old girlfriend she usually expects something like that.
MCCOY: Is that how you get girls to like you, by bribing them? There doesn't seem to be anybody around, does there.
KIRK: They'll be along. You rushed us down ten minutes early. (enter building)

[Crater's home]

KIRK: Professor Crater? Professor? Mrs. Crater? Nervous, Dr. McCoy?
MCCOY: Yeah, a little bit, I guess. You see, we walked out of each other's lives ten years ago. She married Crater, and for all I know she may have forgotten me completely. Of all the bonehead ideas, Jim, how'd I let myself in for things like this?
NANCY: (singing outside, then enters) Leonard!
MCCOY: Nancy.
NANCY: Hello.
MCCOY: It's good to see you.
NANCY: Let me look at you.
MCCOY: You haven't aged a day. Oh, this is Captain Jim Kirk of the Enterprise.
KIRK: (seeing an older woman than McCoy does) Mrs. Crater. I've heard a great deal about you.
NANCY: All good, I hope.
MCCOY: And Crewman Darnell.
DARNELL: (seeing a young blonde) How do you do, ma'am?
KIRK: Something wrong, Darnell?
DARNELL: Excuse me sir but, ma'am, if I didn't know better I would swear you were someone I left behind on Wrigley's Pleasure Planet. It's funny, you're exactly like a girl that
MCCOY: A little less mouth, Darnell.
DARNELL: I'm sorry. I didn't mean to. I mean, I know it's impossible, of course.
KIRK: Why don't you step outside, Darnell.
DARNELL: Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.
KIRK: Maybe I'll step outside, too.
NANCY: What? And let Plum examine me all alone?
KIRK: Plum?
MCCOY: Plum.
NANCY: A nickname I gave Leonard when we were very young.
MCCOY: I'll, er, I'll wait for the professor and I'll catch you both at once.
NANCY: I'd better go get Bob. Every time he starts digging he forgets time, sleep, food, everything. Be back in a minute.

[Planet surface outside building]

BLONDE NANCY: It's quite warm here, isn't it? (encourages Darnell to follow her)

Captain's log, additional entry. Since our mission was routine, we had beamed down to the planet without suspicion. We were unaware each member of the landing party was seeing a different woman, a different Nancy Crater.

[Crater's home]

KIRK: Professor Crater, I'm Captain Kirk. This is
CRATER: The heroic Captain and the intrepid doctor cross interstellar space to preserve our health. Your sense of duty is overwhelming. Now will you please go back where you came from and tell whoever issues your orders to leave me and my wife alone. We need salt against the heat. Aside from that, we're doing very well, thank you.
MCCOY: I'm pleased you're doing well but I'm required to confirm that fact.
CRATER: Doubtless the good surgeon will enjoy prodding and poking us with his arcane machinery. Go away, we don't want you.
MCCOY: What you want is unimportant right now. What you will get is required by the book.
KIRK: Quote. All research personnel on alien planets are required to have their health certified by a starship surgeon at one year intervals. Like it or not, Professor, as commander of the starship, I'm required
CRATER: To show your gold braid to everyone. You love it, don't you.
KIRK: He's all yours, Plum. Doctor McCoy.
MCCOY: Sit down and breathe deeply, please.
CRATER: Did I hear you call him Doctor McCoy?
MCCOY: You did.
CRATER: McCoy. I've heard Nancy speak of a Doctor McCoy.
MCCOY: That's me. Didn't she mention I was here?
CRATER: You've seen Nancy?
KIRK: She went out to get you.
CRATER: You've seen her too? You were with the good Doctor?
KIRK: Yes. Why?
CRATER: Nothing. It's just that it gives me pleasure to know that she's gotten to see an old friend and has a chance for some company. It's different for me, I enjoy solitude. But for a woman. You understand, of course.
MCCOY: Well, it certainly hasn't aged her. She looks exactly as I knew her twelve years ago. Amazing, Jim. Like a girl of twenty five.
CRATER: Sorry. I'm sorry, Captain, sit down. I seem to have forgotten my manners.
KIRK: Quite all right.
MCCOY: I'm not joking, Jim. She hasn't aged a day. She doesn't have a grey hair on her head.
KIRK: She's got some grey, Bones. Excuse me, Professor, she's a handsome woman, yes, but hardly twenty five.
CRATER: You've seen my wife with the eyes of your past attachment, Doctor. I'm sure when Nancy lets, when you see her again she'll be a believable age.
MCCOY: Well at any rate she doesn't look a day over thirty.
CRATER: Genuine affection. I'm glad you still feel it for her. Leonard, isn't it? She's a fine woman.
MCCOY: Open your mouth.
CRATER: Why, I thought the machine
MCCOY: The machine is capable of almost anything but I'll still put my trust in a healthy set of tonsils. Now, open your mouth. (a woman screams, they dash out, Kirk with his phaser drawn)

[Planet surface]

(Darnell is lying on a rock, Nancy is standing by him)
KIRK: (removing a piece of plant from Darnell's mouth) McCoy.
MCCOY: Dead, Jim. Strange. A red mottling all over his face.
KIRK: What happened?
CRATER: What do you suppose happened, Captain? You beam down a crewman who doesn't know better than to eat an untested plant.
KIRK: I've just lost a crewman, Mrs. Crater. I want to know what happened.
NANCY: Well, I, I
MCCOY: Take it easy, Nancy. Just tell us what you know.
NANCY: I was just. I couldn't find Bob, and I was coming back. I crossed to your crewman. I wanted him to know I wasn't offended by the things he'd said back there. You remember. Then I, I noticed he had a Borgia plant in his hand. Before I could say anything, he, he'd taken a bite from it. He fell, his face all twisted, and. Leonard, you're looking at me like you don't believe me.
MCCOY: No, no, no, no, it's not that. It's something entirely different. Jim, I suppose we could complete these examinations later.
CRATER: We don't need an examination, you can see that. Perhaps you'd better take your man and
KIRK: We're well aware of our next duties, Professor. We'll complete your examinations tomorrow. Transporter room.
CREWMAN [OC]: Transporter room, Captain.
KIRK: Lock onto us. Three beaming up.
SCOTT [OC]: Locked onto you, Captain.
NANCY: Salt. You did ask them about more salt tablets?
CRATER: I'll take care of the provisioning, Nancy.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Miss Uhura, your last sub-space log contained an error in the frequencies column.
UHURA: Mister Spock, sometimes I think if I hear that word frequency once more, I'll cry.
SPOCK: Cry?
UHURA: I was just trying to start a conversation.
SPOCK: Well, since it is illogical for a communications officer to resent the word frequency, I have no answer.
UHURA: No, you have an answer. I'm an illogical woman who's beginning to feel too much a part of that communications console. Why don't you tell me I'm an attractive young lady, or ask me if I've ever been in love? Tell me how your planet Vulcan looks on a lazy evening when the moon is full.
SPOCK: Vulcan has no moon, Miss Uhura.
UHURA: I'm not surprised, Mister Spock.
CREWMAN [OC]: Transporter room to Bridge. Landing party returning. They report one death.
SPOCK: Bridge acknowledging.
UHURA: I don't believe it.
SPOCK: Explain.
UHURA: You explain. That means that somebody is dead and you just sit there. It could be Captain Kirk. He's the closest thing you have to a friend.
SPOCK: Lieutenant, my demonstration of concern will not change what happened. The transporter room is very well-manned and they will call if they need my assistance.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: She called it a Borgia plant.
KIRK: Something new to me.
SPOCK [OC]: Bridge to Dispensary.
KIRK: Go ahead, Mister Spock.
SPOCK [on monitor]: Borgia plant listed in library record tapes as carbon group three vegetation similar to Earth nightshade family. Alkaloid poison. Chemical structure common to class M planets. About the strange mottling on his facial skin surface. There is no reference to this symptom.
MCCOY: Hmm. Well then, this man wasn't poisoned.
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Spock. She said she saw him eat the plant.
MCCOY: She's mistaken. I know alkaloid poison, what to look for. There's not a trace of it in his body.
KIRK: There were bits of the plant in his mouth.
MCCOY: Jim, don't tell me my business. He could not have swallowed any. My instruments would have picked up any trace of it whatsoever.
KIRK: Then what kills a healthy man
MCCOY: I'll tell you something else. This man shouldn't be dead. I can't find anything wrong with him. According to all the tests he should just get up and walk away from here. I don't know. I'll have the tests double-checked. My eyes may be tricking me. I swear, Jim, when I first saw her she looked just as I'd known her ten years ago. Granted, for a moment I may have been looking at her through a romantic haze.
KIRK: How your lost love affects your vision, Doctor, doesn't interest me. I've lost a man. I want to know what killed him.
MCCOY: Yes, sir.

Captain's log, Stardate 1513.4. In orbit around planet M-113. One crewman, member of the landing party, dead by violence. Cause unknown, but we are certain the cause of death was not poison.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Message, Captain. Starship base on Caran 4 requesting explanation of our delay here, sir. Space Commander Dominguez says we have supplies he urgently needs.
Tell Jose he'll get his chili peppers when we get there. Tell him they're prime Mexican reds. I handpicked them myself, but he won't die if he goes a few more days without them. Got it?
UHURA: Got it, Captain.
KIRK: Well?
SPOCK: No mistake in our record tapes. Borgia plant. Its sole deadly property is alkaloid poison.
KIRK: And Professor Crater and wife?
SPOCK: Check out perfectly. They arrived here nearly five years ago. Visited by various vessels, made fairly heavy shipments out, of artefacts and reports. However, there has been a marked drop in shipments during the last year.
MCCOY [OC]: Dispensary to Captain.
KIRK: Kirk here.
MCCOY [OC]: We found something.
KIRK: What is it?
MCCOY: I'd rather not put it on the speaker.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Fascinating.
MCCOY: So improbable we almost didn't check it.
KIRK: What?
SPOCK: Sodium chloride. Not a trace of it.
MCCOY: This man has no salt in his body at all.
KIRK: Can you explain that, Doctor?
MCCOY: I can't, except that what we normally carry in our bodies is gone from his.
SPOCK: He would die almost instantly.
KIRK: How? There isn't a mark on his body.
MCCOY: Except the red rings on his face.
KIRK: You called that skin mottling.
MCCOY: I thought it was, sir. Another error on my part.
KIRK: I'm not counting them, Bones. Are you in the mood for an apology?
MCCOY: Oh, forget it. I probably was mooning over her. I should have been thinking about my job.
KIRK: Perhaps you were. Both Nancy and Crater went out of their way to mention one item they needed.
MCCOY: Salt tablets.
KIRK: Mister Spock, outfit a landing party. We're beaming down with some questions.

[Crater's home]

CRATER: One might think that you had more important duties than harassing people, Captain.
KIRK: I have, Professor. Believe me, I have. Where is Mrs. Crater? I want to talk to her, too.
CRATER: Captain, you can't just beam down here and bully us, and interfere with our work.
KIRK: Mrs. Crater. I won't ask again.
CRATER: Possibly at the other diggings. We don't keep military logs
KIRK: Green, find her.
GREEN: Yes, sir. (leaves)
KIRK: Mister Spock.
SPOCK [OC]: Standing by.
KIRK: Sturgeon, transport a sample of the plant to Mister Spock. We'll check if it's actually the Borgia plant or something we don't understand. (Sturgeon leaves) You got that, Mister Spock?
SPOCK [OC]: Complete analysis.
CRATER: Captain, considering the inescapable fact that you are a trespasser on my planet
KIRK: Your complaint is noted, sir. Look, something we don't understand killed one of my men. It could prove to be a danger to you and Mrs. Crater, too.
CRATER: We've been here for almost five years. If there were anything hostile here we would know about it, wouldn't we?
KIRK: Bones, tell the professor what the autopsy revealed.
MCCOY: Our crewman died of salt depletion. Sudden, total loss of it. Medically impossible by any standards.
KIRK: And by coincidence, both you and Mrs. Crater requested salt tablets.
CRATER: And your esteemed physician cannot explain our need for salt tablets?
KIRK: We're all aware of the need for salt on a hot and arid planet like this, Professor, but it's a mystery, and I don't like mysteries. They give me a bellyache and I've got a beauty right now.
CRATER: (opening storage box) Nancy and I started with twenty five pounds. This is what we have left. (a few tablets at the bottom of a jar) Now what is so mysterious about that?
MCCOY: (checking tablets) Salt.
KIRK: One of the missions of the Enterprise is to protect human life in places like this. I'm going to have to ask you and Mrs. Crater to stay aboard my ship until we find out what killed that crewman.
CRATER: But you can't do that.
KIRK: But I can, Professor.
How? You've been here five years. Will a couple of days make a difference? Mister Spock.
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here.
KIRK: Arrange quarters for Professor and Mrs. Crater. Did you get the plant analysis?
SPOCK [OC]: It is the Borgia variety, Captain. Could not have caused Darnell's death.
MCCOY: Jim, he's run off.


(Crater finds Sturgeon's body)
CRATER: Nancy! You! Salt! I've got salt! Smell it! Smell it, Nancy!
(Nancy is kneeling by Green's body. She stands at the call)
KIRK [OC]: Professor Crater! Professor Crater!
MCCOY [OC]: Professor Crater!
KIRK: Professor Crater! Professor! Professor!
MCCOY: Jim! Jim, it's Sturgeon. He's dead.
KIRK: We'd better locate Crewman Green. Green! Green! Crewman Green, report! Green!
(Nancy changes into Green)
MCCOY: Crewman Green, report! Green! Green, where are you? Could it be Crater? He came this way.
KIRK: I don't know. Green! (Green arrives) Did you see this?
GREEN: Yes, sir. Sturgeon was dead when I found him. I was circling to find whatever it was.
MCCOY: Same red rings on his face. Have you seen Nancy, Mrs. Crater?
GREEN: No, sir. I checked all through the ruins.
MCCOY: I'm worried about her, Jim. She's not at the quarters, she's not at the diggings. She could be in trouble. Nancy!
KIRK: Crater!
MCCOY: Nancy, it's Leonard!
KIRK: We're beaming aboard the ship, Doctor.
MCCOY: You can't leave her!
KIRK: We can't search this whole planet on foot.
MCCOY: Jim!
KIRK: You could learn something from Mister Spock, Doctor. Stop thinking with your glands. We've equipment aboard the Enterprise that could pinpoint a match lit anywhere on this planet, or the heat of a body. Transporter room, Kirk speaking. Three to beam up.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Kirk to Bridge.
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here.
KIRK: Break out the surface search equipment. I want co-ordinates on two people.
SPOCK [OC]: Acknowledged.
KIRK: There's a body down there. Sturgeon.
TRANSPORTER OPERATOR: We'll bring him home, sir.
KIRK: You could use some sleep, Bones.
MCCOY: All right, Jim.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Bridge.

[Corridor]

RAND: Oh, Green, what went on down there? (he reaches for the salt cellar) Who do you think you are?
(they enter turbolift)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Something odd, Captain. You said two people.
KIRK: Professor and Nancy Crater.
SPOCK: We get a reading on only one person, probably Crater. He's circling as if searching for something.
KIRK: Expand search radius.
SPOCK: Yes, sir.

[Corridor]

(Green is following Rand)
RAND: Why don't you go chase an asteroid?
REDSHIRT: Hey, Janice, is that for me?
RAND: Don't you wish it was?
BLUESHIRT: How about that?
REDSHIRT: Yeah, how'd you like to have her as your personal yeoman?

[Life Sciences Section - Botany department]

RAND: Where are you, Sulu?
SULU: In here feeding the weepers, Janice.
RAND: I've got your tray.
SULU: May the Great Bird of the Galaxy bless your planet.
RAND: Thank you. Hello, Beauregard. How are you today, darling?
SULU: Her name's Gertrude.
RAND: No, it's a he plant. A girl can tell.
SULU: Why do people have to call inanimate objects she, like she's a fast ship.
RAND: He is not an inanimate object. He's so animate he makes me nervous. In fact, I keep expecting one of these plants of yours to grab me.
SULU: Hello, Green.
RAND: He's not talking today. You been nipping saurian brandy or something?
(Beauregard starts screeching and slithers down into it's stem. Green rushes out)
SULU: (stroking plant) Take it easy. Calm down. Very sensitive.
RAND: He's the real spook. Suppose he's going space happy or something?

[Corridor]

UHURA (to crewmen) The door to my quarters still rattles when it opens. Would you stop by and see if you can do something about it? Thanks, Bobby. (Green changes into African crewman) Crewman, do I know you?
CREWMAN: In a way, ma'am. You were just thinking of someone like me. I'm guessing of course, but you do look a little lonely.
UHURA: I see. So naturally, when I'm lonely I think of you.
CREWMAN: Ina cuvanea mwanamke turee.
UHURA: Una kafeeri Hur. You're Swahili?
KIRK [OC]: Lieutenant Uhura to the Bridge. (the crewman begins to reach for her face) Lieutenant Uhura to the Bridge.
RAND: I'd better get this tray back. Bye, Beauregard.
SULU: Wait a minute, I'll walk along.
KIRK [OC]: Lieutenant Uhura, report to the Bridge.
UHURA: Lieutenant Uhura. On my way, sir.

[McCoy's quarters]

MCCOY: McCoy to Bridge. Captain there?
KIRK [on monitor]: Kirk here. Nothing to report, Doctor. We haven't located Mrs. Crater. What's the matter, can't you sleep?
MCCOY: Nope.
KIRK [on monitor]: Try taking one of those red pills you gave me last week. You'll sleep.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: The simple fact is unless there's something seriously wrong with the ship's equipment, there's only one person within a one hundred mile circle.
KIRK: All right. We'll triangulate on him. We'll let Professor Crater explain what happened to his wife. (to Uhura) Remember my instructions, Lieutenant. Keep a tight fix on us. If we let out a yell I want an armed party down there before the echo dies.
UHURA: Yes, Captain.

[McCoy's quarters]

(Uhura's crewman has found McCoy's quarters, and transforms into Nancy)
MCCOY: Nancy. Well, come in. come in. I've been worried sick about you. I wonder why Jim didn't tell me he found you.
NANCY: I'm so happy to see you, Leonard. The others, they, I, I don't relate to them as much as you. You have such strong memories of me.
MCCOY: Well.
NANCY: You do care, don't you, Leonard? It makes me feel so, so safe.
MCCOY: Nancy, er
NANCY: My husband? I like your feelings better. Much stronger. But you're tired, You need to rest.
MCCOY: You're as bad as Jim Kirk. He's been telling me to take these.
NANCY: I think you should. I'll get you some water.

[Corridor]

(a crewman lies dead, with mottles on his face)
RAND: Look at his face!
SULU: Bridge. Sulu. Trouble on deck nine, section two. We need a medical team.

Captain's log, Stardate 1513.8. I am now certain that the violent death of my crewmen was caused by some strange life-form.

[McCoy's quarters]

MCCOY: (lying on bed) I was so worried. Your husband acting strange, crewmen dying.
NANCY: You're so tired, darling. Just rest now.
UHURA [OC]: Medical department alert. Doctors and medics acknowledge.
NANCY: It's nothing, dear. It's nothing. You just sleep. Nancy will take care of everything.
UHURA [OC]: Dr. McCoy to the Bridge. Dr. McCoy to the Bridge. (Nancy changes to McCoy) Dr. McCoy to the Bridge.

Captain's log, additional. Armed and able-bodied crewmen are not attacked and slaughtered this easily. Apparently, the killer can immobilize them as it approaches perhaps with some hypnotic or paralysing power. The answer lies with Professor Crater.

[Planet surface - ruins]

KIRK: Professor Crater.
CRATER: Go away! We don't want you here.
KIRK: We? Where's your wife, Professor? We're concerned about her.
CRATER: I'm armed. Go away.
KIRK: Where's your wife, Professor?
CRATER: She's no concern of yours.
KIRK: We're worried about her safety. Aren't you? Professor, you're a reasonable man, let me (comm. beep) Kirk here.
SULU [OC]: Casualty, Captain. Barnhart was found dead on deck nine. Same symptoms.
SPOCK: Spock cutting in, Captain. Something here, through the arches to your left.
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Sulu. Spock has something.
SPOCK: Green.
KIRK: He beamed up to the ship with us.
SPOCK: Or something did.
KIRK: Enterprise from Kirk.
SULU [OC]: Bridge. Sulu.
KIRK: You have an intruder aboard. Could be masquerading as Crewman Green. General quarters, security condition three.
SULU [OC]: GQ security three, sir.

[Corridor]

SULU [OC]: General quarters three. Intruder alert. GQ three. Intruder alert. General quarters three. Intruder alert. GQ three. Intruder alert.
UHURA [OC]: Reporting GQ three secure, Captain. Do you require assistance there?
SPOCK: Crater knows the creature. If we could take him alive.
KIRK: Negative, Lieutenant, but keep locked in on us. Kirk out. Let's get him. (phaser fire)
CRATER: We don't want you here! We're happy alone! I'll kill to stay alone. You hear that, Kirk? Or you'll have to kill me. II don't care either way.
SPOCK: Obviously, taking him alive is going to be difficult.
KIRK: Set your phaser on one quarter. I'll leave mine on stun.
SPOCK: Why risk your life for his?
KIRK: He's not trying to kill us, he's trying to frighten us, and he's doing a pretty good job.

[Bridge]

SULU: GQ three now secured except for decks five, seven, and ten. Come in, please.
UHURA: He's not in supply and maintenance.
SULU: Go to Engineering now. Run through file photos of the crewmen there.
UHURA: Check.
SECURITY [OC]: Deck five reporting. Crewman Green is not in his quarters. No one has seen him
SULU: Keep in mind if you find him, he's not Crewman Green. The Captain reports Crewman Green is dead.
RAND: And he, or rather it, followed me. I thought there was something twitchy about him.
SULU: He, whatever, was probably your crewman, too, Lieutenant.
UHURA: He must have been it. You know, I would have remembered a crewman like him.
MCCOY: The creature leading you a merry chase, Mister Sulu?
SULU: The creature?
MCCOY: Or whatever it is that's killing the crewmen. Perhaps I can help. Fill me in.

[Planet surface - ruins]

(Spock and Kirk are circling around Crater from different directions)
KIRK: Set.
SPOCK: Acknowledged. Crater! (Kirk fires his phaser)
KIRK: Your wife, Professor. Where is she? Your wife, Professor. Where is she?
CRATER: She was the last of her kind.
KIRK: The last of her kind?
CRATER: The last of its kind. Earth history, remember? Like the passenger pigeon or buffalo. Ooh! I feel strange.
KIRK: Just stunned. You'll be able to think in a minute.
SPOCK: The Earth buffalo. What about it?
CRATER: Once there were millions of them prairies black with them. One herd covered three whole states, and when they moved they were like thunder.
SPOCK: And now they're gone. Is that what you mean?
CRATER: Like the creatures here. Once there were millions of them. Now there's one left. Nancy understood.
SPOCK: Always in the past tense.
KIRK: Where's your wife? Where is she now?
CRATER: Dead. Buried up on the hill. It killed her.
KIRK: When?
CRATER: Oh, a year, or was it two?
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.
SULU [OC]: Bridge to Captain. Sulu here.
KIRK: It's definite, Mister Sulu. The intruder can assume any shape. Crewmen, you, myself, anyone. Do you understand?
SULU [OC]: Affirmative, Captain.
KIRK: Go to GQ four.
SULU [OC]: General quarters four, Captain.
CRATER: The creature was trying to survive. It has that right, doesn't it?
KIRK: Kirk to transporter room. Three to beam up.
CRATER: They needed salt to stay alive. There was no more salt. It's the last one. The buffalo. There is no difference.
KIRK: There's one, Professor. Your creature is killing my people.

Captain's log, continuing. The Enterprise has been invaded by a creature capable of assuming any form, and with the capacity to paralyse and draw the life from any one of us.

[Corridor]

SULU [OC]: Deck five, section three. Deck five, section three. Report.
SECURITY: Security 3 A here. 3 B in sight.

[Briefing room]

UHURA: Negative, Captain. I've checked every face on this vessel. It was not a crewman I saw.
KIRK: Yeoman Rand, how long was this Green with you?
RAND: As long as he, it thought it could get to the salt on my tray, sir.
KIRK: Mister Spock?
SPOCK: Supplies of salt have been set out as bait at all decks and engineering levels, Captain. However, no one or nothing has approached them as yet.
KIRK: Dr. McCoy?
MCCOY: Yes?
KIRK: Medical department report, Doctor.
MCCOY: Oh. Well, we could offer it salt without tricks. There's no reason for it to attack us.
SPOCK: Your attitude is laudable, Doctor, but your reasoning is reckless.
CRATER: (eyeing McCoy carefully) The creature is not dangerous when fed.
MCCOY: No, it's simply trying to survive by using its natural ability to take other forms.
CRATER: The way the chameleon uses its protective colouring, an ability retained no doubt from its primitive state, the way we have retained our incisor teeth. They were once fangs. Certain of our muscles were designed for chase. It uses its ability the way we would use our muscles and teeth if necessary, to stay alive.
MCCOY: And like us, it's an intelligent animal. There's no need to hunt it down.
SPOCK: A very interesting hypothesis, Doctor. Briefing room.
SULU [on monitor] All the halls sealed off. All weapons accounted for and locked away. Security four in effect on every level. Still no lead on intruder.
KIRK: Thank you, Lieutenant. Continue the search. Crater, we don't know who or what we're looking for. We need your help, and now.
CRATER: I demanded, I even begged that you get off my planet.
KIRK: Can you recognise this thing When you see it? Professor, I'll forego charges up to this point but this creature's aboard my ship and I'll have it, or I'll have your skin, or both. Now where is it?
CRATER: I loved Nancy very much. Few women like my Nancy. She lives in my dreams. She walks and sings in them.
KIRK: And it becomes Nancy for you.
CRATER: Not because of tricks. It doesn't trick me. It needs love as much as it needs salt. When it killed Nancy, I almost destroyed it but, it isn't just a beast. It is intelligent and the last of its kind.
KIRK: You bleed too much, Crater. You're too pure and noble. Are you saving the last of its kind or has this become Crater's private heaven, here on this planet? This thing becomes wife, lover, best friend, wise man, fool, idol, slave. It isn't a bad life to have everyone in the universe at your beck and call, and you win all the arguments.
CRATER: You don't understand.
KIRK: Have you learned to see this thing in whatever form it becomes?
CRATER: Yes.
KIRK: Are you going to help us find it?
CRATER: Sorry, I can't.
SPOCK: Recommend we use truth serum, Captain.
KIRK: Doctor?
MCCOY: Well, I resist using it, but in this case the professor will give us the truth.
KIRK: Take him.
SPOCK: I'll accompany you, Doctor.
MCCOY: Oh, yes. Of course.

[Corridor]

CREWMAN [OC]: Captain Kirk to dispensary. Captain Kirk to dispensary.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: (on biobed) It wasn't McCoy. It was the creature. It hit me. Crater grabbed my phaser. I wondered about McCoy. Doubt had crossed my mind.
RAND: Captain. Professor Crater.
KIRK: Dead. But it had you, too.
SPOCK: Fortunately, my ancestors spawned in another ocean than yours did. My blood cells are quite different.

[McCoy's quarters]

NANCY: Leonard. Leonard, wake up. Please help me. Help me, Leonard. They're trying to kill me. Don't let them kill me!
MCCOY: Easy, easy. Nobodies going to
NANCY: But you must help me!
KIRK: Move aside, Bones.
MCCOY: What's going on here, Jim?
KIRK: She's not Nancy, Bones.
MCCOY: Are you insane?
KIRK: It killed four crewmen. Now Crater.
MCCOY: It?
KIRK: The creature. It kills. It needs salt to live. Bones, move aside.
MCCOY: No!
KIRK: My guess is she needs more. You want it, Nancy? Come and get it.
MCCOY: You're frightening her, Jim.
KIRK: Not fright. Hunger. Look at her.
NANCY: Leonard, if you love me, make him go away.
KIRK: Come on. You want this, Nancy? Come on Nancy. Come and get it. Come and get it. Here it is.
NANCY: Leonard, help me.
MCCOY: Stop it, Jim!
KIRK: McCoy, get out of the way!
MCCOY: Are you out of your mind?
KIRK: Get out of the way.
(McCoy and Kirk struggle for the phaser while Nancy grabs and eats the salt tablets. McCoy wins and is pushed away, then she transfixes Kirk and reaches for his face)
SPOCK: It's killing the Captain. Shoot it, Doctor, quickly!
MCCOY: No! No!
(They struggle for the phaser. Spock gets between Nancy and Kirk.)
SPOCK: It's killing the captain! Shoot, quick!
MCCOY: I won't shoot Nancy.
SPOCK: This is not Nancy. (hitting her repeatedly) If she were Nancy, could she take this?
MCCOY: Stop it! Stop it, Spock! Stop it! (Nancy sends Spock flying with one slap)
SPOCK: Is that Nancy, Doctor?
MCCOY: No. (she goes to Kirk again) No!
(She transforms into her natural state. Kirk screams, McCoy fires the phaser, she changes back into Nancy)
NANCY: Leonard. Leonard, no. Leonard, please.
MCCOY: Lord, forgive me.
(He fires again and she dies)
KIRK: I'm sorry, Bones.

[Bridge]

SULU: Ready to leave orbit, Captain.
SPOCK: Something wrong, Captain?
KIRK: I was thinking about the buffalo, Mister Spock. Warp one, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Warp one, sir. Leaving orbit.
KIRK: All right, Chief, begin materialisation. Captain Ramart, I'm Captain Kirk.
RAMART: This is my navigator Tom Nellis.
KIRK: How do you do?
NELLIS: How do you do?
RAMART: And this is our young castaway Charlie, Charlie Evans. His dossier.
KIRK: Mister Evans. We've heard a great deal about you. Welcome aboard.
RAMART: Wonderful boy, Charlie. Its been an honour having him aboard.
NELLIS: Why, it's been a great pleasure. The things that he's learned in the last
RAMART: Absolutely. To think this boy spent practically his whole life alone on that planet. Everyone killed, just a few microtapes to learn from.
CHARLIE: How many humans like me on this ship?
RAMART: Like a whole city in space, Charlie. Over four hundred in the crew of a starship, aren't there, Captain?
KIRK: Four hundred and twenty eight, to be exact. Is there anything we can do for you, Captain? Medical supplies, provisions?
CHARLIE: Hundreds. All human, like me. That's exciting. Is that the right word?
NELLIS: That's perfect. It's the exact word.
RAMART: You see. We'd like to keep Charlie with us, but with his closest living relatives on Colony Five and your vessel going that way, why
CHARLIE: I'd like to see your ship now. All of it. The people and everything.
KIRK: You keep interrupting, Mister Evans. That's considered wrong.
CHARLIE: I'm sorry.
KIRK: We have a large supply of entertainment tapes, gentlemen.
RAMART: No, we've a tight schedule to make, Captain. Just twenty of us, we're making out fine.
KIRK: This must be a space first. A transport ship that doesn't need anything?
RAMART: Nothing.
KIRK: Not even Sarian brandy?
RAMART: We're fine, thank you. Pleasant journey, Captain.
KIRK: Thank you. (the pair are beamed off)
KIRK: Yeoman Rand, this is Charles Evans. Show him to his quarters and drop his records off at Doctor McCoy's office, if you will.
RAND: Yes, sir. Come with me, please.
CHARLIE: Are you a girl? Is that a girl?
KIRK: That's a girl.

Captain's Log, star date 1533.7. We have taken aboard an unusual passenger for transport to Colony Alpha Five. Charles Evans, the sole survivor of a transport crash fourteen years ago. The child, alone from age three, has not only survived, but has grown to intelligent, healthy adolescence.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Tell me. The ship's supply of food concentrates couldn't have lasted fourteen years.
CHARLIE: After that I found other things to eat, just growing around.
MCCOY: And you learned to talk by just listening to the ship's tapes?
CHARLIE: The memory banks still worked. They talked to me, and I talked back.
MCCOY: You're four-oh.
CHARLIE: Four?
MCCOY: Four-oh. One hundred percent. Sound of wind and limb.
CHARLIE: That, that Captain. Kirk?
MCCOY: Yeah.
CHARLIE: Why does he call me Mister Evans?
MCCOY: Because that's your name.
CHARLIE: He's not, well, he isn't like Captain Ramart.
MCCOY: Well, no. Captain Kirk is one of a kind, Charlie.
CHARLIE: Do you like me?
MCCOY: Why not?
CHARLIE: Some, the other ship, they didn't like me. I tried. I'm trying to make people like me. I want them to like me.
MCCOY: Most seventeen year olds do. Come on, let's go. I'll show you to your quarters.

[Corridor]

CREWMAN 1: Hey, I'll put the equipment away. See you in the rec room, huh?
CREWMAN 2: You got a deal, friend. (slaps man on bottom)
CREWMAN 1: All right. (to Charlie) Hello.
CHARLIE: I brought you a present.
(A bottle of perfume.)
RAND: Oh, thank you. I really appreciate it, but, but I have to go. I'm on duty.
CHARLIE: Do you like that kind?
RAND: Yes, I, it's my favourite. Where did you get it? They don't have any in the ship's stores.
CHARLIE: It's a present.
RAND: I know, but where did? Gee, I'm late, Charlie. I really have to go.
CHARLIE: Can't you stay and talk a little while?
RAND: Look, I'm off duty at fourteen hundred. Why don't you join me in recreation room six, deck three.
CHARLIE: You got a deal, friend. (slaps her bottom)
RAND: Charlie!
CHARLIE: I thought. Don't be angry. I didn't, I wanted.
RAND: Charlie, you, you, you just don't go around slapping girls on the. It's okay, but er, just don't do it again.
CHARLIE: Don't be angry.
RAND: Look, why don't you tell Captain Kirk or Doctor McCoy what you did. They'll explain it to you. Okay?
CHARLIE: I will.
RAND: Okay.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: But tell me, what reason would he have to lie if there are Thasians?
SPOCK: That is a very intriguing question. Scanners show no disturbances in this quadrant, Captain.
KIRK: Good. Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock is working out
UHURA: Excuse me, Captain. Status report.
KIRK: Thank you. He's working out a training programme for Charlie Evans. Earth history, his own background, that sort of thing. I'd like you to give him the necessary medical orientation on the problems of, um, er, adolescence.
MCCOY: Well, don't you think it'd be better for a strong father image like you? He already looks up to you.
KIRK: The job is yours, Bones. Flattery will get you nowhere.
SPOCK: Doctor, didn't the boy make any reference at all to Thasians?
KIRK: Do you believe the legend, Mister Spock, that Thasians still exist on that planet in some form?
SPOCK: Charlie's very existence proves in fact there must be some intelligent form of life on Thasus. He could not possibly have survived alone. The ship's food concentrates would have been exhausted in a year or so.
MCCOY: By which time he would have been eating fruits, vegetables.
SPOCK: Probes of Thasus indicate very little edible plant life.
MCCOY: And probes have been known to be wrong, Spock.
MCCOY: Doctor, are you speaking scientifically or emotionally?
KIRK: Gentlemen, the fact is the boy is here and he's alive and he needs our help.
MCCOY: And he needs a guide and he needs a father image, Jim.
KIRK: Hmm. I'll depend on your astute abilities to supply him with that, or find him one.

[Recreation room]

(Spock is strumming his lyre when Uhura starts humming. Spock stops)
UHURA: I'm sorry. I did it again, didn't I.
(Spock smirks and Uhura begins playing again.)
UHURA: (singing) Oh, on the starship Enterprise There's someone who's in Satan's guise Whose devil ears and devil eyes Could rip your heart from you. At first, his look could hypnotise And then his touch would barbarise His alien love could victimise And rip your heart from you. And that's why female astronauts, Oh, very female astronauts Wait terrified and overwrought To find what he will do. Oh, girls in space, be wary, be wary, be wary, Girls in space, be wary. We know not what he'll do.
RAND: One more time!
UHURA: (singing) Now from a planet out in space, there comes a lad, not commonplace. A-seeking out his first embrace. He's saving it for you. Oh, Charlie's our new darling, our darling, our darling. Charlie's our new darling. We know not what he'll do.
(Uhura suddenly loses her voice and the lyre makes no sound.)
CHARLIE: Want to see something? (puts three cards face down) Turn them over. (They have pictures of Rand on them)
RAND: Well, how did you do that?
CHARLIE: Oh, I can do a lot of card tricks. One of the men on the Antares showed me.
(The cards return to normal)
RAND: I don't believe this!
(Hhe lays out the aces, throws one over his shoulder, then Rand removes it from her cleavage)

[Corridor]

KIRK: On Earth today, it's Thanksgiving. If the crew has to eat synthetic meat loaf, I want it to look like turkey. Charlie.
CHARLIE: Captain? I'm supposed to ask you something. Why shouldn't I? I don't know how to explain it.
KIRK: Say it right out, Charlie. That usually works.
CHARLIE: Well, in the corridor I saw. When Janice, when Yeoman Rand was. (slaps Kirk's bottom) I did that to her. She didn't like it. She said you'd explain it to me.
KIRK: Me. I see. Well, um, er, there are things you can do with a lady, er, Charlie, that you er. There's no right way to hit a woman. I mean, man to man is one thing, but, er, man and woman, er, it's, er, it's, er. Well it's, er, another thing. Do you understand?
CHARLIE: I don't know.
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk.
KIRK: Excuse me. Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: Captain Ramart of the Antares is on D channel.
KIRK: I'm on my way to the Bridge now.
CHARLIE: Can I come with you?
KIRK: I don't think so, Charlie.
CHARLIE: I won't get in the way.
KIRK: Okay.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Can you boost your power, Antares. We're barely reading your transmission.
RAMART [OC]: We're at full output, Enterprise. I must speak to Captain Kirk.
KIRK: Kirk here, Captain Ramart.
RAMART [OC]: Captain, we're just barely in range. I've got to warn
KIRK: Re-establish contact.
UHURA: They're not transmitting.
KIRK: Keep trying.
CHARLIE: It wasn't very well constructed.
KIRK: Sweep the area of the Antares transmission with our probe scanners, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Affirmative, Captain.
KIRK: You think something happened to the Antares, Charlie?
CHARLIE: I don't know.
SPOCK: Picking up some debris on our scanners, Captain.
KIRK: What about the Antares?
SPOCK: The debris is what's left of the Antares.
CHEF [OC]: Captain Kirk from ship's Galley.
KIRK: Kirk here.
CHEF [OC]: Sir, I put meat loaf in the ovens. There's turkeys in there now. Real turkeys.
KIRK: Chief, have you been
(Charlie laughs and leaves.)

Captain's Log, star date 1535.8. UESPA headquarters notified of the mysterious loss of science probe vessel Antares.

[Recreation room]

(Kirk and Spock are playing 3D chess)
SPOCK: Your mind is not on the game, Captain. Check. The Antares?
KIRK: A survey ship with twenty men aboard lost. No reason. Obviously, Captain Ramart was not aware of any trouble. I can't figure it.
SPOCK: My own concern is more immediate. The boy.
KIRK: I can usually follow you, Mister Spock, but this time?
SPOCK: He seemed to know what happened to the Antares before we did.
KIRK: I'd call it a pretty long reach for evidence, Mister Spock. Come in, Charlie.
SPOCK: And again, check.
KIRK: Checkmate.
SPOCK: Your illogical approach to chess does have its advantages on occasion, Captain.
KIRK: I prefer to call it inspired.
SPOCK: As you wish. At any rate, the game is yours.
KIRK: You play chess, Charlie?
CHARLIE: Oh, I, I watched them play on the Antares. Can I try?
KIRK: I place you in the hands of our chess master.
(Kirk gets up and leaves)
SPOCK: The principles of three-dimensional chess are basically mathematic, Charlie. You put the white here and the black on the secondary level.
CHARLIE: I know what it is. Let's play.
SPOCK: Very well. (just three moves later) That was a mistake, Charlie.
CHARLIE: No, it wasn't.
SPOCK: Checkmate.
CHARLIE: No, it isn't.
SPOCK: If you'll excuse me.
(Spock leaves. Charlie melts the white chess pieces.)

[Corridor]

RAND: Oh, Charlie. I was looking for you. I'd like you to meet Tina Lawton, Yeoman Third Class. Charlie Evans.
TINA: Hello, Charlie.
RAND: I thought you might enjoy meeting someone your own age.
CHARLIE: Can I talk to you, alone.
RAND: Charlie, Tina's
TINA: Excuse me. I must be wanted somewhere.
RAND: That was, that was rude and completely uncalled-for.
CHARLIE: But I don't need her. I want to talk to you.
RAND: That's no excuse. You'd better learn that right now. You have to live with people, Charlie. You're not alone anymore.
CHARLIE: But she's not as. She doesn't. She's not the same. Not like you. She's, she's just a girl. You're, you smell like a girl. All the other girls on the ship they, they look just like Tina. You're the only one who looks like you. You can understand, can't you? You know about being with somebody? Wanting to be? If I had the whole universe I'd give it to you. When I see you, I feel like I'm hungry all over. Hungry. Do you know how that feels?

[Bridge]

KIRK: What?
RAND: I wasn't sure I should, er, talk to you about this.
KIRK: Charlie's a seventeen year old boy.
RAND: Exactly, and he's
KIRK: I talked to him about the swat.
RAND: It's not that. Captain, I've seen the look before, and if something isn't done, sooner or later I'm going to have to hurt him. Tell him to leave me alone, and that wouldn't be good for him right now. You see, I'm his first crush, his first love, and his first
KIRK: Yes, Yeoman, I'll talk to him. I'll look into it.
RAND: Thank you, sir.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Come in, Charlie. Er, Charlie. Charlie, do you know anything about this chess piece? Did you notice anything peculiar in them when we were using them this afternoon?
CHARLIE: No, sir. Is that all?
KIRK: Er, no. No, no. Sit down. Charlie, being seventeen is more than how many years you've lived. It's a whole other thing. Doctor McCoy could probably explain the biological conditions. Well, let's, let's use a specific. Yeoman Rand is a woman.
CHARLIE: Oh, I won't hit her like that anymore.
KIRK: No, there's more to it than that.
CHARLIE: Everything I do or say is wrong. I'm in the way, I don't know the rules, and when I learn something and try to do it, suddenly I'm wrong!
KIRK: Now wait, wait.
CHARLIE: I don't know what I am or what I'm supposed to be, or even who. I don't know why I hurt so much inside all the time.
KIRK: You'll live, believe me. There's nothing wrong with you that hasn't gone wrong with every other human male since the model first came up.
CHARLIE: What if you care for someone? What do you do?
KIRK: You go slow. You be gentle. I mean, it's not a one-way street, you know, how you feel and that's all. It's how the girl feels, too. Don't press, Charlie. If the girl feels anything for you at all, you'll know it. Do you understand?
CHARLIE: You don't think Janice. You. She could love me!
KIRK: She's not the girl, Charlie. The years are wrong, for one thing, and there are other things.
CHARLIE: She can.
KIRK: No, Charlie.
CHARLIE: She is.
KIRK: No.
CHARLIE: But if I did what you said! If I was gentle!
KIRK: Charlie, there are a million things in this universe you can have and there are a million things you can't have. It's no fun facing that, but that's the way things are.
CHARLIE: Then what am I going to do?
KIRK: Hang on tight and survive. Everybody does.
CHARLIE: You don't.
KIRK: Everybody, Charlie. Me, too.
CHARLIE: I'm trying, but I don't know how.
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: You asked to be notified when we were to make our course adjustments, sir.
KIRK: Ask Mister Spock to see to it. Charlie, come on with me.

[Gymnasium]

KIRK: You've got to slap the floor to absorb the energy when you fall. Go ahead, try it. Like everything else, it takes practice, Charlie. Try again. Good. That's much better. Here, now I'll show you a shoulder roll. Try that.
CHARLIE: I don't want to do that.
KIRK: Well, it makes it hard to teach you
CHARLIE: I don't want to do that.
KIRK: All right, Charlie. Lesson's over for today.
CHARLIE: You were going to teach me how to fight.
KIRK: You have to learn to protect yourself in a fall before I do that. It's more than teaching you to defend yourself. Charlie, I want you to learn. Charlie? Hey, Sam, let me borrow you for a couple easy throws, all right?
SAM: Right.
KIRK: Watch this, Charlie. That wasn't so bad, was it? Now I'll throw him. Here we go, Sam.
CHARLIE: That looks hard.
SAM: Oh.
KIRK: Come on, Charlie. Try it. Attaboy. Let's go.
(Charlie can't make Kirk lose his balance. He gets dumped instead.)
CHARLIE: Oh!
(Sam laughs.)
KIRK: That wasn't so bad, was it?
CHARLIE: Don't laugh at me.
KIRK: Cool off.
CHARLIE: Don't laugh at me!
(Sam disappears.)
KIRK: Charlie.
CHARLIE: He shouldn't have done that. It's not nice to laugh at people.
KIRK: What happened to him, Charlie?
CHARLIE: He's gone.
KIRK: That's no answer.
CHARLIE: He's gone! I didn't mean to do that. He made me do it! He laughed at me.
CREWMAN [OC]: Bridge.
KIRK: Kirk here. Two men from security, on the double.
CREWMAN [OC]: Affirmative.
CHARLIE: What are you going to do to me?
KIRK: I'm confining you to quarters. I want you to stay there.
CHARLIE: I won't let them hurt me. I'll make them go away, too.
KIRK: They won't hurt you, Charlie. (security arrive) They'll take you to your quarters, Charlie. Go with them.
(Charlie knocks them down, one draws his phaser)
CHARLIE: No! (phaser disappears)
KIRK: Go to your quarters.
CHARLIE: He was going to hurt me.
KIRK: Go to your quarters or I'll pick you up and carry you there.
CHARLIE: I won't let you.
KIRK: That's your choice, Charlie.
CHARLIE: I won't let them hurt me.
KIRK: They won't hurt you.
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk.
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: Security reports that all phaser weapons have disappeared. Shall I repeat, Captain?
KIRK: No, I heard you. Have Doctor McCoy and Mister Spock meet me in the Briefing room.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Thasians have been referred to in our records as having the power to transmute objects or render substances invisible. It has generally been regarded as legend, but Charlie does seems to possess this same power.
KIRK: What are chances that Charlie's not an Earthling, that he's a Thasian?
MCCOY: No, I don't think so, not unless they're exactly like Earthlings. The development of his fingers and toes exactly matches the present development of mans on Earth.
SPOCK: Agreed.
KIRK: Well, whatever he is, we have some idea of the power he has. I know what I saw him do in the gymnasium.
MCCOY: Considering the effect a normal adolescent has on a home, Charlie with the power he has
KIRK: Short-tempered, because he doesn't understand. He needs, he wants. Nothing happens fast enough.
SPOCK: The probability is he's responsible for the destruction of the Antares, which would indicate a total disregard for human life.
KIRK: He doesn't understand what life is. He's a boy.
MCCOY: Well, what do we do with this boy, Jim? How do we keep him caged up?
KIRK: It goes even further than that, Doctor. We can't take him with us to Earth Colony Five. Can you imagine what he'd do in an open, normal environment. I've talked with him, listened. He's a boy in a man's body, trying to be an adult with the adolescence in him getting in the way.
SPOCK: And with a weapon in him which could destroy you or anyone, anywhere on this ship.
MCCOY: Well, for the moment he's stopped. You're an authority he respects, Jim.
SPOCK: Agreed. The struggle must remain between you and him. Should any of us interfere
(Charlie enters under guard)
CHARLIE: You wanted to ask me something, he said.
KIRK: Are you responsible for what happened to the Antares, Charlie?
CHARLIE: Why?
KIRK: Answer me.
CHARLIE: Yes. There was a warped baffle-plate on the shield of their energy pile. I made it go away. It would've blown up anyway. Well they weren't nice to me! They wanted to get rid of me. They don't now.
KIRK: What about us, Charlie?
CHARLIE: I don't know.
(Charlie leaves)
SPOCK: We're in the hands of an adolescent.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Lieutenant, raise Colony Five. I want to speak directly to the governor.
UHURA: Yes, sir.
KIRK: Navigator, lay a course away from Colony Five. Buy me some time.
NAVIGATOR: Yes, sir.
(Uhura's console short-circuits and she is thrown to the floor)
KIRK: Spock, get the doctor up here on the double. How bad is it?
UHURA: I think it's all right, sir. Sir, there's no reason for that panel to cross-circuit like that. I checked it over myself not fifteen minutes ago.
NAVIGATOR: Captain! I can't feed any course co-ordinates into the panel, sir. It rejects the course change.
PILOT: Helm doesn't respond either, sir. (Charlie enters)
KIRK: Mister Spock, you getting any readings on your instruments?
SPOCK: Yes, sir. There's a Tyger, tyger, burning bright in the forest of the night.
KIRK: Mister Spock.
SPOCK: I'm trying to Saturn rings around my head, down a road that's Martian red.
CHARLIE: You're trying to change course, Captain. You can't do that. I want to get to Colony Five as soon as we can.
KIRK: Release the transmitter.
CHARLIE: You don't need all that subspace chatter.
MCCOY: What's going on here? Spock calls me to the Bridge and goes into some kind of poetry.
KIRK: See to her, Doctor.
SPOCK: Once upon a midnight dreary while I pondered, weak and weary.
CHARLIE: Very nice, Mister Ears. Oh, I can make him do anything, whirl around, laugh, anything.
KIRK: That's enough, Charlie.
CHARLIE: Don't you think he's funny? I think he's funny.
KIRK: Leave my crew alone. (Charlie leaves)
SPOCK: Jim, he'll soon reach a point where he won't back down.
KIRK: I know.

[Corridor]

TINA: Charlie, what's wrong? (he turns her into an iguana)

[Rand's quarters]

CHARLIE: I have something for you. (a rose) Pink is your favourite, isn't it?
RAND: You don't walk into a room without knocking.
CHARLIE: Don't ever lock your door on me again, Janice. I love you.
RAND: I'll lock it when I please. What is it you want, anyway?
CHARLIE: You. I only want to be nice to you. I can give you anything. Just, just tell me.
RAND: (switching on comm.) I want you to get out.

[Bridge]

CHARLIE [OC]: But I only want to be nice to you.
RAND [OC]: Get out, Charlie.
KIRK: Spock.
RAND [OC]: I can't make it any plainer than that.

[Rand's quarters]

CHARLIE: I love you.
RAND: You don't know what the word means.
CHARLIE: Then show me.
RAND: No!
(Kirk and Spock rush in, Charlie knocks them down.)
RAND: Charlie!
(She slaps him, so he makes her disappear.)
CHARLIE: Why did she do that? I loved her, but she wasn't nice at all. What you did wasn't nice either, but I still need you, Captain. The Enterprise isn't quite like the Antares. Running the Antares was easy. You have to be nice. All right? (gives pain)
KIRK: Mister Spock?
SPOCK: My legs. They're broken.
KIRK: Let him go, too, Charlie.
CHARLIE: Why?
KIRK: Because I'm telling you to. Because you need me to run the ship, and I need him.
CHARLIE: If you try to hurt me again, I'll make a lot of people go away.
KIRK: And what about Yeoman Janice? Is she dead? Gone? Destroyed?
CHARLIE: I won't tell you. Growing up isn't so much. I'm not a man, and I can do anything! You can't.

[Corridor]

SPOCK: I'll activate the force field myself. You can return to your section.
CHARLIE: He had a mean look. I had to freeze him. I like happy looks. (enters room) Aren't you coming in?
(A forcefield activates in the doorway so Charlie makes the wall go away and freezes Kirk and Spock.)
CHARLIE: That wasn't nice. You'll be sorry. You wait, you'll see, you'll be sorry you did that. (unfreezes them) You will.
(He turns a young woman into an old one. Some crew are laughing in a room.)
CHARLIE: No. No laughing!
(The shadows freeze, then a woman with no face feels her way around the corner)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain Kirk, my instruments show we're receiving a message on subspace frequency three, ship-to-ship. I can't hear it, sir.
KIRK: Are you creating that message, Charlie, or you're blocking one that's coming in.
CHARLIE: It's my game, Captain. You have to find out. Like you said, that's how the game's played. You can have it now. I've locked on course for Colony Five again. (leaves)
KIRK: I've waited long enough. I'm going to take him on.
MCCOY: You don't have any special immunity. Not anymore. Pushed far enough, he'd send you off to oblivion, too.
KIRK: Mister Spock?
SPOCK: Out of the question.
KIRK: Wait a minute. Does Charlie? Now, wait, Spock, has he done away with anybody since he took over?
SPOCK: Not so far as we know.
KIRK: Maybe he can't. Could be he's overreached himself. It's a big ship. He's taken full control. If we could tax his power, turn on every device on the ship, every circuit, every light, all of it, and while he's fighting that, if I could distract him, maybe you could tranquilize him, keep him under until we reach Colony Five.
MCCOY: Risky, Jim.
KIRK: If we don't try, Doctor, he'll get rid of us anyway. There's no choice, gentlemen, none at all.
CHARLIE: I can make you all go away anytime I want to.
KIRK: Get out of my chair, Charlie, and get out of it now.
CHARLIE: I've got your ship, Captain.
KIRK: Maybe, Charlie, but I don't think you can handle any more. I think you've reached your limit and can't take on one more thing, but you're going to have to.
CHARLIE: I could've sent you away before, but I didn't.
KIRK: You're going to have to take me on.
CHARLIE: Don't make me do it now.
KIRK: You've got my ship, and I want it back. I want my crew back, whole, if I have to break your neck to do it! (throws him out of command chair)
CHARLIE: Don't push me. (gives Kirk pain) Sorry. I'm sorry but. Stop it. I said stop it!
SPOCK: Captain, the navigation console is clear now. The ship is answering the helm.
UHURA: Sir, something off our starboard bow. The message says they're from Thasus.
(Rand reappears)
CHARLIE: Oh.
RAND: Captain, how did I?
KIRK: It's all right, Yeoman.
SPOCK: Sensors show there something's there, Captain. Deflectors indicate no solid substance.
CHARLIE: No! Oh, no, please, don't let them take me. I can't live with them anymore. You're my friends. You said you were my friends, remember? When I came aboard! Please, I want to go home. Take me home.
THASIAN: I have taken my form from centuries ago, so that I may communicate with you. We did not realise until too late that the boy had gone, and we are saddened that his escape cost the lives of the first ship. We could not help them, but we have returned your people and your ship to you. Everything is as it was.
CHARLIE: I won't do it again. Please, I'll be good. I won't ever do it again. I'm sorry about the Antares. I'm sorry! When I came aboard! Please, I want to go with you. Help me!
KIRK: The boy belongs with his own kind.
THASIAN: That would be impossible.
KIRK: With training, we can teach him to live in our society. If he can be taught not to use his power
THASIAN: We gave him the power so he could live. He will use it, always, and he would destroy you and your kind, or you would be forced to destroy him to save yourselves.
KIRK: Is there nothing you can do?
THASIAN: We offer him life, and we will take care of him. Come, Charles.
CHARLIE: Oh, please, don't let them take me. I can't even touch them! Janice, they can't feel. Not like you! They don't love! Please, I want to stay. (fades away)
UHURA: Charlie's back on board the Thasian ship, sir. They signal they're leaving.
KIRK: It's all right, Yeoman. It's all over now.
SPOCK: Check out the life-support systems.
TORMOLEN: Right, sir. All life systems were off, sir.
SPOCK: Someone strangled this woman.
TORMOLEN The other four are back there.
SPOCK: Dead?
TORMOLEN: Right, sir.
SPOCK: Engineer at his post?
TORMOLEN He's frozen there like he didn't care.
SPOCK: The rest?
TORMOLEN: Well, better look for yourself, Mister Spock. One man was taking a shower fully clothed. (they split up, he takes off his glove to scratch his nose then puts it on the console. Something orange jumps onto his skin. Feeling the cold he puts the glove back on)
SPOCK: Be certain we expose ourselves to nothing. Spock here. Do you read, Enterprise?
KIRK [OC]: Kirk, affirmative.
SPOCK: All station personnel are dead.
KIRK [OC]: What caused it?
SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. It's like nothing we've dealt with before.

Captain's Log: Stardate 1704.2. The science party we were to have picked up has been found dead. Life support systems had been turned off. Station personnel, frozen to death. Conditions highly unusual. Meanwhile, we remain in orbit to complete our mission, close scientific measurement of the break-up of this planet.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: You received my signal, Mister Scott.
SCOTT: Yes, sir. Decontaminate.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Captain here.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Spock and Tormolen aboard, sir.

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: We're holding them in the chamber for decontamination.
KIRK: Better have Medicine look them over too. Tell Mister Spock I'll meet him there in ten minutes. Kirk out.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: You're fine, Joe. Up and out of there. Mister Spock? Your pulse is two hundred and forty two, your blood pressure is practically nonexistent, assuming you call that green stuff in your veins blood.
SPOCK: The readings are perfectly normal for me, Doctor, thank you, and as for my anatomy being different from yours, I am delighted. Captain.
KIRK: How are they?
MCCOY: They're fine, Jim.
TORMOLEN: Terrible, Captain. It was terrible. They were just sitting, like they didn't care. Whatever was happening, they didn't care. I keep wondering
KIRK: You keep wondering if man was meant to be out here. You keep wondering, you keep signing on. Any guesses, Mister Spock? Any idea of what happened down there?
SPOCK: I wish I could say, Captain. The circumstances were quite bizarre, however our record tapes may show us something.
TORMOLEN: Six dead. Six people dead.
KIRK: You'd better get some rest.
TORMOLEN: Yes, sir.
KIRK: Set up those tapes, Mister Spock. We'll see if the answers are there. (leaves with Spock)
CHAPEL: The lab status report, Doctor.
MCCOY: Oh, thank you, Christine.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Next tape, please.
RAND: Spectro-analysis tape, sir.
SPOCK: Thank you.
KIRK: Almost as though they were irrational, drugged. An engineer sitting there, apparently oblivious to everything. A woman strangled. A crewman with a phaser pistol in his hand.
SPOCK: He'd used the computer room as if it were an amusement gallery.
KIRK: And a fully clothed man frozen to death in a shower. If the image wasn't so ugly, it would be laughable. Not even a theory, gentlemen?
MCCOY: Definitely not drugs or intoxication. The bio-analysis on the tapes prove that conclusively.
SPOCK: It could be some form of space madness we've never heard of, but it would have to be caused by something. Our spectro-readings showed no contamination, no unusual elements present.
SCOTT: Or at least none your tricorders could register.
SPOCK: Instruments register only those things they're designed to register. Space still contains infinite unknowns.
KIRK: Earth Science needs the closest possible measurement of the breakup of this planet. To do this, we need the Enterprise in a critically tight orbit. Question. Could what happened down there to those people create any unusual danger to this vessel and crew?
SPOCK: We will need top efficiency, Captain. It'll be a tricky orbit. When the planet begins to go, there may be drastic changes in gravity, mass, magnetic field.
KIRK: The purpose of a briefing, gentlemen, is to get me answers based on your abilities and experience. In a critical orbit, there's no time for surprise.
SCOTT: Unless you people on the Bridge start taking showers with your clothes on, my engines can pull us out of anything. We'll be warping out of orbit within a half second of getting your command.
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Captain.
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: Scanners report sudden four degree shift in planet magnetic field. A change in mass also, sir.
SPOCK: It's beginning. Unusually rapid shifts.
KIRK: On our way, Lieutenant. I'll hold you to that half second, Scotty.

[Rec room]

SULU: Foil. It's a rapier. A thin sword.
RILEY: All right. So what do you do with it?
SULU: What do you mean, what do you do with it?
RILEY: Self-defence? Mayhem? Shish kebab?
SULU: You practice.
RILEY: For what?
SULU: Hi, Joey.
RILEY: Last week it was botany he was trying to get me interested in. I was supposed to be collecting leaves, plant specimens.
SULU: Your attitude is all wrong. Fencing tones the muscle, sharpens the eye, improves the posture. You tell him, Joey. Explain to him. Hey, Joey. You feeling all right?
TORMOLEN: Get off me! You don't rank me and you don't have pointed ears, so just get off my neck!
SULU: What's with him?
TORMOLEN: Nothing!
UHURA [OC]: Attention. Engine room on standby alert. All duty personnel to the Bridge. Acknowledge.
SULU: You sure you're all right now, Joe? We've got to leave.
TORMOLEN: We're all a bunch of hypocrites. Sticking our noses into something that we've got no business. What are we doing out here, anyway?
SULU: Take it easy, Joe.
TORMOLEN: We bring pain and trouble with us, leave men and women stuck out on freezing planets until they die. What are we doing out here in space? Good? What good? We're polluting it, destroying it. We've got no business being out here. No business.
RILEY: Take it easy, Joe.
SULU: Now calm down.
TORMOLEN: If a man was supposed to fly, he'd have wings. If he was supposed to be out in space, he wouldn't need air to breathe, wouldn't need life-support systems to keep him from freezing to death.
RILEY: Hey, Joey, put the knife down, huh?
SULU: You're all steamed up, Joe.
TORMOLEN: We don't belong here. It's not ours. Not ours. Destroying and watching. We don't belong. I don't belong. Six people died down there. Why do I deserve to live?
SULU: What are you doing, Joe?
RILEY: Hey, Joey, put the knife down. (grabs his arm) Don't be a fool.
TORMOLEN: Let go!
RILEY: You're just getting in a sweat about (three men struggle) Let me have the knife!
SULU: Joey, don't be a fool.
TORMOLEN: Let me go.
RILEY: Joey, give me the knife. (they fall to the floor, Tormolen gets stabbed in the stomach) Emergency! Rec room, area three nine. We need medics!

Captain's Log, supplemental. Our orbit tightening. Our need for efficiency, critical. But unknown to us, a totally new and unusual disease has been brought aboard.

[Bridge]

RILEY: Relative gravity increasing, sir.
KIRK: Compensate, Mister Riley.
RILEY: Yes, sir.
SULU: Magnetic field continuing to shift, sir. Planet continuing to shrink in mass.
KIRK: Mister Spock?
SPOCK: All scanning stations manned, all recorders functioning, Captain.
RILEY: Orbit steady now, sir.
SPOCK: Obviously, this planet is condensing more rapidly than expected. A valuable study. We may be seeing Earth's distant future. Before its sun went dark, this planet was remarkably similar to yours.
SULU: Helm answering nicely, Captain.
KIRK: Good.
UHURA: Communications status, Captain.
KIRK: Tormolen's record?
SPOCK: Psychiatric file, personality quotients.
KIRK: Was he trying to kill himself?
SPOCK: It's doubtful he meant to. He was confused, self-tortured.
KIRK: Doesn't sound like the man I know.
SPOCK: His capacity for self-doubt has always been rather high. What puzzles me is what brought it to the surface with so much force.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: His breathing rate is dropping, Doctor.
MCCOY: Compensate with the respirator. Stand by to close. Closing.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What is it?
SULU: Relative gravity increase, sir. Like the planet reached out and yanked at us.
KIRK: Compensate. (adjusts Riley's controls) Compensate.
RILEY: Orbit steady now, sir. May be a little nervous, I guess.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: This shouldn't be happening. This man should be getting stronger. You sure the respirator's functioning properly?
CHAPEL: Yes, Doctor.
MCCOY: Why is this man dying? Hypo.
CHAPEL: He's dead, Doctor.
MCCOY: The wounds were not that severe.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: This is McCoy. Captain Kirk to Sickbay.
KIRK: Uhura, monitor communications. Tell McCoy I'll be there when I can.
UHURA: Yes, sir.
SPOCK: Planet breakup is imminent, Captain. Shrinking in size at an increasing rate. As the planet continues to shrink in size, its surface moves away from us.
KIRK: Forcing us to spiral down to maintain the same distance from it.
SPOCK: Exactly. We must be prepared to respond instantly to any sudden change.
KIRK: Engine room from Bridge.
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, Captain.
KIRK: Tie into the helm, Scotty. If we should call for power, we'll want it fast.
SCOTT [OC]: No problem, sir. You'll have it.
SPOCK: Rate of compaction seems constant.
KIRK: Then I'll go see what the good doctor wants. Keep me informed of any change, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Acknowledged.
SULU: Don't know if it's this planet or what happened with Joe. I'm sweating like a bridegroom.
RILEY: Yeah, me too.
SULU: Hey, why don't you come down to the gym with me, Kevin m'lad?
RILEY: Now?
SULU: Why not? Light workout will take the edge off.
RILEY: Sulu, what about. Hey, Sulu, don't be a fool!

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Intestinal damage wasn't that severe. I got to him in plenty of time. That man should still be alive. The only reason he died, Jim, is he didn't want to live. He gave up.
KIRK: That's a supposition, Doctor, not a fact.
MCCOY: Well, that may be. Maybe. I've lost patients before, but not like that. Not Joe's kind. That kind of man doesn't give up.
KIRK: Coincidence? Maybe.
MCCOY: You mean that Joe was down on the planet surface and you're gonna ask me if it's connected.
KIRK: That's exactly what I was going to ask.
MCCOY: Jim, he was decontaminated. He's been medically checked. We've run every test we know for everything we know.
KIRK: That's not good enough.
MCCOY: Well, we're doing everything that's possible.
KIRK: Bones, I want the impossible checked out too.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Why isn't Mister Sulu at this station?
RILEY: Magnetic pull compensated for, sir. Orbit steady.
SPOCK: Take over here, Rand. (a male, not Janice)
RAND: Yes, sir.
SPOCK: You haven't answered my question. Where is Mister Sulu?
RILEY: Have no fear, O'Riley's here. One Irishman is worth ten thousand of you
SPOCK: You're relieved, Mister Riley. Lieutenant Uhura, take over this station.
UHURA: Yes, sir.
RILEY: Now that's what I like. Let the women work too. Universal suffrage.
SPOCK: Report to Sickbay, Mister Riley.
RILEY: Sickbay? Exactly where I was heading, sir.
SPOCK: Security. Mister Riley is headed for Sickbay. See to it he arrives. Captain Kirk to the Bridge.

[Sickbay]

RILEY: Where's Joe?
CHAPEL: Well.
RILEY: He died, didn't he.
CHAPEL: Yes.
RILEY: You know something? You have such lovely eyes, pretty lady. (touches her face)
CHAPEL: I know he was a friend of yours. This must be a terrible shock.
RILEY: You know what Joe's mistake was? He wasn't born an Irishman.

[Corridor]

SULU: (brandishing foil) Richelieu, beware! Stand. No farther. No escape for you. You either leave this bois bloodied, or with my blood on your swords. Cowards!

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Lieutenant Brent, relieve Miss Uhura.
BRENT: Yes, sir.
KIRK: What were their symptoms?
SPOCK: Nonviolent at this stage. Slightly disoriented. Riley seemed rather pleased with himself, as if he were
KIRK: Irrational, or drugged.
SPOCK: Precisely.
KIRK: Security, Lieutenant Uhura.
UHURA: Yes, sir.
KIRK: Both Sulu and Riley, locate and confine. I want every crewman who comes in contact with them medically checked.
UHURA: Sir, level two, corridor three reports a disturbance. Mister Sulu chasing crewmen with a sword.
KIRK: Put Security on it.
SPOCK: Fascinating. A pattern is developing. First, Tormolen. Hidden personality traits being forced to the surface. Then Riley, who fancies himself a descendant of Irish kings, and now Sulu, who is at heart a swashbuckler out of your 18th century.
KIRK: Present condition of Psi 2000.
SPOCK: Gravity pull increasing. We've shifted to two percent and should stabilise our position.
KIRK: Helmsman, stabilise position.
BRENT: Helm is not answering to control.
KIRK: Warp us out of here.
BRENT: No response from engines, sir.
KIRK: Impulse power then. Blast us out of this orbit.
BRENT: Impulse engines also dead, sir.
SPOCK: Engine room, we need power!
KIRK: Mister Scott, acknowledge. Our controls are dead. Take her.
SULU: Richelieu, at last.
KIRK: Sulu, put that (discovers that the point is sharp) put that thing away.
SULU: For honour, Queen, and France! (lunges)
UHURA: Sulu.
SULU: Ah.
UHURA: Sulu, give me that.
SULU: I'll protect you, fair maiden.
UHURA: Sorry, neither.
SULU: Foul Richelieu. (distracted by Uhura's escape, Kirk is able to grab Sulu and Spock does a neck-pinch)
KIRK: I'd like you to teach me that sometime.
SPOCK: Take D'Artagnon here to Sickbay.
KIRK: Scotty, we need power. Engine room, acknowledge!
RILEY [OC]: You rang, sir?
KIRK: Who's this?

[Engineering]

RILEY: This is Captain Kevin Thomas Riley of the starship Enterprise.

[Bridge]

RILEY [OC]: And who is this?
KIRK: This is Captain Kirk. Get out of the engine room, navigator. Where's Mister Scott?
RILEY [OC]: I've relieved Mister Scott of his duties. Now, attention, cooks. This is your captain speaking. I would like double portions of ice cream for the entire crew.
KIRK: Clear that tube, will you?
UHURA: Yes, sir.
RILEY [OC]: And now, your captain will render an ancient Irish favourite. (sings) I'll take you home again Kathleen
SPOCK: Captain. At our present rate of descent, we have less than twenty minutes before we enter planet atmosphere.
KIRK: And burn up. I know, Mister Spock.
RILEY [OC]: Wild and wide to where your heart

Captain's Log, stardate 1704.4. Ship out of control, spiraling down towards planet Psi 2000. We have nineteen minutes of life left without engine power or helm control.

[Corridor outside Engineering]

KIRK: How did Riley get in there?
SCOTT: He ran in, said you wanted us on the Bridge.
KIRK: He's cut off both helm and power.
SCOTT: And he shut the door behind us and locked off the mechanism.
KIRK: Can't you get to the auxiliary?
SCOTT: I can't. He's hooked everything through the main panel in there. Get up to my office and pull the plans for this bulkhead. The only way to get that door open is to cut through these wall circuits here.

[Engineering]

RILEY: (singing) The roses all have left your cheeks. I've watched them fade away and die

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Status reports, all sections.
UHURA: Mister Spock, a fight in the aft wardroom. Security reports incidents among the crewmen are increasing.
SPOCK: Go to Alert Baker two. Seal off main sections.
UHURA: All decks, alert system B two. Repeat, go to alert condition Baker two. Seal off all main sections. Stand by.
SPOCK: We're going to seal off, Captain, if we can minimise the spread of whatever this is.
KIRK: Continue the alert, Lieutenant.
UHURA: I can't, sir. He's cut off the alert channels.

[Engineering]

RILEY: Lieutenant Uhura,

[Bridge]

RILEY [OC]: You've interrupted my song. I'm sorry, but there'll be no ice cream for you tonight.
KIRK: Cut him off.
UHURA: I can't, sir. There's no way to do it.
RILEY [OC]: Attention, crew. This is Captain Riley. There will be a formal dance in the bowling alley at nineteen hundred hours tonight.
SPOCK: No way, Captain. He controls the main power panels. He can override any channel from down there. Seventeen minutes left, sir. (ship is jolted severely)
MCCOY: Sickbay to Bridge.
KIRK: Can you tie me in to the Sickbay?

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: I'm getting you, Jim. Look, can you keep this beast level? I've got Sulu tranquillized and we're running tests on him.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: So far there's nothing unusual in his bloodstream. Body functions seem normal.
KIRK: Riley's the immediate problem, Doctor. Is there any way, anything you can do to snap him out of it?

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Negative, until I can get a little farther on these tests.

[Bridge]

RILEY [OC]: This is Captain Riley. Crew, I have some additional orders.

[Engineering]

RILEY: In the future, all female crew members will wear their hair loosely, about their shoulders.

[Bridge]

RILEY [OC]: And use restraint in putting on your makeup. Women, women should not look made up. And now, crew, I will render Kathleen one more time!
KIRK: Please, not again.

[Engineering]

RILEY: (singing) I'll take you home again, Kathleen (meanwhile, Scott is working in a Jefferies tube) I've watched them fade away and die.

[Corridor]

SCOTT: I've set the jumpers up there. Stand by 'til I give you a signal.

[Engineering]

RILEY: And tears bedim your loving eyes. Oh,

[Corridor outside Engineering]

RILEY [OC]: I will take you home Kathleen.
SCOTT: Engineering to Bridge. Try your helm. You'll have enough power to keep her stabilised. Here, let's have a look at that.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Sixteen minutes left, Captain. We've stabilised, but still spiraling down.
UHURA: Emergency signal, Captain. Both decks four and five. Fights and disorders.
KIRK: Get me Sickbay.
UHURA: I have no intercom for Sickbay. He keeps switching channels on me.
KIRK: See what you can do to help Doctor McCoy. Better check Scotty first. Move him faster. He's got to get through that bulkhead.

[Corridor] SPOCK: Crewman, report to the lab!
MOODY: (singing) I'll take you home again Janice
SPOCK: What's going on?
RAND: Mister Spock, I'm trying to get to the Bridge and this crewman won't let me by.
SPOCK: Crewman, stand aside.
MOODY: Oh, yes, sir. I'll take you home again, Janice
RAND: Spock!

[Corridor outside Engineering]

SPOCK: Message from the captain.
SCOTT: Tell him I'm doing my best. If I cut through the wrong circuits
SPOCK: We have fourteen minutes left.
SCOTT: Even if we were under a full-scale attack I couldn't move any faster, not and maintain a safety factor.
SPOCK: At the rate you're proceeding, calculations show that you'll take a minute and a half more than we have left. You can't afford a safety factor.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Biopsy lab. Biopsy, where's my report? Biopsy, come in! Harrison, where's my report? I'm going to the lab.
CHAPEL: Sir?
MCCOY: Yes?
CHAPEL: The tranquillizer's wearing off.
MCCOY: Oh, good. I'll need him conscious now. Continue to examine him on circuits K one and three.
CHAPEL: Of course, Doctor.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Get him out of here.
RAND: I would have gotten here sooner, sir but Crewman Moody stopped me in the hallway.
KIRK: Take the helm.
RAND: Sir?
KIRK: Take the helm!
RAND: Yes, sir.
RILEY [OC]: Kathleen. And now, crew, one more time!
KIRK: At least try cutting him off!
UHURA: Sir, if I could cut him off, don't you think I
RILEY [OC]: I'll take you home again Kathleen
UHURA: Yes, sir. I'll keep trying.
KIRK: Sorry.
RILEY [OC]: Across the ocean wild and wide
KIRK: Scotty.
SCOTT [OC]: Engine room.
KIRK: We've got twelve minutes left. It'll take at least two or three of them to get the engines up to power now.
SCOTT [OC]: Then we'll make it, sir, if all goes right.
KIRK: Call me when you've cut through. I want to be there. Kirk out.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Nurse? Where is Doctor McCoy?
CHAPEL: He's gone to the lab.
SPOCK: Lab. Lab, respond please. Spock here. Lab!
CHAPEL: Mister Spock.
SPOCK: What is it, Nurse?
CHAPEL: Mister Spock, (takes his hand) the men from Vulcan treat their women strangely. At least, people say that, but you're part human too. I know you don't, you couldn't, hurt me, would you? I'm in love with you, Mister Spock. You, the human Mister Spock, the Vulcan Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Nurse, you should
CHAPEL: Christine, please. I see things, how honest you are. I know how you feel. You hide it, but you do have feeling. Oh, how we must hurt you, torture you.
SPOCK: I'm in control of my emotions.
CHAPEL: The others believe that. I don't. I love you. I don't know why, but I love you. I do love you just as you are. Oh, I love you.
SPOCK: I'm sorry.
UHURA [OC]: Captain is en route to Engineering, Mister Spock. Can you take the bridge? Acknowledge.
SPOCK: I am sorry.
CHAPEL: Christine.
SPOCK: Christine.
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Sickbay. Is Mister Spock there?

[Corridor]

UHURA [OC]: Mister Spock, would you please acknowledge? (Spock is struggling to keep his control)

[Corridor outside Engineering]

RILEY [OC]: I will take you home Kathleen
SCOTT: Almost ready, sir.
RILEY [OC]: To where your heart will feel no pain. When the fields are fresh and green. I'll take you to your home
SCOTT: - Ready, sir.
KIRK: (to Security) Follow me through. Put your phasers on stun. Don't fire unless he's armed. Go.

[Engineering]

RILEY: I'll take. No dance tonight.
KIRK: Get him out of here.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: (close to tears) I'm in control of my emotions. Control of my emotions. I am an officer. An officer. My duty. My duty is, is. My duty is to, to. Too late. I'm sorry. To. Two, four, six. Six. Six times six.

[Engineering]

KIRK: Scotty, we haven't got much time left.
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Captain.
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: Entering planet's outer atmosphere, sir.
SCOTT: Captain.
KIRK: What is it?
SCOTT: He's turned the engines off. Completely cold. It will take thirty minutes to regenerate them.
UHURA [OC]: Ship's outer skin is beginning to heat, Captain. Orbit plot shows we have about eight minutes left.
KIRK: Scotty!
SCOTT: I can't change the laws of physics. I've got to have thirty minutes.

Captain's Log, supplemental. The Enterprise, spiraling down out of control. Ship's outer skin heating rapidly due to friction with planet atmosphere.

SCOTT: Maybe twenty two, twenty three minutes.
KIRK: Scotty, we've got six.
SCOTT: Captain, you can't mix matter and antimatter cold. We'd go up in the biggest explosion since
KIRK: We can balance our engines into a controlled implosion.
SCOTT: That's only a theory. It's never been done.
KIRK: Bridge, have you found Mister Spock yet?
SCOTT: If you wanted to chance odds of ten thousand to one, maybe, assuming we had a row of computers working weeks on the right formula.
UHURA: Mister Spock is not on the Bridge, Captain.

[Bridge]

SULU: (waking up screaming) I was on the Bridge. Hey Doc, what am I doing here?
MCCOY: McCoy to Bio. We've isolated it. Start preparing serum.
HARRISON [OC]: What, Doctor?
MCCOY: It's water. Somehow on this planet, water's changed to a complex chain of molecules.
HARRISON [OC]: What's that, Doctor?
MCCOY: That's how we missed it. It passed from man to man through perspiration. Once in the bloodstream, it acts like alcohol, depresses the centres of judgment, self-control. Now get someone to the lab. Tell them the serum works, and start preparing more.
SULU: Doc, will you let me out of here? I'm all right.
MCCOY: Release him.

[Briefing room]

SCOTT [OC]: Engineers, man your stations. Engine rooms, report. Cycling station, report. This will be an emergency restart of engines.
KIRK: Where have you been? What happened?
SPOCK: My mother. I could never tell her I loved her.
KIRK: We've got four minutes, maybe five.
SPOCK: An Earth woman, living on a planet where love, emotion, is bad taste.
KIRK: We've got to risk a full-power start. The engines were shut off. No time to regenerate them. Do you hear me? We've got to risk a full-power start!
SPOCK: I respected my father, our customs. I was ashamed of my Earth blood. (Kirk slaps him) Jim, when I feel friendship for you, I'm ashamed.
KIRK: (hitting him repeatedly) You've got to hear me! We need a formula. We've got to risk implosion!
SPOCK: t's never been done! Understand, Jim. I've spent a whole lifetime learning to hide my feelings. (finally hits Kirk back)
KIRK: We've got to risk implosion. It's our only chance.
SPOCK: It's never been done.
KIRK: Don't tell me that again, Science Officer! It's a theory. It's possible. We may go up into the biggest ball of fire since the last sun in these parts exploded, but we've got to take that one in ten thousand chance!
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Captain. Engineer asked, did you find
KIRK: Yes, I found Mister Spock! I'm talking to Mister Spock, do you understand?
UHURA: Yes, sir. Three and a half minutes left, Captain.
KIRK: I've got it, the disease. Love. You're better off without it, and I'm better off without mine. This vessel, I give, she takes. She won't permit me my life. I've got to live hers.
SPOCK: Jim.
KIRK: I have a beautiful yeoman. Have you noticed her, Mister Spock? You're allowed to notice her. The Captain's not permitted
SPOCK: Jim, there is an intermix formula.
KIRK: Now I know why it's called she.
SPOCK: It's never been tested. It's a theoretical relationship between time and antimatter.
KIRK: Flesh woman to touch, to hold. A beach to walk on. A few days, no braid on my shoulder.
SCOTT: Captain.
KIRK: Scotty, help.
SPOCK: Stand by to intermix. I'll call the formulae in from the Bridge.
UHURA [OC]: Entering upper stratosphere, Captain. Skin temperature now twenty one hundred seventy degrees.
KIRK: I've got to hang on. Tell them. Clear the corridors, the turbo lift. Hurry. (Scott and Spock leave) Never lose you. Never.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Bridge.

[Bridge]

(McCoy gives Kirk a hypo as he leaves the turbolift)
KIRK: Engine room. We're set. Hyperbolic course.
BRENT: Direction, sir?
KIRK: Direction. Direction. It doesn't matter. The way we came.
SULU: Course laid in, sir.

[Engineering]

SPOCK: Fuel temperature.
SCOTT: Level.

[Bridge]

KIRK: (gazing at Janice) No beach to walk on.
RAND: Sir?

[Engineering]

SPOCK: Raise antimatter eight and forty degrees.
SCOTT: That'll take four minutes.
SPOCK: We haven't the time. We'll have to risk it. Bridge, we're ready.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Engage.
SPOCK: Are you all right, Jim?
KIRK: Are you? (Spock nods)
MCCOY: We found a cure. We're over that part of it.
SPOCK: Obviously, we were successful. The engines imploded.
SULU: Captain, my velocity gauge is off the scale.
SPOCK: Engine power went off the scale as well. We're now travelling faster than is possible for normal space.
KIRK: Checked elapsed time, Mister Sulu.
SULU: My chronometer's running backwards, sir.
KIRK: Time warp. We're going backward in time. Helm, begin reversing power. Slowly.
SULU: Helm answering, sir. Power reversing.
SPOCK: We're back to normal time, Captain.
KIRK: Engines ahead. Warp one.
SULU: Warp one, sir.
KIRK: Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Yes, sir.
KIRK: The time warp. What did it do to us?
SPOCK: We've regressed in time seventy one hours. It is now three days ago, Captain. We have three days to live over again.
KIRK: Not those last three days.
SPOCK: This does open some intriguing prospects, Captain. Since the formula worked, we can go back in time, to any planet, any era.
KIRK: We may risk it someday, Mister Spock. Resume course to our next destination, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Course laid in, sir.
KIRK: Steady as she goes.
KIRK: That should make a good specimen.
SULU: (holding pink animal with a horn) Temperature's starting to drop.
KIRK: Yeah. At night it gets down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero.
SULU: That's nippy.
FISHER: Hey!
KIRK: What happened?
FISHER: I fell off that bank, sir. Cut my hand.
KIRK: Let's see it. Get back to the ship. Report to the Sickbay.
FISHER: Yes, sir. Geological Technician Fisher. Ready to beam up.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Right. Locked onto you. Energise. Coadjutor engagement.
WILSON: What happened?
FISHER: I took a flop.
WILSON: Onto what?
FISHER: I don't know. Some kind of yellow ore.
SCOTT: Magnetic. Decontaminate that uniform.
FISHER: Yes, sir. (;eaves)
SCOTT: That acted like a burnout.
KIRK [OC]: Captain Kirk ready to beam up.
SCOTT: Just one moment, Captain. It checks out okay now. You better go get a synchronic meter so we can double-check.
WILSON: Yes sir.
SCOTT: All right, Captain. Locked onto you. (Kirk stumbles as he leaves the platform) Are you all right, Captain?
KIRK: Yes, I'm all right. Just a little dizzy.
SCOTT: Let me give you a hand.
KIRK: I can't get through there. Nothing serious. Don't leave the transporter room unattended.
SCOTT: Wilson will be right back, sir.
(both leave, and another Kirk materialises on the pad)

Captain's Log, stardate 1672.1. Specimen-gathering mission on planet Alpha 177. Unknown to any of us during this time, a duplicate of me, some strange alter ego, had been created by the transporter malfunction.

[Transporter room]

WILSON: Captain? Are you all right, sir? Can I give you a hand, sir? Captain?

[Corridor]

UHURA [OC]: Bridge to all decks. Section duty officers, check communication lines.
KIRK: Thank you.
SCOTT: It might profit you to let Doctor McCoy give you the once-over.
KIRK: All right, Engineer, I'll have my engines looked to.

[Kirk's quarters]

RAND: Ship's manifests, sir. I think they're in order now.
KIRK: Thank you, Yeoman.
RAND: I've checked
KIRK: That's all.
RAND: Yes, sir. (leaves Kirk to lie down on bed)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: You picked a good day, Fisher. Business has been lousy. What'd you do, take a fall on purpose so you could get a little vacation?
KIRK: Saurian brandy.
Back to duty status, Fisher. I have no sympathy for clumsiness.
FISHER: No, sir. The hand's much better, sir. (leaves)
MCCOY: What can I do for you, Jim?
KIRK: (grabbing him by the neck) I said, give me the brandy! (leaves with bottle and goes to Rand's quarters)

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Yeah.
SPOCK [OC]: Mister Spock.
KIRK: Come in. Yes, Mister Spock, what is it?
SPOCK: Is there something I can do for you, Captain?
KIRK: Like what?
SPOCK: Well, Doctor McCoy seemed to think I should check on you.
KIRK: That's nice. Come on, Spock, I know that look. What is it?
SPOCK: Well, our good doctor said that you were acting like a wild man, demanded brandy.
KIRK: Our good doctor's been putting you on again.
SPOCK: Hmm. Well, in that case, if you'll excuse the intrusion Captain, I'll get back to my work.
KIRK: I'll tell him you were properly annoyed.
SPOCK: Captain.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: What is it, Scotty?
SCOTT: Transporter breakdown. Continue circuit testing. We beamed up this animal and, well, look for yourself. It's in this specimen case. (opens lid to reveal angry pink animal)
KIRK: Yes?
SCOTT: A few seconds after they sent this one up through the transporter, that duplicate appeared. Except it's not a duplicate, it's an opposite. Two of the same animal, but different. One gentle, this. One mean and fierce, that. Some kind of savage, ferocious opposite. Captain, we don't dare send Mister Sulu and the landing party up. If this should happen to a man.
KIRK: Oh, my.

[Rand's quarters]

RAND: Oh! Captain, you startled me. Is there something that you? Can I help you, Captain?
KIRK: Jim will do here, Janice.
RAND: Oh.
KIRK: You're too beautiful to ignore. Too much woman. We've both been pretending too long. (grabs her) Stop pretending. Let's stop pretending. Come here, Janice. Don't fight me. Don't fight me, Janice. (kisses her)
RAND: Captain!
KIRK: Just a minute, Janice. Just a minute! (forces her onto the floor, she scratches his face and gets away to the door which opens just as Fisher is passing by)
RAND: Call Mister Spock! Call Mister Spock!

[Corridor]

FISHER: Geological Technician Fisher. Deck twelve, section (Kirk grabs him and hits him, hard)

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Me? My yeoman said that? I've been resting here since you left me. Alone, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy reports that you demanded this brandy in Sickbay and left with it. I found this bottle in Yeoman Rand's quarters.
KIRK: Not true. I haven't been to the Sickbay. Let's find out what's going on.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Sickbay. (just missing the other Kirk nursing grazed knuckles, who goes into his quarters)

[Sickbay]

RAND: Then he kissed me and he said that we, that he was the Captain and he could order me. I didn't know what to do. When you mentioned the feelings we'd been hiding, and you started talking about us.
KIRK: Us?
RAND: Well, he is the captain. I couldn't just. You started hurting me. I had to fight you, and scratch your face.
KIRK: Yeoman, look at me. Look at me, look at my face. Are there any scratches?
RAND: I was sure I scratched you. I was frightened. Maybe
KIRK: Yeoman. I was in my room. It wasn't me.
RAND: Sir, Fisher saw you, too.
KIRK: Fisher saw?
RAND: If it hadn't been. I can understand. I don't want to get you into trouble. I wouldn't have even mentioned it!
KIRK: It wasn't me!
FISHER: It was you, sir.
KIRK: Do you know what you're saying?
FISHER: Yes, I know what I'm saying.
MCCOY: Back to that bed, bucko. Come on, let's go.
SPOCK: You can go now, Yeoman. (Rand leaves) There's only one logical answer. We have an impostor aboard.

Captain's Log, stardate 1672.9. On the planet's surface, temperatures are beginning to drop, our landing party there in growing jeopardy. Due to the malfunction of the ship's transporter, an unexplained duplicate of myself definitely exists.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: How did all this happen?
SCOTT: I don't know sir, but when Fisher came up, his suit was covered with a soft yellow ore that had highly unusual properties. It may have caused an overload. Can't tell, not yet.
KIRK: Does the transporter work at all?
SCOTT: Yes sir, but we don't dare bring up the landing party. It might be duplicated like this animal.
KIRK: How long will it take you to find the trouble?
SCOTT: Can't say, sir.
KIRK: We just can't leave those four men down there. It's getting dark. They'll die. The surface temperature of that planet goes down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero at night.
SCOTT: We're doing everything we can, sir.
KIRK: Yes, I know, Scotty.
SPOCK: About your double, Captain.
KIRK: Yes, er, yes, we'll have to find him. Search parties, Mister Spock. Organise search parties.
SPOCK: We can't take a chance on killing it. We have no previous experience, no way of knowing what would happen to you.
KIRK: Yes, that's right. We don't know, but the men have to be armed. The men are to be armed, with their phasers locked, I repeat, locked, on setting number one. There can't be any chance of him being killed. He's to be taken without. If the men are forced to fire, he can't be killed.
SPOCK: How shall we explain it to them, Captain? The search parties are to capture you?
KIRK: Tell them.
SPOCK: The search parties, Captain.
KIRK: Yes, I'll make an announcement to the entire crew, tell them what happened. It's a good crew. They deserve to know.
SPOCK: Captain, no disrespect intended, but you must surely realise you can't announce the full truth to the crew. You're the Captain of this ship. You haven't the right to be vulnerable in the eyes of the crew. You can't afford the luxury of being anything less than perfect. If you do, they lose faith, and you lose command.
KIRK: Yes, I do know that, Mister Spock. What I don't know is why I forgot that just now. Mister Spock, if you see me slipping again, your orders, your orders are to tell me.
SPOCK: Understood, Captain.

Captain's Log, stardate 1673.1. Something has happened to me. Somehow, in being duplicated, I have lost my strength of will. Decisions are becoming more and more difficult.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK [OC]: This is the Captain speaking. There's an impostor aboard the ship, a man who looks exactly like me and is pretending to be me. This man is dangerous. Utmost caution is to be observed. All crew members are to arm themselves. The impostor may be identified by scratches on his face. Repeat, the impostor may be identified by scratches on his face.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Section chiefs, assign personnel to the search. All search parties

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK [OC]: report to Mister Spock for assignment.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Something?
SPOCK: About the phaser weapons to be set for stunning force and locked.
KIRK: Oh, yes, yes. All hand phasers must be set on base cycle, stunning force.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK [OC]: The impostor is not to be injured. Use minimum force. Repeat, the imposter
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk!
KIRK [OC]: Is not to be injured.
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk. I'm Captain Kirk! I'm Captain Kirk! I'm Captain Kirk! (goes to mirror, covers scratches with makeup, opens door) Wilson!
WILSON: Sir?
KIRK: Wilson, give me your phaser.
WILSON: Yes, sir.
KIRK: How have you been?
WILSON: Fine, sir. (Kirk grabs and hits him)

[Planet surface]

KIRK [OC]: How's it going down there, Mister Sulu?
SULU: It's already twenty degrees below zero. Can't exactly

[Briefing room]

SULU [OC]: call it balmy.
KIRK: Isn't there any way we can help them?
SPOCK: Thermal heaters were transported down. They duplicated. They won't operate.
KIRK: Then we've got to get those men up.
CREWMAN [OC]: Mister Spock?
SPOCK: Spock here.
CREWMAN [OC]: Transporter Technician Wilson found injured near the Captain's cabin. He says the impostor attacked him, called him by name, took his hand phaser.
SPOCK: Acknowledged. Continue the search.
KIRK: We've got to find him before he, but how?
SPOCK: Apparently, this double, however different in temperament, has your knowledge of the ship, its crew, its devices. This being the case, perhaps we can outguess him by determining his next move. Knowing how the ship is laid out, where would you go to elude a mass search?
KIRK: The lower levels. The Engineering deck.

[Engineering]

SPOCK: Set and locked on base cycle to stun, not to kill. What about your phaser, Captain? Don't you think we ought to get some help, Captain?
KIRK: No. I don't want anyone else to see the
SPOCK: Captain, you ordered me to tell you.
KIRK: Mister Spock, if I'm to be the Captain, I've got to act like one.
(they split up to search, and Kirk comes face to face with himself)
KIRK: You can't hurt me. You can't kill me. You can't. Don't you understand? I'm part of you. You need me. I need you.
OTHER KIRK: I don't need you. (Spock neck-pinches him, and his phaser fire hits a panel instead)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: He'll be regaining consciousness soon, and not knowing what his physical state is, I don't think I dare give him a tranquilizer of any kind. I think we'd better bind him.
KIRK: Yes. yes, all right. What's the matter with me?
SPOCK: Judging from my observations, Captain, you're rapidly losing the power of decision.
MCCOY: You have a point, Spock?
SPOCK: Yes, always, Doctor. We have here an unusual opportunity to appraise the human mind, or to examine, in Earth terms, the roles of good and evil in a man. His negative side, which you call hostility, lust, violence, and his positive side, which Earth people express as compassion, love, tenderness.
MCCOY: It's the Captain's guts you're analysing. Are you of that, Spock?
SPOCK: Yes, and what is it that makes one man an exceptional leader? We see indications that it's his negative side which makes him strong, that his evil side, if you will, properly controlled and disciplined, is vital to his strength. Your negative side removed from you, the power of command begins to elude you.
KIRK: What is your point, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: If your power of command continues to weaken, you'll soon be unable to function as Captain. You must be prepared for that.
MCCOY: You have your intellect, Jim. You can fight with that!
KIRK: For how long?
SPOCK: If I seem insensitive to what you're going through, Captain, understand it's the way I am.
SCOTT [OC]: Captain Kirk.
KIRK: Kirk here.
SCOTT [OC]: Mister Scott, sir, on the lower level of the Engineering deck.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: I've found a new trouble with the transporter. The casing has a wide gap ripped in it. (the phaser damage) The main circuits

[Sickbay]

SCOTT [OC]: have been burned through. The abort control circuit is gone altogether.

[Planet surface]

SULU: Can you give us a status report, Captain? Temperature's still dropping. Now forty one degrees below zero.
KIRK [OC]: We've located the trouble. It shouldn't be much longer.
SULU: Do you think you might be able to find a long rope somewhere and lower us down a pot of hot coffee?

[Sickbay]

KIRK: I'll see what we can do.
SULU [OC]: Rice wine will do, if you're short on coffee.
KIRK: Engineering deck, Kirk here.
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, Captain.
KIRK: That unit, Scotty, status report.
SCOTT [OC]: The transporter unit ioniser. Nothing much left of it, sir.
KIRK: How bad is it?
SCOTT [OC]: We can't repair it in less than a week.

Captain's Log, stardate 1673.5. Transporter still inoperable. My negative self is under restraint in Sickbay. My own indecisiveness growing. My force of will steadily weakening. On the planet, condition critical. Surface temperature is seventy five degrees below zero, still dropping.

[Planet surface]

SULU: (using phaser to heat rocks) I think we ought to give room service another call. That coffee's taking too long. Enterprise, this is Sulu.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Kirk here, Mister Sulu.
SULU [OC]: Hot line direct to the Captain. Are we that far gone?
KIRK: I gave everybody the afternoon off. I'm watching the store.

[Planet surface]

KIRK [OC]: How is it down there?
SULU: Oh, lovely, except that the frost is building up. We're using hand phasers to heat the rocks. One phaser quit on us, three still operating. Any possibility of getting us back aboard before the skiing season opens down here?

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: This is Spock, Mister Sulu. You'll have to hold on a little longer. There's no other way. Survival procedures, Mister Sulu.
SULU [OC]: Per your training programme, Mister Spock.

[Sickbay]

(other Kirk is screaming)
KIRK: What happened?
MCCOY: Apparently the body functioning weakened during the duplication process. A fact I failed to consider.
KIRK: He's not dying?
KIRK: Yes, he is.
OTHER KIRK: Help me.
KIRK: How can he die? Can I survive without him?
MCCOY: I don't know, Jim.
KIRK: Don't be afraid. Here's my hand. Hold on. You don't have to be afraid. I won't let go. Hold on. You won't be afraid if you use your mind and think! Think! You can do it. That's it!
MCCOY: Jim, he is back! Jim, you can use that brandy now. In fact, I'll join you.
KIRK: I have to take him back inside myself. I can't survive without him. I don't want him back. He's like an animal, a thoughtless, brutal animal, and yet it's me. Me.
MCCOY: Jim, you're no different than anyone else. We all have our darker side. We need it! It's half of what we are. It's not really ugly, it's human.
KIRK: Human.
MCCOY: Yes, human. A lot of what he is makes you the man you are. God forbid I should have to agree with Spock, but he was right. Without the negative side, you wouldn't be the Captain. You couldn't be, and you know it. Your strength of command lies mostly in him.
KIRK: What do I have?
MCCOY: You have the goodness.
KIRK: Not enough. I have a ship to command.
MCCOY: The intelligence, the logic. It appears your half has most of that, and perhaps that's where man's essential courage comes from. For you see, he was afraid and you weren't.
SPOCK [OC]: Captain Kirk.
KIRK: Kirk here.
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here. Would you come to the transporter room. We think we may have found an answer.
KIRK: Coming.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: What is it?
SCOTT: We've found a way to get the transporter working, sir.
SPOCK: We've attached some bypass and leader circuits to compensate for the difference. Tied directly into the impulse engines, there shouldn't be more than a five point variation in the velocity balance. I suggest we send the animal through. Captain.
KIRK: Yes, yes. Go ahead.
SCOTT: (opening box with angry animal in it) I'll grab him by the scruff of the neck and hold him as long as I can.
KIRK: Don't hurt him.
SPOCK: It's painless and quick. The animal will be unconscious for only a few minutes. (sedates it)
SCOTT: If this doesn't work, I don't know what will.
SPOCK: Energise. Reverse.
SPOCK: The shock of putting him back together seems to have been too much for him.
MCCOY: He's dead, Jim.

Captain's Log, stardate 1673.1. Entry made by Second Officer Spock. Captain Kirk retains command of this vessel, but his force of will rapidly fading. Condition of landing party critical. Transporter unit still under repair.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Autopsy in-depth. Hurry. I don't know. Animal could have died of some kind of shock.
SPOCK: For once, I agree with you.
MCCOY: I said could have, Mister Spock. We won't know until we get a full post-mortem.
SPOCK: No autopsy is necessary to know that the animal was terrified, confused. It was split into two halves and suddenly thrust back together again. Thus shock induced by blind terror.
KIRK: Yes, yes, that sounds likely.
SPOCK: It couldn't understand. You can. You have your intelligence controlling your fear.
KIRK: Get the transporter room ready.
MCCOY: Could be, if, maybe. All guesswork so far. Just theory. Jim, why don't you give me a chance to do an autopsy and let Spock check the transporter circuits again.
KIRK: That sounds, sounds reasonable. We should double-check everything.
SPOCK: Aren't you forgetting something, Captain?
KIRK: No, I don't think I've for
SPOCK: Your men on the planet surface. How much time do they have left?
KIRK: Yes, that's right. The men. We have to take the chance, Bones. Their lives
MCCOY: Suppose it wasn't shock, Jim. Suppose death was caused by transporter malfunction. Then you'd die. They'd die, anyway. Jim, you can't risk your life on a theory!
SPOCK: Being split in two halves is no theory with me, Doctor. I have a human half, you see, as well as an alien half, submerged, constantly at war with each other. Personal experience, Doctor. I survive it because my intelligence wins over both, makes them live together. Your intelligence would enable you to survive as well.
KIRK: Help me. Somebody make the decision.
SPOCK: Are you relinquishing your command, Captain?
KIRK: No. No, I'm not.
MCCOY: Well then, we can't help you, Jim. The decision is yours.
KIRK: Mister Spock, ready the transporter room. Bones, continue the autopsy.
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk, I have a tie-in with Sulu now.
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Planet surface]

SULU: Captain K-Kirk, Sulu here. One hundred seventeen below. Can't last much longer.

[Sickbay]

SULU [OC]: Can't see clearly, Doctor, to read top indicator. Think the cold penetrating communicator. Two men unconscious. No time. No. Can't wait. No time.
KIRK: Mister Sulu. Mister Sulu. Can't wait. Can't let them die.
OTHER KIRK: What are you going to do?
KIRK: Go through the transporter, both of us.
OTHER KIRK: There's nothing I can do to stop you.
KIRK: It's what I have to do. It's what I have to do. What we have to do.
OTHER KIRK: I won't fight you anymore. Oh, I feel so weak. I'll be glad when this is over. (grabs Kirk and knocks him out)

[Corridor]

KIRK: Janice, hello.
RAND: Captain, I
KIRK: Yeoman, I owe you an explanation.
RAND: No.
KIRK: Yes, I do. The transporter malfunctioned, divided me, created a duplicate. The animal part of me came to your cabin. He even scratched me to make us look more alike. I'd like the chance to explain it to you. You don't mind if I come to your cabin later?
RAND: No, sir.
KIRK: (enters turbolift) Bridge.

[Bridge]

FARRELL: No word from Mister Sulu, sir.
OTHER KIRK: Prepare to leave orbit, Mister Farrell. Well?
FARRELL: Captain!
OTHER KIRK: I gave you an order, Mister Farrell.
FARRELL: But what about
OTHER KIRK: They can't be saved. Prepare to leave orbit.
FARRELL: Yes, sir.
SPOCK: Captain, I thought the plan
OTHER KIRK: I've changed my mind. Man your station, Mister Spock. (McCoy enters with another Kirk, identically dressed) Grab him. He's the impostor.
MCCOY: No!
OTHER KIRK: McCoy, he's fooled you.
MCCOY: He (the one in the captain's chair) attacked him.
OTHER KIRK: Mister Spock, you know who I am. You know what that is.
FARRELL: Mister Spock, which one? What do we do?
SPOCK: We'll let the captain handle this.
OTHER KIRK: I'm the captain. Isn't that obvious? Look at his face. Remember the scratches? Look how he's tried to hide them. He wants you to think that he's Captain Kirk. You know who I am.
KIRK: Yes, I know.
OTHER KIRK: You want to kill me, don't you? Farrell, James, grab him. He'll destroy the ship! I'm the Captain. Don't you understand? I'm captain of the ship! (starts attacking the crew) I'm the captain! This is my ship! My ship! It's mine! I'll kill you.
KIRK: Can half a man live?
OTHER KIRK: Take another step, you'll die.
KIRK: Then we'll both die.
OTHER KIRK: Please, I don't want to. Don't make me. Don't make me. (Kirk takes phaser off him) I don't want to go back. Please! I want to live!
KIRK: You will. Both of us.
OTHER KIRK: I want to live!

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: You'll have to hold on to him, Captain.
KIRK: Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Captain?
KIRK: If this doesn't work.
SPOCK: Understood, Captain.
KIRK: Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Ready. (beams them out)
MCCOY: Well, Mister Spock? (one figure is beamed back) Jim?
KIRK: Get those men aboard fast.
SPOCK: Right away, Captain.
MCCOY: (as the party is wheeled away) Severe exposure and frostbite, but I think they'll make it. How do you feel, Jim?
KIRK: How? I've seen a part of myself no man should ever see.

[Bridge]

FARRELL: Status report, green.
SPOCK: All sections report ready, sir.
KIRK: Good. Thank you, Mister Spock, from both of us.
SPOCK: Shall I pass that on to the crew, sir?
KIRK: The impostor's back where he belongs. Let's forget him.
RAND: Captain? The impostor told me what happened, who he really was, and I'd just like to say that. Well, sir, what I'd like is
KIRK: Thank you, Yeoman.
SPOCK: The, er, impostor had some interesting qualities, wouldn't you say, Yeoman?
KIRK: This is the Captain speaking. Navigator, set in course correction. Helmsman, steady as she goes.
SULU: There he is, sir. Centre screen. Still trying to run away from us, sir.
KIRK: Don't lose him, Mister Sulu.
SULU: No, sir.
KIRK: Earth ship, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: Difficult to say, Captain. We're getting no registration beam from it.
SCOTT: If it is, he'll soon overload his engines.
SPOCK: Sir, he's pushing his engines too hard.
SULU: Changing course again. He knows we're after him all right.
KIRK: Stay with him, Mister Sulu. Communication?
UHURA: I've tried all frequencies, sir. He refuses to answer. Unless he's not receiving us.
KIRK: He's receiving us alright.
SPOCK: Approaching an asteroid belt, Captain. Schiller rating three five.
KIRK: Deflectors on, Mister Farrell.
SULU: He's seen the asteroids too, sir.
KIRK: Stay with him. He'll try to lose us in them.
SULU: If one hits him.
SPOCK: Sensor reading on the vessel. I make it out as a small class J cargo ship, and his engines are super-heating.
KIRK: Try to warn him. If he loses power now
FARRELL: There go his engines, sir.
SULU: He's drifting into the asteroid belt, Captain.
FARRELL: He's had it, unless we put our deflector screen around him.
SCOTT: Captain, if we try, we'll overload our own engines. He's too far away.
KIRK: Cover him with our deflector screen, Mister Farrell. Scotty, Spock, stand by in the transporter room.
SCOTT: Aye, sir. (they leave)
FARRELL: We're protecting him, sir. We won't be able to hold it long.
SULU: We're overloading, Captain. Engine temperatures climbing.
CREWMAN [OC]: This is the Engine room. Temperatures are passing the danger line.
FARRELL Our deflector screen's weakening, sir. We can't protect them much longer. (lights flicker)
SULU: That was one of our lithium crystal circuits, sir.
KIRK: Bridge to transporter room. If you don't start beaming that crew over soon
SCOTT [OC]: They're not answering our signal. There's nothing to lock onto.
SULU (lights go out again) Another circuit, sir.
UHURA: I'm getting a distress signal call from them, sir.
KIRK: Scotty, we're getting a distress signal.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: We're locked onto something, Captain.
MUDD: Meaning no ingratitude, gentlemen, but just where is it I find meself?
MCCOY: You're aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise.
MUDD: It's really a darn beautiful ship, isn't it? Really a beautiful ship. Oh, the name, gentlemen, is Walsh, Captain Leo Walsh.
SPOCK: How many more in your crew?
MUDD: Just a few more.
SCOTT: Your vessel's breaking up, man. If we don't get them over here right now
MUDD: We couldn't be sure you was a friendly vessel, now could we. Ah, but the three will be in position about by now.

[Bridge]

SULU: Another lithium circuit. Now supplementing with battery power, sir.
KIRK: Scotty, how many of them did you get aboard?
SCOTT [OC]: Only one, sir, but we've locked onto three more.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: What's wrong?
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. With those three lithium crystals gone
SPOCK: It'll take longer on battery power.
MCCOY: Never trusted this.

[Bridge]

FARRELL: There she goes.
SULU: Asteroid hit him dead centre.

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: Bridge to transporter room. Their vessel has been hit by an asteroid. It's gone. Did you get the crew off?
SCOTT: Not yet, sir, but we've hooked onto something. (three women beam in, the men are transfixed)
KIRK [OC]: Kirk to transporter room. Report.
MUDD: It's all right, darlings. We're in good hands.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Bridge to transporter room.
FARRELL: We're clearing the asteroid belt now, Captain.
KIRK: Deflector screen down, Mister Farrell. Save the power.

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: Captain to transporter room. Are you reading me or not, Mister Scott? Bridge to transporter room. How many did we get off?
SCOTT: Oh, er, four in all, sir.
KIRK [OC]: If that captain can walk, I want him in my cabin immediately. Correction,

[Bridge]

KIRK: I want him there whether he can walk or not. Kirk out.

[Transporter room]

MUDD: That fellow sounded a mite upset, didn't he?
MCCOY: Yes. Yes, they are.
SPOCK: Curious. You're certain this was everyone aboard, Mister Walsh? No other crewmen?
MUDD: Oh, no, that's everyone, all right, but so far as the ladies actually being the crew
SPOCK: You can explain that to the Captain. (the group leave)
MCCOY: Amen to that, Scotty.

[Corridor]

MUDD: Ah, sure, these starships are really something marvellous, but men will always be men no matter where they are. Eh, mister? You'll never take that out of them.

[Turbolift]

SPOCK: Deck twelve.
MUDD: You're part Vulcanian, aren't you. Ah well then, a pretty face doesn't affect you at all, does it. That is, unless you want it to. You can save it, girls. This type can turn himself off from any emotion.
EVE: I apologise for what he said, sir. He's used to buying and selling people.
MUDD: I'll handle the conversation, darling.

[Captain's quarters]

KIRK: Come.
SPOCK: The Commander of the transport to see you, Captain.
KIRK: Good. Now, if you don't mind telling
EVE: Hello.
KIRK: And the ladies? Is this your crew, Captain?
MUDD: Well, no, Captain. This is me cargo.

Captain's log, Stardate 1329.1. We've taken aboard from unregistered transport vessel its captain and, and three unusual females. These women have a mysterious magnetic effect on the male members of my crew, including myself. Explanation unknown at present.

[Captain's quarters]

MUDD: Well, how the devil am I supposed to know this is a starship, Captain? Here I am with a cargo of young lovelies. A strange ship comes up alongside. Well. naturally I did my best to evade you. And starship Captain or no, you exceeded your authority when you drove me and mine into a shower of asteroids.
KIRK: Your name, please.
MUDD: Walsh. Leo Walsh. You destroyed me ship, Captain.
KIRK: Mister Walsh, I'm convening a ship's hearing on your actions. Mister Spock will supply you with any legal information you may need for your defence.
MUDD: You're a hard-nosed one, Captain.
KIRK: And you're a liar, Mister Walsh. I think we both understand each other. Security! Escort Mister Walsh to his quarters. Confine him there.

[Bridge]

SULU: You're on duty, Johnny-o. Back to reality.
FARRELL: You can feel their eyes when they look at you, like something grabbing hold of you. Did you notice that?
SULU: I noticed. How I noticed. Come on, Johnny.
SCOTT: We've got trouble, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: I'm well aware of that, Mister Scott.
SCOTT: One lithium crystal left, and that with a hairline split at the base.
SPOCK: Better rig a by-pass circuit.
SCOTT: Can't. We blew the whole converter assembly.
KIRK [OC]: Kirk here.
SPOCK: Needed on the bridge, Captain.

[Briefing room]

WOMEN: Harry! Where were you?
MUDD: Shh! Calm down now, darlings. Would you mind waiting outside?
SECURITY: Sorry, sir.
MUDD: Well, now, answer every question they put to you. Don't lie. Well, you've no need to, have you, and don't submit to a med. That is, being so healthy, they've no need for a medical exam, have they.
RUTH: What if they ask about
MUDD: They won't. Have you no place to go lads?
MAGDA: They'll notice we're different.
MUDD: No, no, no, they won't. Just let Leo take all the hard questions. Now don't be panicking, loves. We'll get to
EVE: Get where? We don't have a ship and we're headed the wrong way, Harry.
NUDD: Leo. Leo Walsh is me name, darling. Don't forget that. So lovely. Lovely, aren't they? If they only think lovely thoughts, if they smile, they'll come out right some which way, won't they? My personal guarantee on that.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: The entire ship's power is feeding through one lithium crystal.
KIRK: Well, switch to by-pass circuits.
SCOTT: We burned them all out when we super-heated. That jackass Walsh not only wrecked his vessel, but in saving his skin
KIRK: If it makes you feel better, Engineer, that's one jackass we're going to see skinned.
SCOTT: But it's frustrating. Almost a million gross tons of vessel depending on a hunk of crystal the size of my fist.
SPOCK: And that crystal won't hold up, not pulling all our power through it.
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: There's a lithium mining operation on Rigel 12. High-grade ore, I've heard.
KIRK: Location and distance.
SPOCK: Mister Farrell has the course. Less than two day's travel.
KIRK: Make for Rigel 12, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Rigel 12, Mister Farrell. You have the course.

Captain's log, Stardate 1329.2. On board the U.S.S. Enterprise, a ship's hearing is being convened against the transport vessel's captain. I'm becoming concerned about the almost-hypnotic effect produced by the women.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: This hearing is convened. Stardate 1329.2, on board starship U.S.S. Enterprise. Formal hearings against transport captain Leo Walsh. Start computer.
SPOCK: State your name for the record.
MUDD: Leo Francis Walsh.
COMPUTER: Incorrect.
SPOCK: Your correct name.
MUDD: Gentlemen, surely you're not going to take the word of a soulless mechanical device over that of a real flesh and blood man.
SPOCK: State your correct name for the record.
MUDD: Harry Mudd.
COMPUTER: Incorrect.
MUDD: Harcourt Fenton Mudd.
SPOCK: Any past offenses, Mister Mudd?
MUDD: Of course not. Gentlemen, I'm simply an honest businessman.
COMPUTER: Incorrect.
MUDD: Blast that tin-plated pot.
COMPUTER: Full data coming on screen.
RUTH: If it can read our minds, too.
MUDD: It can't, darling. It can't. Just what's on the record.
COMPUTER: Offense record. Smuggling. Sentence suspended. Transport of stolen goods. Purchase of space vessel with counterfeit currency. Sentences, psychiatric treatment, effectiveness disputed.
KIRK: Mister Mudd, you're charged with galaxy travel without a flight plan, without an identification beam, and failure to answer a starship's signal, thus effecting a menace to navigation.
MUDD: What? My tiny ship in this immense galaxy a menace to navigation?
KIRK: You're also charged with operation of a vessel without a master's license.
MUDD: Untrue! I have a master's ticket.
COMPUTER: Incorrect. Master's license revoked Stardate 1116.4.
MUDD: All right. Well, very simply, Leo Walsh, who was to be my captain on this trip, passed away suddenly. Well, I had no choice but to take out me ship me own self. I assumed Leo's name out of courtesy to him. In memoriam, as it were. A fine, fine man, alas, gone to his reward.
KIRK: Destination and purpose of journey?
MUDD: Planet Ophiuchus 3. Wiving settlers.
KIRK: Come again, Mister Mudd. You do what?
MUDD: I recruit wives for settlers, a difficult but satisfying task.
KIRK: Data on witnesses.
COMPUTER: No data.
KIRK: Computer, go to sensor probe. Any unusual readings?
COMPUTER: No decipherable reading on females. However, unusual reading on male board members. Detecting high respiration patterns, perspiration rate up, heartbeat rapid, blood pressure higher than normal.
KIRK: Er, that's sufficient. Strike that from the record.
MUDD: You see, gentlemen, just as I told you. Three lovely ladies destined for frontier planets to be the companions of lonely men, to supply that warmth of a human touch that's so desperately needed. A wife, a home, a family. Gentlemen, I look upon this work as a sacred public trust. I've devoted me whole life to it.
COMPUTER: Incorrect.
MUDD: Well, I'm about to start devoting my entire life to it.
KIRK: Did these ladies come voluntarily?
MUDD: Well, of course! Now, for example, Ruthie here comes from a pelagic planet, sea ranchers. Magda there from the helium experimental station.
EVE: It's the same story for all of us, Captain. No men. Mine was a farm planet with automated machines for company and two brothers to cook for, mend their clothes, canal mud a foot thick on their boots every time they walked in.
MUDD: Fine, Evie. Fine.
EVE: It's not fine! We've got men willing to be our husbands waiting for us, and you're taking us in the opposite direction! Staring at us Iike we were Saturnius harem girls or something.
MUDD: That's enough, Evie.
KIRK: The only charges are against Mister Mudd. Illegal operation of a vessel. Do you have any defence to offer?
MUDD: Only heaven's own truth, which I've just given you.
KIRK: The hearing is closed. Mister Mudd to be handed over to the legal authorities at our earliest opportunity.
EVE: And what about us? What happens to us? Help us, please. All of us.
KIRK: Miss McHuron, if you don't mind
SCOTT: Our last crystal, sir. It's gone.
SULU: Captain Kirk, engineering section reports our entire life-support system is now on batteries.
KIRK: Mister Spock. Miss McHuron, would you mind. Mister Spock, will you contact the miners on Rigel 12? Notify them that we'll need the lithium crystals immediately upon arrival. (all officers leave)
MUDD: Oh, you beautiful galaxy! Oh, that heavenly universe! Well, girls, lithium miners. Don't you understand? Lonely, isolated, overworked, rich lithium miners! Girls, do you still want husbands, hmm? Evie, you won't be satisfied with a mere ship's captain. I'll get you a man who can buy you a whole planet. Maggie, you're going to be a countess. Ruth, I'll make you a duchess. And I, I'll be running this starship. Captain James Kirk, the next orders you're taking will be given by Harcourt Fenton Mudd!

Captain's log-- Stardate 1330.1. Position, fourteen hours out of Rigel 12. We're on auxiliary impulse engines. Fuel low, barely sufficient to achieve orbit over the planet. Lithium replacements are now imperative. The effect of Mudd's women on my crew continues to grow, still totally unexplained. Harry Mudd is confined to his quarters under guard.

[Sickbay]

RUTH: May I come in?
MCCOY: Why, yes, please do. By all means. Connors, are you finished?
RUTH: I was wondering what this place looked like. It's fascinating.
MCCOY: Would, Would you walk past my panel again, please?
RUTH: Your what?
MCCOY: My medical scanner.
RUTH: Oh, why? You're not giving me an examination, are you?
MCCOY: Oh no. I wouldn't trust my, my judgment, believe me. Just walk by, please. (scanner heart monitor activates) It's not supposed to do that.
RUTH: I wondered, will you be examining the miners on Rigel 12?
MCCOY: Yes, if they need it.
RUTH: You haven't asked yet? Are they in good health and all?
MCCOY: What? Oh, yes, they're in excellent health, all three of them.
RUTH: Oh. Three.
MCCOY: Are you wearing some unusual kind of perfume or something radioactive, my dear?
RUTH: No. I'm just me.
MCCOY: I wonder what makes it do that.

[Kirk's quarters]

EVE: Captain? I hope you don't mind.
KIRK: As a matter of fact, Miss McHuron, I do.
EVE: I was trying to take a walk, and I just, I just had to run in someplace. You see, all your men were looking at me, following me with their eyes.
KIRK: Yes. I'll have to talk to them about that. They, er, they don't do that ordinarily, Miss McHuron, but somehow, in your case, and the ladies with you, its, er
EVE: They're probably just lonely. I can understand loneliness.
KIRK: Yes. Yes, er, now, Miss McHuron
EVE: I, I suppose you understand it even more, having to run a huge ship like this with so much responsibility every minute and having to be so careful with all your men looking up to you.
KIRK: Well, it probably appears more difficult than it is.
EVE: Hmm! I read once that a commander has to act like a paragon of virtue. I never met a paragon.
KIRK: Neither have I.
EVE: Well, of course not. No one is. But some people try to pretend. Do you, Captain?
KIRK: Miss McHuron, I don't
EVE: Oh, no! Oh, I just can't do it. I don't care what Harry Mudd says. I do like you, but I just can't go through with it. I hate this whole thing!

[Mudds's quarters]

MUDD: Just three? You're sure?
RUTH: Yes. The miners are healthy and fairly young.
MUDD: Later, dear, later. Magda, did you get to your communications man?
MAGDA: The head miner is named Ben Childress. The others are Gossett and Benton.
MUDD: And they've been there?
RUTH: Almost three years now, alone!
MUDD: Perfect. Perfect. Three of them and three lovely ladies has Harry Mudd. And lithium crystals, my dear, are worth three hundred times their weight in diamonds, thousands of times their weight in gold.
RUTH: But they'll be down there, and we'll be up here, circling a hundred miles above them.
MAGDA: And there's a guard outside your door, Harry. You can't get out of your cabin.
MUDD: No, my dears. After one more job for you, it won't be Harry Mudd that's trapped. It will be a gentleman named James T
EVE: I don't like you, and I'm not very happy with myself, either.
MUDD: Well, I'm not really surprised. I've seen you noticing the Captain.
EVE: We're supposed to notice them! Oh, oh Harry, I don't feel very good. I think it must be near the time.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I asked for a preorbital course, Mister Farrell.
FARRELL: Preorbital course locked in, sir.
KIRK: That's the last time I'm giving an order twice, gentlemen. We're down to battery power, and we're low on that.
SCOTT: It'll get us to Rigel 12, sir, but it'll be a shaky orbit.
KIRK: Just hang us in long enough to get six crystals, Scotty. That's all we need.
SCOTT: I'll get you there.
KIRK: Ridiculous. What are we running here. Did you examine them? Did you examine Eve?
MCCOY: She refused.
KIRK: Well, come on, you're the doctor. What is it? Is it that we're tired, and they're beautiful? They are incredibly beautiful.
MCCOY: Are they, Jim? Are they actually more lovely, pound for pound, measurement for measurement, than any other women you've known? Or is it that they just, well, act beautiful. No. Strike that, strike that.
KIRK: What are they?
MCCOY: You mean are they alien illusions? That sort of thing?
KIRK: I asked you first.
MCCOY: No, an alien smart enough to pull this could also keep my medical scanner from going beep!
KIRK: I don't follow you.
MCCOY: I don't either.

[Mudd's quarters]

MAGDA: Top space frequency of three nine. (hands over communicator)
MUDD: Rigel 12. Rigel 12.
CHILDRESS [OC]: This is Rigel 12. Come in, Enterprise.
MUDD: Well, this isn't exactly the Enterprise. My name is Harry Mudd. To whom have I the pleasure of speaking, sir?

[Bridge]

SULU: Power curve still dropping, Captain.
FARRELL: We'll make orbit, sir. A temporary one.
KIRK: Lay in. Computer?
SPOCK: We can sustain this orbit for three days, seven hours.
KIRK: More than enough time. Communications, have a representative of the Rigel 12 miners meet us here to discuss our needs. Beam him up first pass over their camp.
UHURA: Yes, sir.

[Mudd's quarters]

RUTH: Look what's happening. (hair lank, skin slightly lined) Look at my face.
MAGDA: Give us the pills.
RUTH: What if someone sees us like this?
EVE: You'll never find them, Harry, and if you do find them you know what they are. A cheat. If you care for someone, really care
MUDD: (ransacking drawers frantically) For whom, Evie? For Kirk? You'll find out that Ship's captains are already married, girl, to their vessels. You'd find out the first time you came between him and the ship. You'll see.
RUTH: I'm going back to what I was. Ugly.
MAGDA: I can't stand myself like this.
RUTH: Why did you hide them, Harry? Don't you trust us?
MUDD: I didn't hide them, girl. I put them in a safe place in case I was searched.
MADGA: Find the pill, Harry!
MUDD: Mattress! Yes, here! (Ruth and Magda devour them eagerly) Go on, Eve. Take it. It's not a cheat. It's a miracle for some man who can appreciate it and who needs it.

[Kirk's quarters]

SPOCK: Even burned and cracked, they're beautiful. Destroying them was a shame.
KIRK: Not at all, Mister Spock. The choice was burning this lithium crystal or the destruction of another man's ship. Come.
SECURITY: Sir. Mining Chief Childress and Mister Gossett.
KIRK: Good. Show them in. I'm James Kirk, captain of the Enterprise. This is my science officer Mister Spock.
CHILDRESS: Let's get right to business. You want lithium crystals and we've got them.
KIRK: Fine. I'm authorised to pay an equitable price.
CHILDRESS: We're not sure they're for sale, Captain. We might prefer a swap.
KIRK: What did you have in mind?
CHILDRESS: Mudd's women.
GOSSETT: If we like them. We'd like to have a look at them first of course.
CHILDRESS: Right. Trot them out, Captain. Oh, and Harry Mudd. Either way, I've agreed to have him released. Charges dropped.
KIRK: (laughs) Is there anything else?
CHILDRESS: You've got no choice, Kirk. You beam a landing party down, and you won't find one blessed crystal.
KIRK: No deal. You're a long way out in space, gentlemen. You'll need medical help, cargo runs, starship protection. You want to consider those facts too?
MUDD: Come along, ladies, come along. You must be Ben Childress. Come on now, girls, come on.
RUTH: And you must be Herm Gossett.
GOSSETT: Yes, I reckon I am.
CHILDRESS: One thing I'll say for you, Mudd, you're not a liar. Ladies, you are welcome.
KIRK: It's still no deal.
SPOCK: Conserving batteries, sir. Half power.
MUDD: I'm told they have only three days of orbit left before they start spiraling in. I do hate to see you suffering such a situation, Captain, but truth is truth, and the sad fact is you will deal. Sooner or later, you'll have to.

Captain's log. Transporting down to surface of planet Rigel 12 to acquire replacement lithium crystals. Expect further difficulty from miners.

[Miner's camp]

KIRK: All right, Childress, you've won. Now I'll take the lithium crystals.
CHILDRESS: When I have the time, Kirk.
KIRK: Childress.
CHILDRESS: We're busy, Mister Kirk.
SPOCK: We don't have the time to spare, Captain.
KIRK: You got a better idea?
CHILDRESS: (to Eve) Blows like that all the time. You can get lost a dozen feet from your doorstep. The wind comes up sudden. Magnetic storm. That means the wind will really rip soon.
MAGDA: Dance with me.
CHILDRESS: Would you like to dance?
EVE: No, I (coughs) No. I'm sorry, I guess it must be the dust.
CHILDRESS: That's the way it is on Rigel all the time. (cuts in on Ruth instead)
GOSSETT: Hey.
BENTON: Go away.
GOSSETT: I'm cutting in.
BENTON: Not on me. (fight starts)
CHILDRESS: What's the matter with you?
EVE: Why don't you run a raffle and the loser gets me? (leaves)
CHILDRESS: You can't go out there. You'll get killed.
KIRK: Just have those crystals here when I get back.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Eve! Eve!

Captain's log. Have transported aboard the Enterprise to implement search with infrared scanners and sensing system. Magnetic storms on the planet's surface are cutting down speed and efficiency of our equipment. Search now in progress for three hours, eighteen minutes.

[Bridge]

FARRELL: Traverse parallel three and four.
SULU: Checking, but not getting much.
SPOCK: The storm is ionising the atmosphere, Captain. Getting difficult to probe through it.
SCOTT: Captain, this is draining our batteries further. If we only had those crystals.
KIRK: But we don't! I didn't get any. I should have found a way. Satisfied, Mister Scott?
UHURA: Losing communications with the miners, sir. Magnetic storm seems worse.
KIRK: Has Childress reported in yet?
UHURA: No, sir. He and the girl are still missing.
KIRK: Sorry, Scotty. How much power do we have left?
SCOTT: About five hours, sir.

Captain's log. Have expended all but forty three minutes of power. Ship's condition, critical. Search now in progress seven hours, thirty one minutes. Magnetic storms are easing.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Infrared reading. Check traverse three, grid zero four zero.
FARRELL: About eleven miles, bearing one two one from the mining company.
SULU: That's Ben Childress' quarters.
SPOCK: There's a heat unit operating in there. It could be a cookstove.
KIRK: Have Mudd meet me in the transporter room.
SPOCK: Mudd?
KIRK: The name of this game.

[Childress' quarters]

CHILDRESS: I had things where I wanted them.
EVE: I ate some of your food, so I paid with some chores.
CHILDRESS: And I do my own cooking. I've not laid a hand on you. Remember that.
EVE: Oh, the sound of male ego. You travel halfway across the galaxy, and it's still the same song. There. You going to eat or talk?
CHILDRESS: I guess I'm supposed to sit, taste, and roll my eyes. Ooh, female cooking again. I've tasted better, by my own hand.
EVE: Well you're tasting some of it now. I couldn't scrape three layers of your leavings out of that pan.
CHILDRESS: You find me a well, some decent water, then talk.
EVE: Well, why don't you hang your pan out in the wind and let the sand blast it clean, or hadn't you thought about that?
CHILDRESS: (after hanging out the pots) It might work. That solitaire?
EVE: Double jack.
CHILDRESS: The red eight ought to go on the black nine.
EVE: Not in double jack.
CHILDRESS: You're not only plain as an old bucket, you're not even good company. What the devil happened to your looks, anyway?
EVE: I got tired of you. I slumped.
CHILDRESS: You heard what I said. You're homely! I've got enough in crystals already to buy queens by the gross! (Kirk and Mudd enter) I didn't touch her.
MUDD: Thank heaven you found her.
CHILDRESS: She's been bubbling with gratitude ever since.
KIRK: Sit down. Tell him. Tell him, Harry.
MUDD: Ah. Yes, well.
KIRK: The Venus drugs, Harry.
CHILDRESS: Venus drug? I've heard of it but, it's not just one of those stories?
KIRK: Oh, it exists, illegally.
MUDD: Well, actually, you see, it's a relatively harmless drug.
EVE: Harmless!
MUDD: Well, what it does is give you more of whatever you have. Well, with men, it makes them more muscular. Women, rounder. Men, more aggressive. Women, more feminine, and
KIRK: He gave it to the women before you met them.
CHILDRESS: Does that mean the others? They really look like she does?
MUDD: Mister Childress, I
CHILDRESS: Is that what it means?
EVE: Yes, that's what it means!
CHILDRESS: What happened to my partners?
KIRK: They've left for their quarters during the storm, Childress. They're married. Subspace radio marriage. It was a fraud. They can get out of it.
MUDD: If they want to.
CHILDRESS: Why?
MUDD: You can't condemn the women.
CHILDRESS: I can! A man goes out and fights, almost dies. We all almost die. We should have, but we didn't. And now that we've got the good life in our hands, you bring us women for wives that
EVE: You don't want wives, you want this. This is what you want, Mister Childress. I hope you remember it and dream about it, because you can't have it. It's not real! (takes the pills) Is this the kind of wife you want, Ben? Not someone to help you, not a wife to cook and sew and cry and need, but this kind. Selfish, vain, useless. Is this what you really want? All right, then. Here it is.
KIRK: Quite a woman, eh, Childress?
CHILDRESS: A fake, pumped up by a drug.
KIRK: By herself. She took no drug.
EVE: I swallowed it.
KIRK: Coloured gelatin.
MUDD: Yes, they took away my drug and substituted that.
EVE: But that can't be.
KIRK: There's only one kind of woman.
MUDD: Or man, for that matter.
KIRK: You either believe in yourself, or you don't. All right Childress, I've gone as far with you as I intend to. I want those lithium crystals and I want them now. Enterprise, this is Kirk.
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain.
KIRK: Stand by. Do I beam down a search party?
CHILDRESS: No, the crystals are here, and you're welcome to them.
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Spock. We're coming aboard with the lithium crystals.
SPOCK [OC]: How many coming, Captain?
CHILDRESS: Eve will stay, today at least. We, er, we want to talk.
KIRK: Eve?
EVE: You've got someone up there called the Enterprise.
KIRK: Two of us, Mister Spock. Come on, Mister Mudd.
MUDD: Don't you think you could possibly, by accident, arrange to leave me behind here? On this planet that would be punishment enough.
KIRK: I can't do that, Harry, but I will appear as a character witness at your trial. If you think that'll help.
MUDD: They'll throw away the key.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: That must have been quite a talk you made down there. Ever try considering the patent medicine business?
KIRK: Why should I work your side of the street?
SPOCK: I'm happy the affair is over. A most annoying emotional episode.
MCCOY: Smack right in the old heart. Oh, I'm sorry. In your case, it would be about here.
SPOCK: The fact that my internal arrangement differs from yours, Doctor, pleases me no end.
FARRELL: Course plotted and all systems in operation.
SULU: Engines engaged. Helm answering.
FARRELL: Out of orbit, sir.
KIRK: Ahead full.
SULU: Ahead full, sir.
BERKELEY: Ready to beam down. Energise. Energise.
KIRK: Having trouble, gentlemen?
BERKELEY: I just don't understand the problem, sir.
KIRK: You're beaming cargo down to a penal colony, Mister Berkeley.
BERKELEY: Their security force field, sir.
KIRK: U.S.S. Enterprise to Tantalus colony.
WOMAN [OC]: Rehab colony. Come in.
KIRK: Request opening in your force field for beaming down of cargo.
WOMAN [OC]: Enterprise, affirmative. Our security cover is now open.
KIRK: Energise. Any incoming cargo?
BERKELEY: Just one item, sir. Some research material bound for the Central Bureau of Penology at Stockholm.
WOMAN [OC]: Tantalus cargo ready to beam up.
KIRK: Oh, Mister Berkeley, you might refamiliarise yourself with the manual on penal colony procedures.
BERKELEY: Immediately, sir.
KIRK: I think you can take the time to lock this up first.
BERKELEY: I'll get a vault assignment. (leaves. The box opens, a man climbs out and attacks the technician)

Captain's log, stardate 2715.1. Exchanged cargo with penal colony on Tantalus V. I've departed without going ashore.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I would like to have met Doctor Adams. Have you ever been to a penal colony since they started following his theories?
MCCOY: A cage is a cage, Jim.
KIRK: You're behind the times, Bones. They're more like resort colonies now.
UHURA: Message, Captain. Switching to speaker.
WOMAN [OC]: Tantalus colony to Enterprise. We are unable to locate one of our inmates. This is a potentially violent case. Possibly hidden in the box we beamed up to you. Repeat, unable to locate one of our inmates. This is a potentially violent case.
KIRK: Enterprise acknowledging. Stand by. Security alert three.
UHURA: Security alert, condition three. All sections go to alert condition three. We may have an intruder aboard.

[Corridor]

UHURA [OC]: Repeat, all sections to alert condition three. Intruder aboard.
SECURITY: (to intruder who has swapped overall with technician) Hey, you from Engineering! (runs) Bridge. Section C, deck fourteen.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, section C deck fourteen, reporting trouble. Someone in Engineering uniform.
KIRK: Security control, this is the Bridge. Come in.
SPOCK: I have them, Captain. Closing off deck fourteen, search in progress.

[Corridor]

UHURA [OC]: Security alert, condition three. (intruder jumps one of the security men) Approximately six foot four male, early forties. Approach with caution. This man's extremely dangerous.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Repeat, approach with extreme caution. Bridge out.
SPOCK: Negative in the deck area, Captain. He may have gotten out. Expanding search to adjoining sections.
KIRK: Enterprise to Tantalus colony.
ADAMS [OC]: Tantalus colony. Adams here.
KIRK: Doctor Adams? This is Captain Kirk. It appears we may have an inmate of yours aboard the ship.
UHURA: Transporter crewman found unconscious, Captain. Cargo case open and empty.
KIRK: Make that definite, Doctor. He's aboard.
ADAMS [OC]: Terribly sorry, Captain. I take all the blame. Let me repeat, he's clever as well as extremely violent. Take all possible precautions.
KIRK: We'll keep you posted, Doctor. Kirk out.
SPOCK: Interesting. Your Earth people glorify organised violence for forty centuries, but you imprison those who employ it privately.
MCCOY: And, of course, your people found an answer.
SPOCK: We disposed of emotion, Doctor. Where there is no emotion there is no motive for violence.
GELDER: Where's the captain? Which one of you is the captain?
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk.
GELDER: My name is Van Gelder. I want asylum.
KIRK: At gunpoint?
GELDER: I want your promise first, your word that you won't take me back there, to Tantalus.
KIRK: No promises. Give me the weapon.
GELDER: No! No. No, I'm not going back! I'll disable your vessel first. You choose, Captain. I'll destroy your control panel.
(Gelder is distracted and Spock neck-pinches him)
KIRK: Take him to Sickbay. Reverse course. Head back for Tantalus colony.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Abnormal, of course, but it's not schizophrenia, tissue damage, or any condition I'm acquainted with, Jim. And you know after getting him here, it took almost a triple dose of sedative to put him under.
KIRK: Your report said he was quite talkative.
MCCOY: But not very informative. He claimed one thing, then he seemed to forget, and then he'd start to claim something else, but always with just the ring of truth in it. I'd sure like to study this one, Jim.
KIRK: Not our problem, Bones.
GELDER: You smart, button-pushing brass hat. Wash your hands of it. Is that your system? You're both quite sure of yourselves, aren't you? Quite expert. Take him back. Let someone else worry about him.
KIRK: What did you say your name was?
GELDER: My name? My name is Simon Van Gelder. (in great pain) I was the director of, director at the Tantalus colony.
MCCOY: You see what I mean?
GELDER: I was a graduate of, of. I was assistant to Doctor. I knew. I knew, but they've erased it.
MCCOY: Erased?
GELDER: Edited, adjusted, subverted me, but I won't forget! I won't forget! You, you're so blind ignorant. You believe I belong back there, don't you? Dead or alive. Well, I won't let you take me back. I'm not going! I'll die first! Do you hear? I'm not going! No! No! No.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Estimated arrival at Tantalus?
SPOCK: Fifty seven minutes, thirty seconds, Captain.
KIRK: What's so fascinating?
SPOCK: An identification tape from our ship's library on Doctor Simon Van Gelder.
KIRK: Doctor Van Gelder?
SPOCK: Doctor Van Gelder, Captain. No mistake. There's a full ID tape on him.
KIRK: Committed to Tantalus colony when?
SPOCK: Assigned there six months ago as Doctor Adams' associate.
KIRK: Ship to surface, Tantalus colony.
UHURA: Hailing frequency's open, sir.
KIRK: U.S.S. Enterprise to Tantalus colony.
WOMAN [OC]: Tantalus.
KIRK: This is Captain Kirk. I'd like to speak to Doctor Adams.
WOMAN [OC]: Stand by, Enterprise.
ADAMS [OC]: Captain Kirk, Doctor Adams here.
KIRK: Doctor Adams, regarding your escaped man
ADAMS [OC]: Is Doctor Van Gelder all right? And your people, no injuries?
KIRK: No casualties, sir. This man is Doctor Simon Van Gelder?
ADAMS [OC]: Yes, of course. You're certain he's all right? We've been very concerned. In the violent state he's in
KIRK: No harm to him, sir. We thought you might enlighten us as to his condition.
ADAMS [OC]: He'd been doing some experimental work, Captain, an experimental beam we'd hoped might rehabilitate incorrigibles. Van Gelder felt he hadn't the moral right to expose another man to something he hadn't tried on his own person.
KIRK: Tragedy, Doctor.
MCCOY: Jim, that doesn't quite ring true.
KIRK: Er, Doctor Adams, please stand by. Explain.
MCCOY: I don't believe him. I can't explain it, but the more I study that patient
KIRK: You don't believe him, and you can't explain it. Bones, are you aware that in the last twenty years Doctor Adams has done more to revolutionise, to humanise prisons and the treatment of prisoners than all the rest of humanity had done in forty centuries? I've been to those penal colonies since they've begun following his methods, and they're not cages anymore.
MCCOY: Jim
KIRK: They're clean, decent hospitals for sick minds.
MCCOY: Jim, listen!
SPOCK: Gentlemen, I suggest you ask Doctor Adams if he wants Van Gelder returned.
KIRK: Doctor Adams, regarding Van Gelder.
ADAMS [OC]: Yes, Captain. May I inquire about your patrol destinations? Are you passing near any hospital facilities superior to ours? I'd like Van Gelder to have the best possible treatment, of course.
KIRK: Thank you, Doctor. I'll take it up with the ship's surgeon. Stand by. Well, Bones, you've got the ball. You care to recommend a better place?
MCCOY: There are no superior facilities, he knows that. But that's not the question. If something unusual is going on down there
KIRK: An assumption, Doctor.
MCCOY: I'm required to enter any reasonable doubts into my medical log. That requires you to answer in your log. Sorry, Jim.
KIRK: Doctor Adams, this is rather embarrassing. By strict interpretation of our starship regulation, I'm required to initiate an investigation of this so that a proper report
ADAMS [OC]: No need to apologise, Captain Kirk. In fact, I'd take it as a personal favour if you'd beam down and look into it yourself. I'm sure you realise we don't get too many visitors here. Oh, I, er, Captain, I would appreciate it if you could come down with a minimum staff. We're forced to limit outside contact as much as possible.
KIRK: Affirmative, Doctor. I've visited rehab colonies before. Enterprise out. Find me someone in your department with psychiatric and penology experience, if possible.
MCCOY: Yes, sir.

Captain's log, stardate 2715.2. Standard orbit, planet Tantalus V.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mission, routine investigation and report as per ship surgeon's medical log. As for my last entry, it seems I will get to meet Doctor Adams at last. However, I would have preferred other circumstances. Sickbay. Report, Doctor.
MCCOY [on monitor]: Van Gelder's still violently agitated, Captain.
KIRK: And you'd prefer to keep him here until I complete my investigation anyway.
SPOCK: I believe we should, Jim.
MCCOY [on monitor]: Oh, I'm assigning your technical aide, Captain. One of our psychiatrists does have a background in rehabilitative therapy. Doctor Noel, standing by in the transporter room now.
KIRK: Thank you, Doctor. Bridge out. Mister Spock.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Co-ordinates?
BERKELEY: Locked in, sir. Ready to beam down.
NOEL: Doctor Helen Noel, Captain. We've met. Don't you remember the science lab Christmas party?
KIRK: Yes, I remember.
NOEL: You dropped in
KIRK: Yes, yes, I remember.
SPOCK: Problem, Captain?
KIRK: Mister Spock, you tell McCoy that she had better check out as the best assistant I ever had. Energise.
BERKELEY: Energise.

[Building entrance]

KIRK: In here, I presume, Doctor.
NOEL: Perhaps it would be simpler if you called me Helen, Captain, since
KIRK: This is another time, another place, and another situation.
NOEL: Of course, Captain.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Elevator, and going down quite a ways.
NOEL: (in his arms) I wouldn't recommend it for weak hearts.

[Adam's study]

ADAMS: Hello Captain Kirk, and er
KIRK: Doctor Helen Noel. It's a pleasure to finally meet you, sir.
ADAMS: Thank you. Thank you, Captain. Welcome to Devil's Island, Doctor.
NOEL: Perhaps you'll call me Helen, Doctor. With so many titles around, we're not going to be sure who's talking to who.
ADAMS: I shall indeed. Won't you?
NOEL: Thank you.
KIRK: I believe regulations call for me to check my weapon.
ADAMS: No, no. That won't be necessary in your case, Captain. Just keep it out of sight, hmm? I know you people feel as naked without a weapon as we do without a medikit. A small toast. Do you mind? It's such a great day for us here on Tantalus when we have visitors, no matter what the excuse.
KIRK: Doctor.
ADAMS: Oh, now, Captain, you made your apology from upstairs. Now forget it. I don't think you'll be able to get through the security screen, Captain. Just a second, hmm? There. Now try it.
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
SPOCK [OC]: Enterprise. Spock here.
KIRK: Your landing co-ordinates were right on the nose, Mister Spock. We arrived safely, and we're here with Doctor Adams right now. Kirk out.
SPOCK [OC]: Affirmative, Captain. Enterprise out.
ADAMS: Ah, Lethe, come in. Lethe, this is Captain Kirk and Doctor Helen Noel. Lethe came to us for rehabilitation and stayed on as a therapist, and a very good one too, I might add.
LETHE: I love my work.
ADAMS: Go right ahead, Captain.
KIRK: Before you came here
LETHE: I was another person, malignant, hateful.
KIRK: May I ask what crime you committed?
LETHE: Does it matter? That person no longer exists.
ADAMS: Um, part of our cure, if you will, Captain, is to bury the past. Why should a person go on living with unbearable memories if there's no necess. Oh, I feel quite sure that you'd concur with me in that, Doctor. Helen.
NOEL: A shifting of memory patterns is basic to psychotherapy.
ADAMS: Yes. And now to the toast, hmm? You'll forgive us, Lethe. There you are, Captain. To all mankind. May we never find space so vast, planets so cold, heart and mind so empty that, that we cannot fill them with love and warmth.

[Corridor]

KIRK: Quite a tour, Doctor. Very impressive.
ADAMS: Thank you. Hi, Carl.

[Treatment room]

KIRK: Doctor.
ADAMS: Yes?
KIRK: Hmm?
ADAMS: Ah. I was afraid you would ask about this, Captain. One doesn't like to talk about their personal failures, you know? It was just an experiment that went wrong, I'm afraid.
KIRK: May I see it?
NOEL: Captain, if something hasn't worked out and therefore has no scientific fact
KIRK: Shall we leave it up to the doctor?
NOEL: Since you brought me down here for advice, Captain
KIRK: One of the advantages of being a Captain, Doctor, is being able to ask for advice without necessarily having to take it.
ADAMS: I think I'll have to award that round to the Captain, Helen. You're fighting over your weight. All right, let's take a look.

[Sickbay]

GELDER: I'm not a criminal! I do not require neural neutraliser.
SPOCK: Neural neutraliser. Can you explain that, Doctor Van Gelder?
GELDER: A room. A device. Door. Control panel. I see it. A device. A light! The light!
SPOCK: This room. What happens there?
GELDER: (screams)

[Treatment room]

ADAMS: A neural neutraliser. Experimental. Actually, we don't expect to get much use out of it at all. That beam from above neutralises brain waves, relaxes the patient's mind. Does them no harm, of course, and the effects are only temporary.
KIRK: One question, Doctor. If it doesn't do any good
ADAMS: Why do we go on using it, hmm, Captain? Hope. Yes, yes, there's always that slight chance that it might do some good in the more violent cases.
NOEL: Tranquillisers are fine, Captain, but to continually pump chemicals into a person's bloodstream
ADAMS: Exactly my point, Helen. Yes. Shall we? (he and Noel leave)
KIRK: (to therapist) How does it work?
THERAPIST: Quite simple. Off on switches, and the large control here changes the strength of the brain neutralising beam.
ADAMS: Captain, you remind me of the ancient sceptic who demanded of the wise old sage to be taught all the world's wisdom while standing on one foot.
NOEL: Beam neutralising has been experimented with on Earth, Captain. I'm not acquainted with this particular style of equipment, but I can assure you that Doctor Adams has not created a chamber of horrors here.
KIRK: I didn't mean to suggest that he had. The reason I asked, sir, was you haven't mentioned where Doctor Van Gelder's injury occurred.
ADAMS: Right here, Captain. Yes, Simon was a very stubborn man. He could've sat in that room for years with the beam at that volume or even higher. Or if he simply had someone standing by to snap it off in case he got into trouble, but, but no. He tried it alone and on full volume. It's a pity.
KIRK: (to therapist) Thank you. (leaves)
THERAPIST: (to man in treatment chair) You will forget all you have heard. To remember any portion of it, any word, will cause you pain, terrible pain, growing more terrible as you fight to remember.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Can you give us your present location, Captain?
KIRK [OC]: In Doctor Adams' study, Mister Spock. Why?
SPOCK: Then you're with Doctor Adams now.
KIRK [OC]: Affirmative.
SPOCK: Captain, Van Gelder has made reference to a particular treatment room. The term was neural neutraliser.

[Adam's study]

KIRK: Yes. He was injured there. I've seen the room. Doctor Adams explained

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: the mistake Van Gelder made.

[Adam's study]

KIRK: Go ahead, Mister Spock. Anything further?
ADAMS: Your Mister Spock sounds like a very excellent second in command, Captain Kirk. Please tell him to go ahead and speak freely. I have to check in with a member of my staff anyway.
KIRK: Thank you, Doctor Adams.
ADAMS: Excuse me.
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Spock. Doctor Adams has left with some things to attend to. What is it, Mister Spock?

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Van Gelder is extremely agitated, Captain, and warns that you are in danger.

[Adam's study]

NOEL: Oh, that's foolish.
SPOCK [OC]: Please repeat, Captain. I didn't receive that.
KIRK: Tell McCoy the technical expert he sent along with me insists that any concern is unjustified. According to Adams, Van Gelder created his own problem.
NOEL: He's suffering from

[Sickbay]

NOEL [OC]: neuro-synapse damage, as if his brain were short-circuited. It's no wonder he's having delusions.
MCCOY: McCoy here. Received and understood.

[Adam's study]

MCCOY [OC]: But we still have some doubts up here, Captain. Can you tell us any more?
KIRK: Not really.
SPOCK: When do you plan to beam back up, Captain?
KIRK: I think we'll spend the night here, Mister Spock.

[Sickbay]

GELDER: No! No, no, no.
SPOCK: And you will continue to check in every four hours?
KIRK [OC]: Affirmative.

[Adam's study]

KIRK: Kirk out.

[Sickbay]

GELDER: No! No. No, don't let them! You must warn your captain. No! No! Don't let him stay! Don't let him stay! Don't! No. No. Don't hypo me. Please, don't hypo me. I'll try not to fight. I'll try. But you must listen. Warn your Captain. Doctor Adams. Doc, Doctor Adams will destroy.
SPOCK: Destroy how? What?
GELDER: Right death.

SPOCK [OC]: Enterprise log. First officer Spock, acting captain. I must now use an ancient Vulcan technique to probe into Van Gelder's tortured mind.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Spock, if there's the slightest possibility it might help.
SPOCK: I've never used it on a human, Doctor.
MCCOY: If there's any way we can look into this man's mind to see if what he's seeing is real or delusion
SPOCK: It's a hidden, personal thing to the Vulcan people, part of our private lives.
MCCOY: Now look, Spock, Jim Kirk could be in real trouble. Will it work or not?
SPOCK: It could be dangerous. Do you understand? It requires I make pressure changes in your nerves, your blood vessels.
GELDER: You must open my mind. Let me warn you and explain to you.
SPOCK: This will not affect you, Doctor McCoy, only the person I touch. It is not hypnosis.
MCCOY: I understand. (Spock puts his hands on Gelder's face) Good, the reading's levelling.
SPOCK: You begin to feel a strange euphoria. Your body floats.
GELDER: Yes, I begin to feel it.
SPOCK: Open your mind. We move together. Our minds sharing the same thoughts.

[Noel's room]

KIRK: Good evening.
NOEL: Good evening.
KIRK: What did you think of the inmates we saw here this afternoon?
NOEL: You could've waited until tomorrow morning to ask me that, Captain.
KIRK: I didn't.
NOEL: I thought they were happy, well-adjusted.
KIRK: But a bit blank.
NOEL: Captain, if you're questioning the methods of a man like Tristan Adams
KIRK: I'd like to see that treatment room again. You say you're somewhat familiar with the theory behind it?
NOEL: Yes, somewhat, but if you'd simply state any doubts you have to Doctor Adams
KIRK: And if he's lying, he'll continue to lie, and I won't find out a thing. The only way I can be sure is to see that machine at work, or is that too impractical and unscientific of me, Doctor? Well?
NOEL: Coming.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: What is our name? Who are we?
GELDER: We are Simon Van Gelder.
SPOCK: Doctor Adams. The neural neutraliser. What did he do to us?
GELDER: He can reshape any mind he chooses. He used it to erase our memories, put his own thoughts there. He was surprised it took so much power. We fought him, remember? But we grew so tired, our minds so blank, so open, that any thought he placed there became our thoughts. Our minds so empty like a sponge, needing thoughts, begging. Empty. Loneliness. So lonely to be sitting there empty, wanting any word from him. Love.
SPOCK: Yes.
GELDER: Hate.
SPOCK: Yes.
GELDER: Live.
SPOCK: Yes.
GELDER: Die.
SPOCK: Yes.
GELDER: Such agony to be empty.
SPOCK: Empty.
GELDER: Lonely.
SPOCK: Lonely.
GELDER: So empty.
SPOCK: Empty.
GELDER: So empty.

[Treatment room]

KIRK: I have no desire to damage my brain. Can this be handled with reasonable safety? Yes or no?
NOEL: Yes.
KIRK: And will you be able to determine if that beam is harming me in the slightest?
NOEL: Yes, Captain. I know my profession. (Kirk sits in treatment chair) Ready?
KIRK: Mm-hmm.
NOEL: We'll try minimum intensity, a second or two. (light turns)
KIRK: Anytime you're ready, Doctor, just for a second or two.
NOEL: We already tried it for that long, Captain.
KIRK: Nothing happened.
NOEL: Something happened. Your face went completely blank.
KIRK: Try a harmless suggestion.
NOEL: (light turns) You're hungry.
KIRK: You know, when we finally get through this I'd like to locate and raid a kitchen somewhere.
NOEL: I put that suggestion in your mind, Captain. I said simply that you were hungry.
KIRK: Remarkably effective for a device that Doctor Adams was going to abandon.
NOEL: I think we should try this again.
KIRK: Yes. Pick something unusual, an unusual suggestion, something we can both be sure of.
NOEL: (light turns) At the Christmas party, we met, we danced, you talked about the stars. I suggest now that it happened in a different way. You swept me off my feet and carried me to your cabin.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Merry Christmas.
NOEL: Captain, if your crew saw you carry me here.
KIRK: My crew is sworn to secrecy.
NOEL: But my reputation. I mean, just having met like this. Of course, it would be different if you cared for me.
KIRK: You want me to manufacture a lie, wrap it up as a Christmas present for you?
NOEL: No, I prefer honesty. (they kiss)

[Treatment room]

ADAMS: Now Captain Kirk is going to have a complete demonstration. I want there to be no doubts whatsoever in his mind. Mmm. You're madly in love with Helen, Captain. You'd lie, cheat, steal for her, sacrifice your career, your reputation.
NOEL: No, Doctor! No!
ADAMS: The pain. Do you feel it, Captain? You must have her, or the pain grows worse, the pain, the longing for her.
KIRK: Helen.
NOEL: No.
ADAMS: For years, you've loved her, Captain, for years.
KIRK: For years, I've loved you.
ADAMS: You must continue to remember that, Captain. And now, she's gone. (machine to maximum)
KIRK: Helen! Helen, don't go! I need you, Helen!
ADAMS: (reduces intensity) Now Captain, you must take your phaser weapon and drop it on the floor. Captain, the pain increases unless you obey me.
KIRK: I must drop it.
ADAMS: Very good, Captain. Very good indeed. And now your communicator. Drop it on the floor.
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Argh! (machine to maximum) Kirk to Enterprise. Argh!
NOEL: No!

[Kirk's room]

NOEL: They've taken you from the room, Captain. You're in your own quarters now.
KIRK: Helen. Helen, for years I've loved you. Helen.
NOEL: Try to remember.
KIRK: I've loved you.
NOEL: He placed all that in your mind.
KIRK: For years.
NOEL: Remember. Doctor Adams took the controls away from me. Do you remember the pain and then his voice? Remember?
KIRK: Yes. Yes, I remember. I remember. Helen. Look. The duct. The duct. Give me a hand here. Pull. (cover comes open) Air conditioning. It has to connect with other ducts and tunnels. You can get through this. It might lead to the power supply. Short-circuited, it would cut off the security force field. Have you had any training in hyper-power circuits?
NOEL: No.
KIRK: Megavoltage. Touch the wrong line, and you're dead.
NOEL: Anything's better than Adams' treatment room. (he closes the cover behind her and the door opens) Time for another treatment?

[Treatment room]

ADAMS: Please don't fight me, Captain. The pain only gets worse when you doubt me. You believe in me completely.
KIRK: I believe in you.
ADAMS: You trust me completely.
KIRK: I trust you.
ADAMS: Excellent, Captain. I compliment you. Do you know Doctor Van Gelder was down on his hands and knees sobbing at this point? It was so gratifying. I'm so fortunate to have had a couple of excellent specimens to, to work with. I've learned a great deal.
LETHE: The woman doctor. She's gone, Doctor Adams.
ADAMS: Notify security at once, Lethe. Where is she, Captain?
KIRK: I, argh, I don't know.
ADAMS: Where is Helen And with what instructions?
KIRK: I don't know. (collapses)
(Noel makes it to the power control room and finds an off switch but it won't move)

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Emergency channel D.
BERKELEY: It's no good, Mister Spock. I can't break through their force field.
SPOCK: Keep trying.
(Noel hides as guards search for her, and when they go she pulls down the master high voltage switch. A guard grabs her)

[Treatment room]

ADAMS: Put him back in the chair, Eli, and find that girl. (Kirk knocks them both out and leaves)
(the guard turns the power back on again, but when he reaches for Noel she pushes him against the high volt grid and he fries, cutting the power again)

[Transporter room]

BERKELEY: Mister Spock, the force field is gone. I can send you right to the source of the interruption.
SPOCK: (to McCoy) Get some security people and follow me down. Energise.

[Power control room]

(Noel dashes back into the aircon tunnels)
SPOCK: (pushes a load of buttons) Enterprise, this is Spock. Force field has been eliminated. (turns main power back on again)

[Kirk's room]

NOEL: Captain. Captain?
KIRK: (helps her out of vent) Helen, are you all right? (kisses her)
NOEL: Yes. This isn't right, Captain. (Spock enters) Doctor Adams did this to you.
KIRK: Doctor Adams? Doctor A. The treatment room. Follow me.

[Treatment room]

MCCOY: Jim! (Kirk turns machine off)
KIRK: The power came on.
MCCOY: He's dead, Captain.
NOEL: The machine wasn't on high enough to kill.
KIRK: But he was alone. Can you imagine the mind emptied by that thing? Without even a tormentor for company.
NOEL: I understand.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Oh, Captain, there was a message from Tantalus colony, sir.
SPOCK: It was from Van Gelder. He thought you'd like to know the treatment room had been dismantled and the equipment destroyed.
KIRK: Thank you.
MCCOY: It's hard to believe that a man could die of loneliness.
KIRK: Not when you've sat in that room. Take us out of orbit, Mister Spock. Ahead warp factor one.
SPOCK: Acknowledged, Captain. Warp factor one.

KIRK: Anything, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: No, sir. I've tried every major transmitting station on Deneva. None of them have acknowledged my contact signal. 
KIRK: Try GSK-783, sub-space frequency 3. 
UHURA: But sir, that's a call sign for a private transmitter. 
KIRK: I'm very well aware of that, Lieutenant. Try it. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Evaluation, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: As I speculated, Captain, the overall pattern of mass insanity destroying civilisations follows an almost straight line through this section of the galaxy. Over here the Beta Portilin system the ancient civilisations. Archaeologists have given us information indicating that they were the beginning. Two hundred years ago, Levinius Five was swept by mass insanity, then Theta Cygni Twelve. The last was Ingraham B, two years ago. 
KIRK: And next in line, Deneva. Bones, what's your theory about the cause of all this? 
MCCOY: There's no medical or scientific cause for what happened on those planets. Jim. 
KIRK: But it follows a definite pattern, a systematic progression from planet to planet. 
SULU: Captain, we're picking up a ship on our sensors, heading directly into the Denevan sun. He'll burn up. 
KIRK: Plot an interception course, Mister Sulu. Warp factor eight. Lieutenant Uhura, try to contact that ship. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: The ship is a one-man vessel of Denevan configuration, Captain. He does not seem to be out of control. His course is straight for the sun. 
KIRK: Scotty, tractor beams? 
SCOTT: Out of range, sir. 
UHURA: Making contact, Captain. 
KIRK: Denevan ship, this is the USS Enterprise. Can you reverse your course? Acknowledge. 
SCOTT: Captain, we'll get too close to the sun. 
KIRK: Keep closing. Denevan ship, reverse your course. Do you hear me? Reverse your course. Acknowledge. 
SPOCK: Outer hull temperature now four hundred and eighty degrees and rising. 
SULU: He's too close, Captain. 
SPOCK: So are we. Hull temperature one thousand degrees and rising. The sun's gravimetric pull increasing. 
PILOT [OC]: I did it. It's finally gone. I'm free. I'm 
SULU: He burned up, Captain. 
KIRK: Reverse course. One hundred and eighty degrees about. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
SPOCK: All clear, Captain. Hull temperature falling, gravimetric pull approaching tolerance level. 
KIRK: Very well. Reduce to sub-warp speed. Take us to Deneva. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: That Denevan ship headed deliberately into the sun. Why? 
MCCOY: There's one possibility. The mass insanity may have reached this planet, too. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm having difficulty on that transmitter call to Deneva. 
KIRK: Keep trying. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: Jim, your brother Sam and his family, aren't they stationed on this planet?

Captain's log stardate 3287.2. The mass insanity we have tracked across this section of the galaxy seems to have already touched Deneva. That planet, colonised over a century ago, is one of the most beautiful in the galaxy.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Planet development is normal, Captain. Originally colonised as a freighting-line base in this area. 
SCOTT: Aye, they make regular trips from here carrying supplies to the asteroid belt for the miners and bringing cargo out. I've made the run a couple of times myself as an engineering advisor. 
SPOCK: No Federation contacts for over a year. 
UHURA: Captain. I've made contact with your private transmitter, sir. 
KIRK: Put it on audio. 
AURELAN [OC]: Please hurry. Help us. I don't have much time. They'll know. Please! Please help us 
KIRK: Aurelan, this is Jim on the Enterprise. Repeat your message. 
UHURA: Contact broken, sir. 
KIRK: Re-establish. 
UHURA: Sorry, sir. 
KIRK: I'm not interested in your excuses, Lieutenant. Re-establish contact with that transmitter. 
UHURA: I'm afraid that's impossible at the moment, Captain. They stopped broadcasting immediately. They do not acknowledge my contact signal. 
KIRK: Keep trying to raise them. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: Jim, did you know who that woman was? 
KIRK: Yes. You were right a while back. My brother Sam lives on Deneva. He's a research biologist. That woman sounded like his wife Aurelan.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Set your phasers on stun. We're going to beam directly into the capital city. Alert status. Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant Uhura has had no further response to our signals. Sensors report the expected number of humans on the planet surface. However, they are strangely quiet. Very little activity. 
KIRK: I'll want a complete transcript of everything that happens down there, Yeoman. 
ZAHRA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Let's go. Energise.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk, Spock, McCoy, Scott, the Yeoman and two security guards beam into an open area with grass, formal ponds and sculpture in front of a concrete and glass-fronted building.) 
KIRK: There are almost a million inhabitants of Deneva. There's more than one hundred thousand in this city alone. Where is everyone? 
SPOCK: They're here, Captain. In the buildings. Strangely quiescent. 
KIRK: My brother's lab is over there. They signalled us once. There should be someone there. Let's find out what's happening. 
SPOCK: Captain, several people approaching. 
MEN: Go back! Get away! We don't want to hurt you! Go back! Get out of here. Go on, get away! Go away! Get out of here! We don't want to hurt you. 
KIRK: Stand by to fire. Fire. 
(The four attacking men are stunned.) 
KIRK: Did you hear what they said, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Indeed. They seemed most concerned for our safety. 
KIRK: They tried to brain us with these clubs. Check them out, Bones. 
SPOCK: Their attitude was inconsistent with their actions. 
KIRK: To say the least. 
MCCOY: There's something wrong, Jim. Their nervous systems. Unconscious like this, there should be just routine autonomic activity, but I'm getting a very high reading, as though even in their unconscious state, they're being violently stimulated. 
(A woman's scream cuts the air.) 
KIRK: Fan out. Follow me. Security.

[Laboratory]

(A woman is trying to cover the air vents. A man and a boy are lying on the floor.) 
AURELAN: They're here! They're here! Please keep them away! 
KIRK: (bearhugging her) Aurelan. 
AURELAN: They're here! They're here! 
KIRK: Bones. (McCoy sedates her) Aurelan, you're safe now. 
MCCOY: Is this your brother, Jim? 
KIRK: Sam. It is my brother. Was my brother. 
MCCOY: I'm sorry, Jim. The boy's unconscious, but he's still alive. 
KIRK: Peter? 
MCCOY: I'd better get the boy and his mother back to the ship. I can't do much for them down here. 
KIRK: Get ready to beam up. 
MCCOY: McCoy to Enterprise. Prepare to beam up party of four. 
SPOCK: Captain, I understand how you must 
KIRK: Yes. Yes, Mister Spock. You heard my sister-in-law say something about they being here. Your guess. 
SPOCK: Notice the ventilator, Captain. Apparently they were trying to keep something outside from getting in. Obviously they were not entirely successful. 
KIRK: It doesn't make sense. There are no harmful life forms reported. Our sensors didn't pick up anything that didn't belong here. 
SPOCK: That is correct. I am at a loss to understand it. 
MCCOY: Ready to beam up, Captain. I'd like you to be onboard when your sister-in-law regains consciousness. 
KIRK: Take charge of the landing party, Mister Spock. I want some answers to all this.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: I won't be able to give you the exact cause until I get the plates back from the lab. They're both in extreme pain. I sedated them heavily. But your sister-in-law seems to have a high tolerance. The tranquilliser hasn't affected her much. 
KIRK: Can she talk? 
MCCOY: Yes. 
KIRK: Aurelan? Aurelan, it's Jim. 
AURELAN: Jim? Sam, he's 
KIRK: He's dead. But your son's still alive. You've got to help us. 
AURELAN: You are here. It is you, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, I'm here. You have to tell us what happened, Aurelan, to you and the others. 
AURELAN: They came eight months ago. 
KIRK: Who? 
AURELAN: Things. Horrible things! Visitors brought them in their vessel from a planet. Ingraham B. 
KIRK: What kind of things? 
AURELAN: Not the ship's crew's fault. The things made them bring their ship here. 
KIRK: Aurelan, it's important that you tell us. What kind of things? 
AURELAN: Not their fault. 
(She starts screaming and crying again, so McCoy gives her another shot.) 
MCCOY: When she answers questions, any questions, it's as if she's fighting to get the answers out. As though something is exerting pain to stop her. 
AURELAN: They use it to control us. They're spreading, Jim. They need us to be their arms and legs. They're forcing us to build ships for them. Don't let them! Don't let them go any further! 
(One last scream and convulsion, then all her readings plummet to zero. KIRK: My brother's son? 
MCCOY: I'll do everything I can, Jim, to save him.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Report. 
SPOCK: The streets are extraordinarily quiet, Captain. We've seen no other Denevans, and the ones we stunned earlier were gone when we came out. 
KIRK: You've seen some kind of creature? Any alien form? 
SCOTT: None, sir. Just that noise we heard. 
SPOCK: A peculiar buzzing sound. We were about to investigate it. 
KIRK: All right. Let's go find out what it is. Set your phasers on force three, to kill. We're looking for some kind of creature, and we already know it will kill.

[Courtyard]

(They go down some steps into a shady courtyard where the noise is coming from. There are gelatinous-looking creatures attached to the shady side of a lintel.) 
KIRK: Spock! 
(One detaches and flies around them.) 
KIRK: Form a ring. Fire! 
(After a prolonged burst, one falls to the ground and the others fly off.) 
SPOCK: Incredible. Not only should it have been destroyed by our phasers, it does not even register on my tricorder. 
ZAHRA: Captain, it doesn't even look real. 
SPOCK: It is not life as we know or understand it. Yet t is obviously alive, it exists. 
KIRK: And it can bear up under full phaser power. 
SPOCK: Captain, I suggest we risk taking it aboard. 
KIRK: It's too close in here. It may be a trap in here. Let's move out. 
(As they head up the stairs, the felled creature revives and lands on Spock's back. He falls back in pain.) 
KIRK: Spock! Spock! (He pulls it off) It's gone. Can you stand? Spock, are you all right?

Captain's log supplemental. Whatever the creatures are, they have apparently taken over all the inhabitants of Deneva. Meanwhile, ship's surgeon Doctor McCoy is examining a strange puncture wound left by one of the creatures on Mister Spock's back.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Nurse. That's the second time he's come out of it. Either he's fighting us, or something inside of him is fighting us. 
CHAPEL: Doctor, the readings have never looked like that before, not even on Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: Let's prepare to close. Nurse! 
CHAPEL: Doctor, that's not all you're going to do? 
MCCOY: Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Doctor, there is more of it in him, entwined all through his body. 
MCCOY: Miss Chapel, if you cannot assist me as required, call another nurse in here. But do one or the other now.

[Bridge]

(McCoy enters in his surgical scrubs, carrying a jar.) 
KIRK: How is he? 
MCCOY: To be very frank, Jim, I don't know that I can do anything for Spock or your nephew. (hold up the jar) They're pieces of some form of living tissue. I removed one from Spock's spinal cord, the other from your sister-in-law's body. They're both the same. The boy's too weak to touch. Besides, removal of the tissue wouldn't stop the pain anyhow as far as I can tell. 
KIRK: Did you operate on Spock in time? 
MCCOY: No. I just removed these for examination. His body's full of these tentacles, entwining and growing all about his nervous system. 
KIRK: My nephew? 
MCCOY: The same. Evidently, when the creature attacks, it leaves a stinger much like a bee or wasp, leaving one of these in the victim's body. It takes over the victim very rapidly, and the entwining is far, far too involved for conventional surgery to remove. 
KIRK: Recommendations? 
MCCOY: I'm sorry, Jim. The lab, the science departments, we're all stumped.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: No! No! (he sits up) 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: (hoarsely) No, I won't. 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock. 
(Spock leaves) 
CHAPEL: Bridge, this is Sickbay. Tell Doctor McCoy Mister Spock just left here.

[Bridge]

CHAPEL [OC]: He's delirious and possibly dangerous. 
KIRK: All decks, security alert. Locate and restrain Mister Spock. He may be dangerous. Use phasers on stun if necessary. 
(Spock enters the Bridge and throws Sulu out of his seat.) 
SPOCK: I must take the ship.
(Three of them wrestle him to the floor as Chapel enters and hands a hypo to McCoy.) 
SPOCK: Down! I must take it down. 
(McCoy sedates him.) 
KIRK: Get him back to the Sickbay. Use security restraints.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: The K3 indicator registers the level of pain. Watch as I turn it on. That's what he's been going through. I've never seen anything like it. No wonder the poor devils go mad. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy. Captain. 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: These restraints will no longer be necessary. Nor will your sedatives, Doctor. I'll be able to return to duty. I apologise for my weakness earlier when I tried to take control of the ship. I simply did not understand. 
What is there to understand, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I am a Vulcan, Doctor. Pain is a thing of the mind. The mind can be controlled. 
KIRK: You're only half-Vulcan. What about the human half of you? 
SPOCK: It is proving to be an inconvenience, but it is manageable. And the creature, with all of its thousands of parts, even now is pressuring me. (the pain indicator hits the top of the monitor) It wants this ship, but I am resisting. 
KIRK: Can he control it the way he says, Bones? 
MCCOY: Who knows, Jim? I know the amount of pain the creature can inflict upon him, but whether he can control it hour to hour 
SPOCK: I have my own will, Captain. Let me help. 
KIRK: I need you, Spock, but we can't take any chances. We'll keep you confined for a while longer. If you can maintain control, we'll see. My nephew. If he regains consciousness, will he go through that? 
MCCOY: Yes. 
KIRK: Help them. I don't care what it takes or costs. You've got to help them. 
MCCOY: Jim, aren't you forgetting something? There are over a million colonists on that planet down there, just as much your responsibility. They need your help, too. 
(They leave.) 
SPOCK: I am a Vulcan. I am a Vulcan. There is no pain. 
(Then he breaks his restraints.)

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, I thought you were still confined to Sickbay. 
SPOCK: I was. 
SCOTT: Here, now. Where do you think you're going? 
SPOCK: I have an errand on the planet's surface. You will beam me down to the same co-ordinates as before. 
SCOTT: Not likely, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: That is an order, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir, and I'm sorry I have to disobey it. The Captain said no one was to transport down. Mister Spock. 
(Spock pushes Scott aside and neck-pinches his assistant. But Scott has a phaser in his hand when he gets up again.) 
SCOTT: Freeze right there, Mister Spock, or I'll put you to sleep for sure. This is Mister Scott in the transporter room. Get me the Captain. 
(Soon after, Kirk enters with an entourage, and the other man is rubbing his shoulder.) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, I gave you an order to stay in the Sickbay. 
SPOCK: Until the pain was gone, Captain. It has been discontinued by me. 
KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT: He said he was transporting down to the surface, sir. Your orders were that no one was to beam down unless you authorised it. And knowing Mister Spock's determination on some things, I thought I'd better hold him here until I got your orders. 
SPOCK: One of the creatures will have to be captured and analysed, Captain. We did not have a clear opportunity to do so earlier when I was attacked. Since my nervous system is already affected, as you pointed out, Doctor, I don't believe they can do much more to me. 
MCCOY: Jim, this is ridiculous. I don't want my patients running around. He should be in bed. 
SPOCK: I am in complete control of myself, Doctor. The fact that I am here proves that I do not belong in bed. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, your logic, as usual, is inescapable. Beam him down. Stay in constant touch with us. Give him your phaser. He'll need that, too. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Captain. 
KIRK: Energise.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: Jim, that man is sick. Don't give me any damnable logic about him being the only man for the job. 
KIRK: I don't have to, Bones. We both know he is.

[Planet surface]

(A man tries to attack Spock, but is neck-pinched. After struggling to regain his self-control, Spock returns to the courtyard of the gel-creatures. He phasers one off the lintel and puts it into a metal box.)

[Science lab]

(Kirk and McCoy enter.)
SPOCK: Come in, gentlemen. I believe you'll find this interesting. (McCoy scans Spock.) Doctor, your medical skill and curiosity are quite admirable, but I assure you I'm all right. 
MCCOY: You may be controlling the pain, Mister Spock, but you're far from all right. 
SPOCK: Unimportant at the moment, Doctor. Please observe. Interesting, gentlemen. A one-celled creature resembling, more than anything else, a huge, individual brain cell. 
KIRK: Yes. That would answer a lot of questions. 
SPOCK: Do you understand what I'm suggesting, Captain? 
KIRK: I think so. This may be one cell in a larger organism. An incredibly huge organism, in fact. 
SPOCK: And although it is not physically connected to the other cells, it is nevertheless part of the whole creature, guided by the whole, drawing its strength from the whole, which probably accounts for its unusual resistance to our phaser weapons. 
KIRK: Existing so differently from any living matter or energy as we know it, that it may have come here, planet by planet, from an entirely different galaxy. 
SPOCK: From a place where our physical laws do not apply. We may therefore find it difficult to destroy, Captain. 
KIRK: But not impossible, Mister Spock. The Denevan that flew into the sun cried out that he was free, that he'd won. That's the angle to work on, gentlemen. I want an analysis of all this from Medical and Life Science departments within the hour. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
(Kirk leaves, then McCoy.) 
(Later, Chapel is working with McCoy when Kirk enters.) 
MCCOY: I'm sorry, Captain. I've tried everything I can. Variant radiation, intense heat, even as great as nine thousand degrees. 
KIRK: Then you're wasting your time. There has to be something that'll kill the creature without destroying the human host. 
MCCOY: Which happens to be my point. The thing won't die, even at temperatures and radiation which would burn Spock and your nephew to ashes. 
KIRK: I can't accept that, Bones. We've got fourteen science labs aboard this ship. The finest equipment and computers in the galaxy. 
MCCOY: Captain, I understand your concern. Your affection for Spock, the fact that your nephew is the last survivor of your brother's family. 
KIRK: No, no, Bones. There's more than two lives at stake here. I cannot let it spread beyond this colony, even if it means destroying a million people down there.

Captain's log, stardate 3289.8. I am faced with the most difficult decision of my life. Unless we find a way to destroy the creatures without killing their human hosts, my command responsibilities will force me to kill over a million people.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Gentlemen. 
SPOCK: I regret I see no other choice for you, Captain. We already know this thing has destroyed three civilisations. Perhaps more. 
MCCOY: Gentlemen, I want it stopped, too, but not at the cost of destroying over a million people. 
SPOCK: Including myself, Doctor, and Captain Kirk's young nephew. Understandably upsetting, but once it spreads past here, there are dozens of colonies beyond and billions of people. 
MCCOY: If killing five people saves ten, it's a bargain. Is that your simple logic, Mister Spock? 
KIRK: I will accept neither of those alternatives, gentlemen. I cannot let this thing expand beyond this planet, nor do I intend to kill a million or more people to stop it. I want another answer. I'm putting you gentlemen on the hot seat with me. I want that third alternative.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Report. 
MCCOY: I'm sorry, Jim. We've been over and over it, made every conceivable test. 
SPOCK: I therefore request permission to beam down to the planet's surface. I also suggest that your nephew accompany me. 
KIRK: Request denied. 
SPOCK: Captain, I do not make this request lightly. I do not know how much longer I can hold out against the pain. But I do know what the boy will go through should he regain consciousness. 
KIRK: Request denied. There must be another answer. Something in the sun killed that thing before the Denevan died. All right. All right. We've tried heat, radiation. What other qualities or properties does the sun have? 
SPOCK: It exists physically. It occupies space. It has mass, therefore gravity. It converts matter to energy. 
MCCOY: Jim, we've been through it and through it. Radiation, heat 
KIRK: But one other thing you haven't mentioned. It's bright. It radiates a blinding light if you're close enough. 
MCCOY: Nothing lethal about light. 
KIRK: Not to us. But down on the surface, the creatures stayed in the shadows for the most part. Suppose they weren't simply hiding. Suppose they're sensitive to light. Light, like in a sun, close up. 
SPOCK: A possibility. 
MCCOY: You can't move Deneva closer to the sun, Jim. 
KIRK: No, but you can move the equivalent of the sun to Deneva. Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes. In essence, it can be done. A string of satellites around the planet with burning tri-magnesite and trevium. 
MCCOY: Well, I can rig a test cubicle in the bio-lab, put our specimen in it. But I don't 
KIRK: Good. Let's get on it.

[Bio-lab]

(Chapel puts the creature's jar into a large chamber.) 
KIRK: Your figures are, of course, accurate. 
SPOCK: Of course. The light of the sun at the proximity where the Denevan declared himself free was one million candles per square inch. If this works, the satellites we orbit will produce light of such intensity that even someone in a closed, darkened area will be affected by it. 
CHAPEL: Ready, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Put on your masks. 
(They cover their eyes with goggles while the light is shone in the chamber.) 
MCCOY: Completed. 
(They open the chamber. The thing is still.) 
MCCOY: It worked! We can do it. What's the matter, Jim? We can do it. 
KIRK: It worked in a lab. With the creature exposed to everything we can give it. But what about the people who are infected? 
MCCOY: Well, I don't know. Maybe trial 
KIRK: Maybe. There's no time for maybes, Bones. We need to know now. 
MCCOY: But I'd have to put a 
KIRK: Yes, we'd have to put someone who's infected under that light. 
MCCOY: Do you have any idea of the risk? 
KIRK: We have to duplicate the conditions on the planet, and Spock 
SPOCK: Captain, you'll need a host for the next step in the test to determine whether the creature can be driven from the body. I am the logical choice. 
MCCOY: Do you know what one million candlelight per square inch can do to your optic nerves? 
KIRK: There's no other way, Bones. We have to duplicate the brilliance that existed at the moment the Denevan declared himself freed. 
MCCOY: All right. I'll rig up a protective pair of goggles. 
SPOCK: There'll be none on the planet's surface, Doctor. 
KIRK: I agree completely. 
MCCOY: Unfortunately, you're both right. It's the only thing we can do. All right, Mister Spock. 
(Spock enters the experimental chamber.) 
MCCOY: Mister Spock's the best first officer in the fleet. 
KIRK: Proceed. 
(Spock sits facing the light source and gets the full blast.) 
MCCOY: Completed. 
(They open the chamber, and Spock stands.) 
KIRK: Spock, are you all right? 
SPOCK: The creature within me is gone. I am free of it and the pain. 
(He walks forward, straight into a table.) 
SPOCK: And I'm also quite blind. An equitable trade, Doctor. Thank you. 
(They help him into a chair, and Chapel rushes in.)
CHAPEL: Doctor, the results of the first tests on the creature's remains. 
(She leaves.) 
MCCOY: (reading) Oh, no. 
KIRK: What is it? 
MCCOY: I threw the total spectrum of light at the creature. It wasn't necessary. I didn't stop to think that only one kind of light might've killed it. 
SPOCK: Interesting. Just as dogs are sensitive to certain sounds which humans cannot hear, these creatures evidently are sensitive to light which we cannot see. 
KIRK: Are you telling me that Spock need not have been blinded? 
MCCOY: I didn't need to throw the blinding white light at all, Jim. Spock, I 
SPOCK: Doctor it was my selection as well. It is done. 
KIRK: Bones, take care of him.

[Bridge]

SULU: Completing the seeding orbit, Captain. Two hundred and ten ultraviolet satellites now in position. Seventy two miles altitude, permanent orbit about the planet. 
KIRK: Good. Scanners? 
SCOTT: Scanners ready, sir. 
KIRK; Very well. Ready, Helm? 
SULU: Ready, Captain. 
KIRK: Satellite control, this is the Captain. Energise all satellites. 
MAN [OC]: Affirmative. 
SCOTT: All satellites operative, Captain. 
(Down on the planet, gel-creatures are dropping to the ground and dissolving.) 
UHURA: Captain, receiving messages from a ground station. 
KIRK: Report. 
UHURA: The things are dying, sir. It's working. 
KIRK: Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: McCoy here.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Tell Spock it worked.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Yes, Captain. He'll be happy to hear that.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Bones, it wasn't your fault.

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: Bones.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Bones. 
(Later.) 
KIRK: Yeoman, record this for Starfleet Command. 
ZAHRA: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: The alien creatures on Deneva have been destroyed 
ZAHRA: Captain, look. Mister Spock. 
(Spock walks onto the Bridge, followed by McCoy.)
KIRK: Spock. You can see. 
MCCOY: The blindness was temporary, Jim. There's something about his optical nerves which aren't the same as a human's. 
SPOCK: An hereditary trait, Captain. The brightness of the Vulcan sun has caused the development of an inner eyelid, which acts as a shield against high-intensity light. Totally instinctive, Doctor. We tend to ignore it, as you ignore your own appendix. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. Regaining eyesight would be an emotional experience for most. You, I presume, felt nothing? 
SPOCK: Quite the contrary, Captain. I had a very strong reaction. My first sight was the face of Doctor McCoy bending over me. 
MCCOY: 'Tis a pity your brief blindness did not increase your appreciation for beauty, Mister Spock. 
KIRK: If you gentlemen are finished, would you mind laying in a course for Starbase Ten, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: My pleasure, Captain. 
MCCOY: Unusual eye arrangement. I might've known he'd turn up with something like that. 
KIRK: What's that, Doctor? 
MCCOY: I said, please don't tell Spock I said he was the best first officer in the fleet. 
SPOCK: Why, thank you, Doctor McCoy. 
KIRK: You've been so concerned about his Vulcan eyes, Doctor, you forgot about his Vulcan ears. Ahead warp factor one, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Warp factor one, sir.

(Enterprise is at Red Alert as she orbits a muddy looking planet. Every so often the ship shakes.) 
KIRK: Stay on top of it, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: We're holding orbit, sir. The helm is sluggish. 
SCOTT: Control circuits threatening to overload, Captain. 
KIRK: Understood, Engineer. Mister Spock? We can't avoid these areas of turbulence. 
SPOCK: I believe we'll have them plotted in a few more orbits, Captain. 
(Sulu's console explodes and he is thrown to the floor, unconscious.) 
KIRK: Sickbay. To the Bridge. 
SCOTT: Switching to manual, Captain. Do we maintain this orbit? 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: This is of great scientific importance, Captain. We're actually passing through ripples in time. 
KIRK: Maintain orbit. Open the channel to Starfleet Command. Precautionary measure, Lieutenant. Broadcast to Starfleet Command my past week's log entries, starting with the unusual readings we had on the instruments and how they led us here. Inform Starfleet Command that apparently something or someone down on this planet 
(McCoy enters) 
KIRK: (pointing to Sulu) Bones. Can effect changes in time, causing turbulent waves of space displacement. 
MCCOY: Some heart flutter. Better risk a few drops of cordrazine. 
KIRK: Tricky stuff. Are you sure you want to risk 
(The hypo is administered and Sulu opens his eyes.) 
MCCOY: You were about to make a medical comment, Jim? 
KIRK: Who, me, Doctor? 
SCOTT: (at the helm) We're guiding around most of the time ripples now. 
KIRK: Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: All plotted but one, Captain. Coming up on it now. Seems to be fairly heavy displacement. 
(And they hit it just as McCoy still has the hypo in his hand, and the jolt results in him injecting it into his own stomach.) 
KIRK: Bones! Get back to your positions. 
SPOCK: The hypo, Captain. 
KIRK: It was set for cordrazine. 
SPOCK: Empty. 
KIRK: Communications, emergency medical team. 
MCCOY: (screams) Killers! Assassins! I won't let you! I'll kill you first! I won't let you! You won't get me! Murderers! Killers! 
(He dashes into the turbolift.) 
KIRK: Security alert.

Captain's log, supplemental entry. Two drops of cordrazine can save a man's life. A hundred times that amount has just accidentally been pumped into Doctor McCoy's body. In a strange, wild frenzy, he has fled the ship's Bridge. All connecting decks have been placed on alert. We have no way of knowing if the madness is permanent or temporary, or in what direction it will drive McCoy.

[Transporter room]

(McCoy enters, knocks out the Chief very quickly and scientifically, then beams himself away.)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Continue alert, decks four through eleven. The medical department knows as little as we do. In dosages approaching this, there's some record of wild paranoia. 
SPOCK: Confirmed by the library record tapes, Captain. Subjects failed to recognise acquaintances, became hysterically convinced that they were in mortal danger, and were seeking escape at any cost. Extremely dangerous to himself or to anyone else who might 
GALLOWAY [OC]: Bridge, Security. Alert, alert! 
KIRK: Bridge here. Go ahead.

[Transporter room]

GALLOWAY: Security 054, sir. We just found the transport chief injured.

[Bridge]

CHIEF [OC]: Captain, Doctor McCoy has beamed himself down to the planet. 
SPOCK: And the transporter at that time, Captain, was focused on the centre of the time disturbance. 
KIRK: So whatever's down there, McCoy is in the heart of it. Set up a landing party. Let's go get him. Kirk out.

[Planet surface]

(The landing party is Kirk, Spock, Scott, Uhura and two security guards. Among remains of fluted columns and fragments of Greek-style buildings is an irregular dough-nut shaped object with lights in it.) 
KIRK: These ruins extend to the horizon. Begin recording. 
UHURA: Recording, sir. 
SPOCK: And of considerable age. On the order of ten thousand centuries old. 
KIRK: Detail, fan out. What is this thing, Mister Spock? It seems to be pulsating with power of some kind. Analysis, please. 
SPOCK: Unbelievable, Captain. 
KIRK: That's funny. 
SPOCK: This single object is the source of all the time displacement. 
KIRK: Explain. 
SPOCK: I can't. For this to do what it does is impossible by any science I understand. It is operating even now. Putting out waves and waves of time displacement, which we picked up millions of miles away. 
UHURA: Landing party to Enterprise. No sign of Doctor McCoy. Search progressing. 
(And he pops up from behind a rock after she and her security guard have passed by.) 
SPOCK: Incredible power. It can't be a machine as we understand mechanics. 
KIRK: Then what is it? 
GUARDIAN: (The doughnut pulses bright in time with the words) A question. Since before your sun burned hot in space and before your race was born, I have awaited a question. 
KIRK: What are you? 
GUARDIAN: I am the Guardian of Forever. 
KIRK: Are you machine or being? 
GUARDIAN: I am both and neither. I am my own beginning, my own ending. 
SPOCK: I see no reason for answers to be couched in riddles. 
GUARDIAN: I answer as simply as your level of understanding makes possible. 
SPOCK: A time portal, Captain. A gateway to other times and dimensions, if I'm correct. 
GUARDIAN: As correct as possible for you. Your science knowledge is obviously primitive. 
SPOCK: Really. 
KIRK: Annoyed, Spock? 
GUARDIAN: Behold. A gateway to your own past, if you wish. 
(A camel train passing a pyramid, ancient Rome - images appear inside the doughnut.) 
MCCOY: Killers! Killers! I won't let you get me! I'll kill you first! I won't let you get me! Assassins! Murderers! Killers! 
(Scott and a guard manage to grab McCoy, and Spock neck-pinches him. An army of lancers charge across the doughnut.) 
KIRK: Spock! If that is a doorway back through time, could we somehow take Bones back a day in time, then 
SPOCK: Relive the accident. This time be certain that the hypo accident is avoided. Look at the speed with which the centuries are passing, Captain. To step through on precisely the day we wish 
KIRK: Guardian. Can you change the speed at which yesterday passes? 
GUARDIAN: I was made to offer the past in this manner. I cannot change. 
(The US cavalry charges.) 
KIRK: Strangely compelling, isn't it? To step through there and lose oneself in another world. 
SPOCK: I am a fool. My tricorder is capable of recording even at this speed. I've missed taping centuries of living history which no man before has ever 
(But McCoy has woken up, and dashes towards the Guardian.) 
SCOTT: Doctor McCoy! 
KIRK: Bones, no! 
(McCoy leaps through the doughnut and the pictures stop. He's gone.) 
KIRK: Where is he? 
GUARDIAN: He has passed into what was. 
UHURA: Captain, I've lost contact with the ship. I was talking to them. Suddenly, it went dead. No static, just nothing. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty. 
SCOTT: Nothing wrong with the communicator, sir. 
GUARDIAN: Your vessel, your beginning, all that you knew is gone. 
KIRK: McCoy has somehow changed history. 
SCOTT: You mean we're stranded down here? 
SPOCK: With no past, no future. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm frightened. 
KIRK: Earth's not there. At least, not the Earth we know. We're totally alone.

Captain's log, no stardate. For us, time does not exist. McCoy, back somewhere in the past, has effected a change in the course of time. All Earth history has been changed. There is no starship Enterprise. We have only one chance. We have asked the Guardian to show us Earth's history again. Spock and I will go back into time ourselves and attempt to set right what ever it was that McCoy changed.

SPOCK: I was recording images at the time McCoy left. A rather barbaric period in your American history. I believe I can approximate just when to jump. Perhaps within a month of the correct time. A week, if we're fortunate. 
KIRK: Make sure we arrive before McCoy got there. It's vital we stop him before he does whatever it was that changed all history. Guardian, if we are successful 
GUARDIAN: Then you will be returned. It will be as though none of you had gone. 
UHURA: Captain, it seems impossible. Even if you were able to find the right date 
SCOTT: Then even finding McCoy would be a miracle. 
SPOCK: There is no alternative. 
KIRK: Scotty, when you think you've waited long enough. Each of you will have to try it. Even if you fail, at least you'll be alive in some past world somewhere. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
SPOCK: Seconds now, sir. Stand by. 
SCOTT: Good luck, gentlemen. 
UHURA: Happiness at least, sir. 
(First World War images.) 
SPOCK: And now.

[Street]

(They leap through a wall with a poster for boxing at Madison Square Gardens. Welcome to the Depression.) 
KIRK: I've seen old photographs of this period. An economic upheaval had occurred. 
SPOCK: It was called Depression, circa 1930. Quite barbaric. 
(Two women give then curious looks, and Spock hides his ears with his hands.) 
KIRK: We seem to be costumed a little out of step with the time. 
SPOCK: I'm afraid I'm going to be difficult to explain in any case, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock, if we can't disguise you, we'll find some way of explaining you. 
SPOCK: That should prove interesting. 
KIRK: Let's get out of here. 
(They are nearly run down crossing the street.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
DRIVER: Look out, will you? Why don't you watch where you're going? 
(They head into an alley with washing hanging out on the fire escape.) 
SPOCK: Theft, Captain? 
KIRK: Well, we'll steal from the rich and give back to the poor later. I think I'm going to like this century. Simple, easier to manage. We're not going to have any difficulty explaining 
(Then he sees the policeman.) 
POLICEMAN: Well? 
KIRK: You're a police officer. I recognise the traditional accoutrements. 
SPOCK: You were saying you'll have no trouble explaining it. 
KIRK: My friend is obviously Chinese. I see you've noticed the ears. They're actually easy to explain. 
(A crowd is gathering.) 
SPOCK: Perhaps the unfortunate accident I had as a child. 
KIRK: The unfortunate accident he had as a child. He caught his head in a mechanical rice picker. But fortunately, there was an American missionary living close by who was actually a skilled plastic surgeon in civilian life. 
POLICEMAN: All right, all right. Drop those bundles and put your hands on that wall there! Come on! 
KIRK: Oh, how careless of your wife to let you go out that way. 
POLICEMAN: What? Where? 
SPOCK: Oh, yes, it's quite untidy. Here, let me help you. 
(And a quick neck pinch in front of witnesses, then they grab the clothes and run off. With whistles blowing, they duck down the alley beside the 21st Street Mission and down the stairs to the cellar.)

[Cellar]

KIRK: You were actually enjoying my predicament back there. At times, you seem quite human. 
SPOCK: Captain, I hardly believe that insults are within your prerogative as my commanding officer. 
KIRK: Sorry. 
(They get changed into jeans and shirts.) 
KIRK: Time we faced the unpleasant facts. 
SPOCK: First, I believe we have about a week before McCoy arrives, but we can't be certain. 
KIRK: Arrives where? Honolulu, Boise, San Diego? Why not Outer Mongolia, for that matter? 
SPOCK: There is a theory. There could be some logic to the belief that time is fluid, like a river, with currents, eddies, backwash. 
KIRK: And the same currents that swept McCoy to a certain time and place might sweep us there, too. 
SPOCK: Unless that is true, Captain, we have no hope. Frustrating. Locked in here is the place and moment of his arrival, even the images of what he did. If only I could tie this tricorder in with the ship's computers for just a few moments. 
KIRK: Couldn't you build some form of computer aid here? 
SPOCK: In this zinc-plated vacuum-tubed culture? 
KIRK: Yes, well, it would pose an extremely complex problem in logic, Mister Spock. Excuse me. I sometimes expect too much of you. 
(The lights come on.) 
EDITH: Who's there? 
(Spock puts on a woolen hat that was conveniently amongst the clothes Kirk stole. A young woman wearing an apron comes down the stairs.) 
KIRK: Excuse us, miss. We didn't mean to trespass. It's cold outside. 
EDITH: A lie is a poor way to say hello. It isn't that cold. 
KIRK: No. We were being chased by a policeman. 
EDITH: Why? 
KIRK: These clothes. We stole them. We didn't have any money. 
EDITH: Well, I could do with some help around here. Doing dishes, sweeping, general cleaning. 
SPOCK: At what rate of payment? I need radio tubes and so forth. My hobby. 
EDITH: Fifteen cents an hour for ten hours a day. What are your names? 
KIRK: Mine is Jim Kirk. His is Spock. 
EDITH: I'm Edith Keeler. You can start by cleaning up down here. 
KIRK: Excuse me, Miss. Where are we? 
EDITH: You're in the 21st Street Mission. 
KIRK: Do you run this place? 
EDITH: Indeed I do, Mister Kirk. 
(She leaves them.) 
KIRK: Radio tubes and so on. I approve of hobbies, Mister Spock.

[Canteen]

(Kirk and Spock collect their bowls of soup and pieces of bread, and sit at one of the long tables.) 
EDITH: Good evening. 
(She steps up onto a small stage with a piano.) 
MAN: You'll be sorry. 
KIRK: Why? 
MAN: You expect to eat for free or something? You got to listen to Goody Two-shoes. 
EDITH: Now, as I'm sure somebody out there has said, it's time to pay for the soup. 
MAN: Not that she's a bad-looking broad, but if she really wanted to help out a fella in need 
KIRK: Shut up. Shut up. I want to hear what she has to say. 
SPOCK: Yes, of course, Captain. 
EDITH: Now, let's start by getting one thing straight. I'm not a do-gooder. If you're a bum, if you can't break off of the booze or whatever it is that makes you a bad risk, then get out. Now I don't pretend to tell you how to find happiness and love when every day is just a struggle to survive, but I do insist that you do survive because the days and the years ahead are worth living for. One day soon man is going to be able to harness incredible energies, maybe even the atom. Energies that could ultimately hurl us to other worlds in some sort of spaceship. And the men that reach out into space will be able to find ways to feed the hungry millions of the world and to cure their diseases. They will be able to find a way to give each man hope and a common future, and those are the days worth living for. Our deserts will bloom. (She continues under the dialogue.) 
KIRK: Development of atomic power is years away, and space flight years after that. 
SPOCK: Speculation. Gifted insight. 
KIRK: I find her most uncommon, Mister Spock. 
EDITH: Prepare for tomorrow. Get ready. Don't give up. 
(Later, when the bowls are being handed in, Edith calls after Kirk.) 
EDITH: Mister Kirk. You are uncommon workmen. That basement looks like it's been scrubbed and polished. 
KIRK: Then we can report back for other work? 
EDITH: Yes. Seven o'clock in the morning. Do you have a flop for the night? 
KIRK: A what? 
EDITH: You really are new at this, aren't you? A flop is a place to sleep. 
KIRK: Oh. 
EDITH: There's a vacant room at the place where I live for two dollars a week. If you want to I'll take you there. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
EDITH: Good. 
(She goes to get her coat.) 
KIRK: We have a flop. 
SPOCK: We have a what, Captain? 
KIRK: A place to sleep. 
SPOCK: One might have said so in the first place.

[Room]

(It must be some days later, because Spock has already built a 50's horror movie contraption, complete with static electricity running between two vertical wires. Kirk enters with groceries and turns the whining thing off.) 
SPOCK: Captain, I must have some platinum. A small block would be sufficient, five or six pounds. By passing certain circuits through there to be used as a duodynetic field core...
KIRK: Mister Spock, I've brought you some assorted vegetables, baloney in a hard roll for myself, and I've spent the other nine tenths of our combined salaries for the last three days on filling this order for you. Mister Spock, this bag does not contain platinum, silver or gold, nor is it likely to in the near future. 
SPOCK: Captain, you're asking me to work with equipment which hardly very far ahead of stone knives and bearskins. 
KIRK: McCoy'll be along in a few days, perhaps sooner. There's no guarantee that these currents in time will bring us together. This has to work. 
SPOCK: Captain. Captain, in three weeks at this rate, possibly a month, I might reach the first mnemonic memory circuits. 
(There's a knock at the door.) 
KIRK: Your hat. 
EDITH: If you can leave immediately, I can get you five hours work at twenty two cents an hour. What? What on Earth is that? 
SPOCK: I am endeavouring, ma'am, to construct a mnemonic memory circuit using stone knives and bearskins.

[Canteen]

(Kirk and Spock are sweeping the floor, with the chairs stacked on the tables, and two men repairing clocks.) 
SPOCK: Captain. Tools for finely detailed work. 
(Later, a combination padlock is being opened by someone with very sensitive ears.)

[Cellar]

(Spock is stoking the boiler when Edith comes in to confront them.) 
EDITH: That toolbox was locked with a combination lock and you opened it like a real pro. Why did you do it? 
SPOCK: I needed the fine tools for my radio work. They'd have been returned in the morning. 
EDITH: I'm sorry, I can't 
KIRK: If Mister Spock says that he needs the tools and that they'll be returned tomorrow morning, you can bet your reputation on that, Miss Keeler. 
EDITH: On one condition. Walk me home? I still have a few questions I'd like to ask about you two. Oh, and don't give me that questions about little old us? look. You know as well as I do how out of place you two are around here. 
SPOCK: Interesting. Where would you estimate we belong, Miss Keeler? 
EDITH: You? At his side, as if you've always been there and always will. And you? You belong in another place. I don't know where or how. I'll figure it out eventually. 
SPOCK: I'll finish with the furnace. 
EDITH: Captain. Even when he doesn't say it, he does.

[Street]

(They are strolling along, hand in hand, as 'Goodnight, Sweetheart' carries in the air from a radio repair shop.) 
EDITH: Why does Spock call you Captain? Were you in the war together? 
KIRK: We served together. 
EDITH: And you don't want to talk about it? Why? Did you do something wrong? Are you afraid of something? Whatever it is, let me help. 
KIRK: Let me help. A hundred years or so from now, I believe, a famous novelist will write a classic using that theme. He'll recommend those three words even over I love you. 
EDITH: Centuries from now? Who is he? Where does he come from er, where will he come from? 
KIRK: Silly question. Want to hear a silly answer? 
EDITH: Yes. 
KIRK: A planet circling that far left star in Orion's belt. See? 
(Not that you can actually see any stars in the night sky above the Brooklyn Bridge.)

[Room]

(Using the clock-mender's tools, Spock gets an image on his tricorder screen of a newspaper report. Edith Keeler, social worker from 21st Street Mission was killed today, it says. Kirk enters.) 
KIRK: How are the stone knives and bearskins? 
SPOCK: I may have found our focal point in time. 
KIRK: I think you may also find you have a connection burning someplace. 
SPOCK: Yes. I'm overloading those lines. I believe we'll have our answer on this screen, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. 
SPOCK: And, Captain, you may find this a bit distressing. 
KIRK: Let's see what you have. 
SPOCK: I've slowed down the recording we made from the time vortex. 
KIRK: February 23rd, 1936. Six years from now. (reading below the headline FDR confers with slum area 'angel') The President and Edith Keeler conferred for some time today 
(Then the whole thing goes up in flames.) 
KIRK: How bad? 
SPOCK: Bad enough. 
KIRK: The President and Edith Keeler. 
SPOCK: It would seem unlikely, Jim. A few moments ago, I read a 1930 newspaper article. 
KIRK: We know her future. Within six years from now, she'll become very important. Nationally famous. 
SPOCK: Or Captain, Edith Keeler will die this year. I saw her obituary. Some sort of traffic accident. 
KIRK: You must be mistaken. They both can't be true. 
SPOCK: Captain, Edith Keeler is the focal point in time we've been looking for, the point that both we and Doctor McCoy have been drawn to. 
KIRK: She has two possible futures then, and depending on whether she lives or dies, all of history will be changed. And McCoy 
SPOCK: Is the random element. 
KIRK: In his condition, what does he do? Does he kill her? 
SPOCK: Or perhaps he prevents her from being killed. We don't know which. 
KIRK: Get this thing fixed. We must find out before McCoy arrives. 
SPOCK: Captain, suppose we discover that in order to set things straight again, Edith Keeler must die?

[Street]

(The man from the canteen steals a milk bottle from a doorstep when McCoy leaps in through Singers Book Store window and starts shouting.) 
MCCOY: Assassins! Murderers! Murderers! Assassins! You! What planet is this? (he drops the bottle) No! Don't run! I won't kill you! It's they who do the killing! Don't run! I won't kill you!

[Boarding house]

(Jim and Edith are climbing the stairs together.) 
EDITH: Why? What is so funny about man reaching for the moon? 
KIRK: How do you know? 
EDITH: I just know, that's all. I feel it. And more, I think that one day they'll take all the money they spend now on war and death 
KIRK: And make them spend it on life? 
EDITH: Yes. You see the same things that I do. We speak the same language. 
KIRK: The very same. 
(They are outside room 33 when he leans in for the kiss.)

[Street]

(McCoy catches the down-and-out.) 
MAN: No! 
MCCOY: I'm glad you got away, too. Why do you think they want to kill us? 
MAN: Look, fella, you take a sip too much of that old wood alky, and, and almost anything seems like it 
MCCOY: Where? Where are we? Earth? The constellations seem right, but. Explain! Explain this trick. 
MAN: I, I, 
MCCOY: Biped. Small. Good cranial development. No doubt considerable human ancestry. Is that how you're able to fake all of this? Very good. Modern museum perfection. Right down to the cement beams. Very, very good. Oh, I'd give a lot to see the hospital. Probably needles and sutures. All the pain. They used to hand-cut and sew people like garments. Needles and sutures. Oh, the terrible pain! 
(He passes out on the ground and his colour starts to improve. The man frisks him, finds his phaser and runs off a little way. Then he fiddles with the phaser, and disintegrates himself.)

[Room]

KIRK: How long before we get a full answer? 
SPOCK: I'll need at least two more days before I dare make another attempt. 
KIRK: McCoy could have been in the city a week now for all we know, and whatever he does that affects her and changes history could happen tonight or tomorrow morning. 
SPOCK: Captain, our last bit of information was obtained at the expense of thirty hours work in fused and burned circuits. 
KIRK: I must know whether she lives or dies, Spock. I must know what to do.

[Street]

(It's morning, apparently. Bums are still sleeping in shop doorways.) 
CRIER [OC]: Extra! Extra! Get your morning paper! Get your paper. Read all about it! 
(McCoy spots men going into the Mission and follows them.)

[Canteen]

(Edith is pouring cups of brown liquid.) 
MCCOY: Oh, Miss. That coffee, it just smells wonderful. 
EDITH: You look terrible! You'd better sit down. Come on. 
MCCOY: I can't. I got to keep moving. I can't let them find me. 
EDITH: There's a cot in the back room. They won't find you there. Come on. 
(She helps him out just as Spock comes in and starts serving the drinks.

[Room]

SPOCK: This is how history went after McCoy changed it. Here, in the late 1930s. A growing pacifist movement whose influence delayed the United States' entry into the Second World War. While peace negotiations dragged on, Germany had time to complete its heavy-water experiments. 
KIRK: Germany. Fascism. Hitler. They won the Second World War. 
SPOCK: Because all this lets them develop the A-bomb first. There's no mistake, Captain. Let me run it again. Edith Keeler. Founder of the peace movement. 
KIRK: But she was right. Peace was the way. 
SPOCK: She was right, but at the wrong time. With the A-bomb, and with their V2 rockets to carry them, Germany captured the world. 
KIRK: No. 
SPOCK: And all this because McCoy came back and somehow kept her from dying in a street accident as she was meant to. We must stop him, Jim. 
KIRK: How did she die? What day? 
SPOCK: We can estimate general happenings from these images, but I can't trace down precise actions at exact moments, Captain. I'm sorry. 
KIRK: Spock, I believe I'm in love with Edith Keeler. 
SPOCK: Jim, Edith Keeler must die.

[Mission back room]

(McCoy stirs, dislodging the moist towel from his forehead.) 
EDITH: Hey, now, come on. You're not ready to take on any tigers just yet. Lie down. 
MCCOY: The most common question to ask would be, where am I? I don't think I'll ask it. 
EDITH: Why not? 
MCCOY: The only possible answer would conclusively prove that I'm either unconscious or demented. This looks like old Earth around 1920 or 25. 
EDITH: Would you care to try for 30? 
MCCOY: I am unconscious, or demented. 
EDITH: I have a friend that talks about Earth the same way that you do. Would you like to meet him? 
MCCOY: I'm a surgeon, not a psychiatrist. I am Leonard McCoy, Senior Medical Officer aboard the USS Enterprise. 
EDITH: I don't mean to disbelieve you, but that's hardly a Navy uniform. 
MCCOY: It's quite all right. It's quite all right dear, because I don't believe in you, either. 
EDITH: Get some rest.

[Boarding house]

(Edith has just gone up a flight of stairs.) 
KIRK: Edith. 
EDITH: Are you following me, sir? 
KIRK: With ulterior motives. Does that please you? 
EDITH: I hope it means (she stumbles on the step and Kirk catches her, while Spock watches.) Oh! How stupid! I've been up and down those stairs a thousand times. I could have broken my neck. 
(Spock goes back into room 21 as she kisses Jim, and re-emerges when Kirk comes down the stairs again.)
SPOCK: Captain, I did not plan to eavesdrop. 
KIRK: No, of course you didn't. 
SPOCK: I must point out that when she stumbled, she might have died right there, had you not caught her. 
KIRK: It's not yet time. McCoy isn't here. 
SPOCK: We're not that sure of our facts. Who's to say when the exact time will come? Save her, do as your heart tells you to do, and millions will die who did not die before.

[Mission back room]

(McCoy is out of bed.) 
MCCOY: Come in. 
EDITH: Well, you look just fine, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Thank you. 
EDITH: I thought you might like to see the evening paper. 
MCCOY: No, not particularly. You know, I've convinced myself that this is all in a cordrazine hallucination, but I've decided you're not. 
EDITH: That's reassuring. 
MCCOY: But if you're not, what are you? 
EDITH: A friend. When you showed up here, you looked like you could use one. 
MCCOY: I don't doubt it. What about this place? Do you run it? 
EDITH: I try to. 
MCCOY: Why? 
EDITH: It's necessary. 
MCCOY: Well, it was for me, at least. You may have saved my life. 
EDITH: Lots of people drink from the wrong bottle sometimes. 
MCCOY: Not as wrong as the bottle I drank from. Allow me to show my gratitude. Perhaps there's something I can do around here to thank you. 
EDITH: We can talk about that later. I have to go. My young man is taking me to a Clark Gable movie. 
MCCOY: A who movie? 
EDITH: A Clark Gable. Don't you know? 
MCCOY: Well, I know what a movie is, but. 
EDITH: That's very strange. You get some rest. I'll see you later.

[Street]

(Edith, Kirk and Spock leave the Mission together, then Spock heads off alone. Kirk and Edith dodge traffic to cross the street.) 
EDITH: If we hurry, maybe we can catch the Clark Gable movie at the Orpheum. 
KIRK: What? 
EDITH: You know, Doctor McCoy said the same thing. 
KIRK: McCoy! Leonard McCoy? 
EDITH: Yes. He's in the Mission. He's 
KIRK: Stay right here. Spock! Stay right there! 
SPOCK: What is it? 
KIRK: McCoy! He's in 
(McCoy comes out and they greet each other enthusiastically. A truck is coming down the street as Edith starts to cross, not looking.) 
SPOCK: No, Jim! 
KIRK: Edith. 
(McCoy dashes forward but Kirk grabs him and pulls him back onto the pavement just as Edith and the truck meet in in a squeal of brakes.) 
MCCOY: You deliberately stopped me, Jim. I could have saved her. Do you know what you just did? 
SPOCK: He knows, Doctor. He knows.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk and Spock leap back out of the Guardian.) 
SCOTT: What happened, sir? You only left a moment ago. 
(McCoy returns.) 
SPOCK: We were successful. 
GUARDIAN: Time has resumed its shape. All is as it was before. Many such journeys are possible. Let me be your gateway. 
UHURA: Captain, the Enterprise is up there. They're asking if we want to beam up. 
KIRK: Let's get the hell out of here.


[Bridge]
(Enterprise is orbiting a red and white planet.) 
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Very typical, Captain. Iron-silicon base, oxygen-hydrogen atmosphere, largely arid, no discernible life. No surprises. 
KIRK: Photographic section, begin scanning. Tie in to visual section 988-TG, computer bank 22. Kirk out. About four more orbits ought to do it, Mister Lesley. That'll wrap it up. Lay in a course for Starbase 200. 
LESLEY: Aye, aye, Captain. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
(Something suddenly rocks the ship. We see a shot of a nebula along with the crew.) 
KIRK: Mister Spock! 
SPOCK: Incredible, Captain. 
(And again.) 
KIRK: What was that? 
SPOCK: What my instruments read is totally unbelievable, Captain. Twice, for a split second each time, everything within range of our instruments seemed on the verge of winking out. 
KIRK: I want facts, not poetry. 
SPOCK: I have given you the facts, Captain. The entire magnetic field in this solar system simply blinked. The planet below, the mass of which we're measuring, attained zero gravity. 
KIRK: That's impossible. What you're describing 
SPOCK: Is non-existence. 
UHURA: Standard General Alert signal from Starfleet Command, Captain. 
KIRK: All stations to immediate alert status. Stand by. 
SPOCK: Captain, scanners now report a life object on the planet surface below. 
KIRK: You just did a complete life survey five minutes ago. How are you just picking it up now? 
SPOCK: Inexplicable, Captain. This reading began at approximately the moment that the pulsation phenomenon began to subside. 
KIRK: Well, what is it, this object? Its physical makeup? 
SPOCK: A living being. Body temperature 98.5 Fahrenheit. Mass, electrical impulses, movement. It is apparently human, Captain. 
KIRK: And its appearance coincided with this cosmic winking-out? 
SPOCK; Almost to the second. 
KIRK: Explanation. 
SPOCK: None. 
KIRK: Speculation. Could this being present any danger to the ship? 
SPOCK: Possible. Very possible. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, notify Security to have an armed detachment of men ready to beam down with us. Let's go. Any word comes through from Starfleet Command, pipe it down immediately. Communications, priority one.

Captain's log, stardate 3087.6. While investigating an uncharted planet, the Enterprise and at least this entire quadrant of space, has been subjected to violent, unexplained stress and force. Sensors have reported the presence of a human being on the planet below who might be connected with the phenomenon. With my first officer and a security team, I have set out in search of him.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk, Spock and four armed red-shirts arrive on a rocky terrain with a few scrubby bushes. They walk on a little way until they spot a strange craft on the ground. A one-man flying saucer with a perspex dome cockpit. As they reach it, a man calls out from a ridge.) 
LAZARUS: You came! Thank the heavens. There's still time. It's not too late. We can still stop him. But I, but I, need, need your help. 
(He falls.)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Nothing yet, sir. 
MASTERS: (A woman in a blue uniform) Report on the dilithium crystals, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes. 
MASTERS: Whatever that phenomenon was, it drained almost all of our crystals completely. It could mean trouble. 
KIRK: You have a talent for understatement, Lieutenant. Without full crystal power, our orbit will begin to decay in ten hours. Re-amplify immediately. 
MASTERS: Aye aye, sir. 
KIRK: Any further magnetic disturbance? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. Scanners indicate situation normal. 
KIRK: Nothing? 
SPOCK: Nothing. Illogical. An effect of such proportions, unexplainable by any established physical laws that I'm aware of. I have been able to ascertain one fact. Though the effect, whatever it was, was unquestioningly widespread, it was strongest here on the planet beneath us. 
KIRK: Keep checking. 
UHURA: Red Two message in one minute, Captain. Starfleet Command. Code Factor one, sir. 
KIRK: Repeat. 
UHURA: Code Factor one. 
KIRK: Invasion status. All hands, this is the Captain. Battle stations. I repeat, battle stations. This is no drill. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
MCCOY [OC]: About our patient. 
KIRK: Yes, Doctor, quickly. 
MCCOY [OC]: He'll make it. He'll be stiff and sore for a while, but he'll be all right. 
KIRK: I'll talk to him later. Thank you. Kirk out. 
UHURA: Message ready, Captain. Main screen, coming up. 
KIRK: Kirk here. Enterprise standing by, Commodore. 
BARSTOW [on viewscreen]: You're aware of the effect an hour ago? 
KIRK: Yes, sir. 
BARSTOW [on viewscreen]: You may not be aware of its scope. It occurred in every quadrant of the galaxy and far beyond. Complete disruption of normal magnetic and gravimetric fields, timewarp distortion, possible radiation variations. And all of them centring on the general area which you are now patrolling. The question is, are these natural phenomena or are they mechanically created, and if they are, by whom? For what purpose? Your guess, Captain. 
KIRK: Thank you, sir. I have considered all the alternatives. My best guess is it could be a prelude to invasion. 
BARSTOW [on viewscreen]: Exactly our consensus. I'm giving you the job of finding out specifically. 
KIRK; Aye, aye, sir. Can you assign me other starships as a reserve? 
BARSTOW [on viewscreen]: Negative. I'm evacuating all Starfleet units and personnel within a hundred parsecs of your position. It's going to be tough on you and the Enterprise, but that's the job you've drawn. You're on your own. 
KIRK: I see. You mean, we're the bait. 
BARSTOW [on viewscreen]: Good luck. 
KIRK: Thank you, sir. (transmission ends) Maintain alert status at all battle stations. 
UHURA: Aye aye, sir. 
KIRK: From the top, Mister Spock. First, the phenomenon came from the planet below. Secondly, the danger is apparently real and imminent. 
SPOCK: Third, a closer examination of the planet's surface would be in order. My job, sir? 
KIRK: Yes. Meanwhile, I'll talk to our unexpected guest. Maybe he can provide some answers.

[Kirk's quarters]

LAZARUS: That's how I came to be down there, Captain, pursuing the devil's own spawn, a thing I've chased across the universe. He's humanoid outside, but inside, he's a hideous, murdering monster. I'll get him, Captain. I swear it. 
KIRK: You say this one man 
LAZARUS: Not man! Thing. 
KIRK: Thing destroyed your entire civilisation. 
LAZARUS: To the last man, woman and child. 
KIRK: How did you escape? 
LAZARUS: I was inspecting magnetic communications satellites. You believe me, don't you? 
KIRK: Before we picked you up, our ship sustained a number of incredible effects. 
LAZARUS: That was he! He's death, anti-life, he lives to destroy. 
KIRK: Is he the thing that attacked you? 
LAZARUS: Yes. I give you my word. I swear it. 
KIRK: We don't have any other facts, any information. 
LAZARUS: Then you'll join me in my holy cause? Help me in visiting justice and vengeance upon him. 
KIRK: My only cause is the safety of my ship and the mission we're on. You'll beam down with me and I'll check your story out.

[Planet surface]

(The flying saucer is being minutely examined) 
KIRK: Spock, find anything? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. Anything from our guest? 
KIRK: According to him, there's a creature of some sort down here, a humanoid. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant Uhura communicated that information. I ordered re-confirmation on our sensors. They indicate no living creature on this planet. I suggest, Captain, that you've been lied to. 
LAZARUS: Captain, you yourself said there were no other explanations. Why do you give credence to this man? 
SPOCK: I fail to comprehend your indignation, sir. I've simply made the logical deduction that you are a liar. 
KIRK: Let's have it. The truth this time. 
(Another one of those 'nebula overlay' events happens, and Lazarus starts shouting then runs off.)
LAZARUS: No! You've come back in, is it? Well, don't stop. Here I am. Come at me again. We'll finish it! 
KIRK: Can you identify that? 
SPOCK: I'm trying, Captain. 
KIRK: Lazarus! You stay here. All personnel, security red. 
LAZARUS: Come! Come! It'll do you no good. I'll chase you to the very fires of hell! 
(We're treated to a negative image of Lazarus suddenly being pounced on by another person. They fight as the picture keeps being rotated to make you dizzy. Then it all ends and Lazarus staggers back on the planet surface again.)
KIRK: Lazarus, what happened? 
LAZARUS: I saw it again. The thing. It attacked me. 
KIRK: Let's get out of here. 
SPOCK: Captain, readings of the effect indicate it centred here on this planet, almost on this very spot. 
LAZARUS: I told you it was a thing. All white, black and empty. A terrible emptiness. 
KIRK: Let's get back to the ship. 
LAZARUS: He'll kill us all if we don't kill him first! Kill! Kill! Kill! Kill! Kill!

Captain's log, stardate 3088.3. We continue to orbit the dead planet, which seems to be the source of the phenomenon which has struck the Enterprise and all sections of the galaxy once again. As for Lazarus, the story he tells me about the humanoid continues to trouble me.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Any luck? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. I can no more explain the occurrence of the second phenomenon than I can the first. 
KIRK: If there's a shred of truth to what Lazarus said 
SPOCK: That a single creature, a humanoid could be responsible for an effect of such magnitude? 
KIRK: Hard to believe. 
SPOCK: Indeed. 
KIRK: But the rest of his story seems to fit. His wounds testify to an apparent confrontation with something. 
SPOCK: Affirmative. 
KIRK: Assuming there is a humanoid, a something, how does he do it? He has no weapons, no power. 
SPOCK: Captain, I only know for certain that the occurrence of the phenomenon coincides exactly with the moments that Lazarus has his alleged confrontations. 
UHURA: Doctor McCoy asking to see you in sickbay, Captain.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: I don't know, Jim. Maybe I'm imagining things, and maybe I'm not. You tell me. 
KIRK: You tell me. That's why you brought me down here, isn't it. 
MCCOY: Well, as you know, we both brought Lazarus in here and I treated a deep abrasion on his forehead, right? 
KIRK: Right. 
MCCOY: Then I bandaged it, I stepped into this room for just a moment 
KIRK: Bones, I've got a lot of things to do. Get to the point. 
MCCOY: Well, say he's got the constitution of a dinosaur, recuperative powers ditto. As we both know, I'm a bright young medic with a miraculous touch. Why then, when I returned, there wasn't a trace of that wound on his forehead. Not even a bruise. It was like he had never been injured. 
KIRK: Where is he? 
MCCOY: I don't know, Jim. This is a big ship. I'm just a country doctor.

[Rec room]

(Lazarus is sitting nearby when the following conversation takes place.) 
ENGINEER: Hi. 
MASTERS: Hi. Coffee? 
ENGINEER: Is that an order, Lieutenant? 
MASTERS: I know what you mean. Re-amplification finished on the dilithium crystals? 
ENGINEER: Yes. Ready and waiting. 
(They leave, then Lazarus follows.)

[Corridor]

(Lazarus has some sort of seizure and we get the nebula effect, the fight, and then... he has a plaster on his forehead again. Kirk and McCoy exit the turbolift and spot him.) 
KIRK: Lazarus, are you all right? 
LAZARUS: Yes. But impatient. Have you decided to help me yet? 
(McCoy removes the plaster to show the cut.) 
LAZARUS: Is something wrong? 
KIRK: No. I have a ship's physician with a strange sense of humour. 
MCCOY: This is no joke, Jim. I know what I saw. 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge calling the captain. 
KIRK: Go. 
SPOCK [OC]: Request you come to the Bridge, Captain. 
KIRK: Find something? 
SPOCK [OC]: Something quite extraordinary. 
KIRK: On my way. Lazarus, you're with me. Bones, if I had time, I'd laugh.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Main screen on, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Screen on, sir. 
(Kirk and Lazarus enter.) 
SPOCK: Source of radiation, Captain. 
(A bright flashing light on the planet.) 
KIRK: How is it the scanners didn't pick it up before? 
SPOCK: Because it is not there. 
KIRK: Another riddle? First Doctor McCoy, then you? 
SPOCK: What I mean, Captain, is that according to our usual scanning procedures, there is nothing there that could be causing that effect. 
KIRK: But it is there. 
SPOCK: Affirmative. I confess I am somewhat at a loss for words. It may be described, though loosely and inaccurately, as a rip in our universe. 
KIRK: A what? 
SPOCK: A kind of physical warp, Captain, in which none of our established physical laws apply with any regularity. However, with the dilithium crystals, I was able to localise it. 
LAZARUS: Yes! That's it! The dilithium crystals. With their power we could do it. 
SPOCK: You refer to the humanoid? 
LAZARUS: Yes. We've got him, Captain, we've got him. 
KIRK: What do the crystals have to do with it? All they show us the point of radiation. 
LAZARUS: That's just it, that's the key. That's the way to trap him. That's the solution. Captain, I beg of you. I plead, I demand. Give me the crystals. 
KIRK: Out of the question. Those crystals are the very heart of the power of my ship. 
LAZARUS: You fool! There won't be any ship if we don't kill him. He'll destroy all of you. 
KIRK: How? Now you tell me how. All I've heard is double-talk, lies, threats, accusations that don't hold water. Now you tell me, how it presents a danger to my ship? 
LAZARUS: I warn you, Captain. You'll give me the crystals. 
KIRK: Don't threaten me, Lazarus. 
LAZARUS: No threat intended. Captain, I'll have my vengeance. 
(He leaves the Bridge by the turbolift, and the guard follows a moment later. Lazarus is walking along a corridor when he has another seizure and loses the head injury. Lazarus heads for...)

[Engineering]

ENGINEER: Lieutenant Masters, Captain's calling. 
MASTERS: Masters here. 
KIRK [OC]: Lieutenant, can you prepare an experimentation chamber in ten minutes? All dilithium crystals, full power. 
(We see Lazarus jump the engineer, out of her sight.) 
MASTERS: I'll check, sir. 
(She goes into the room where Lazarus is hiding, checks a panel and leaves again.) 
MASTERS: Captain. The chamber will be ready in ten minutes, sir. My assistant and I will 
(Lazarus injects her neck with something.) 
MASTERS: Captain! Captain! 
KIRK [OC]: Lieutenant, what is it? What's wrong? Lieutenant?

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, Security reports Lazarus missing.

Captain's log, stardate 3088.7. We are no closer to finding an answer to the strange phenomenon than we were at the beginning. Not only have two of my crewmen been attacked, two of our dilithium crystals are missing, and without them the Enterprise cannot operate at full power. They must be found.

[Briefing room]

(This Lazarus has his head injury back again.) 
KIRK: Fact. You said you needed the crystals. Fact. An hour after you said you must have them, they were missing. Fact. Two of my crewmen were attacked. 
LAZARUS: And fact, Captain. I didn't take the crystals. I'm not the one. Find my enemy, find the beast, and you'll find the crystals. 
KIRK: How'd this beast get aboard my ship? 
LAZARUS: He did. Isn't that enough? 
KIRK: No. He didn't transport up. A report would've been made. 
LAZARUS: I tell you we're dealing with a creature capable of destroying worlds. 
SPOCK: Why does he need the crystals? For what reason? 
LAZARUS: For the same reason that I do. Listen to me. He's humanoid. Why, he he can pilot a spaceship. He can compute formulas to destroy races. He can steal an energy source for his vehicle so he can escape from me. Are you deaf as well as blind? 
KIRK: Sit down. The crystals certainly aren't here. There's an unexplained radiation source on the planet. Obviously some connection. We'll check it out. Organise a search party immediately. Mister Lazarus will beam down with us. 
LAZARUS: Thank you, Captain. 
KIRK: You may not have reason to thank me, depending on what we find.

[Planet surface]

LAZARUS: What do you believe now, Captain? 
KIRK: I believe the missing crystals aren't in your ship. Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Unable to locate the source of radiation. 
KIRK: Why not? You had it spotted on the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: It has simply disappeared, Captain. 
KIRK: I want every inch of this terrain checked. Look for footprints, movement, anything. Call out if you spot anything. Don't be afraid to use your weapons. 
(The entire party leave the little spaceship. The Starfleet group splits into two and take different lines along a rocky outcrop. Lazarus heads off on his own and has one of his nebula moments. There's a fight in negative space and then it's over again. Kirk sends his two security men on ahead, and for some reason Lazarus decides to climb down a cliff face. He dislodges a rock and it goes tumbling. Lazarus calls out, then follows it.) 
LAZARUS: Captain, look out!

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: He's coming out of it now. 
LAZARUS: The thing, the thing. 
MCCOY: It's all right. You're on board the Enterprise. 
LAZARUS: The rock, I 
MCCOY: How's your head? 
LAZARUS: Aches. 
KIRK: You saved my life down there. I want to thank you. 
LAZARUS: Why shouldn't I? 
KIRK: I have some questions I want to ask you. 
MCCOY: Not now, Jim. 
KIRK: It's necessary. 
LAZARUS: Go ahead. It's all right. 
KIRK: This is a computer report of the evidence you gave at your first screening. It calls you a liar, Lazarus. For one thing, there's no planet at the location you said you came from. There never has been. If you want help from us, you'd better start telling the truth. 
LAZARUS: You wouldn't believe me if I told you. 
KIRK: Try us. 
LAZARUS: All right. I distorted a fact in the interest of self-preservation, for my holy cause. I needed help, not censure. Freedom, not captivity for being a madman. I was afraid that's what you'd call me if I told you the truth. 
KIRK: I'll have the truth now. 
LAZARUS: My planet, my Earth, or what's left of it, is down there beneath us. 
KIRK: What are you saying? 
LAZARUS: My spaceship is more than just that. It's a time chamber, a time-ship, and I. I am a time traveller. 
KIRK: And this thing you search for is a time traveler, too? 
LAZARUS: Oh, yes. He's fled me across all the years, all the empty years to a dead future on a murdered planet he destroyed. Help me! Give me the tools I need to kill him! The crystals! Don't let him get away! Don't let him get away. 
KIRK: Lazarus, you're hurt. I know. I sympathise, but I've got four hundred and thirty other men to worry about. Now where are those crystals? 
LAZARUS: I told you, he's got them. He took them. The thing! The thing! 
MCCOY: He's got to get some rest, Jim. And would you get that muscleman out of my Sickbay. (gestures at the security guard) 
KIRK: Dismissed. 
(The guard leaves.) 
MCCOY: He's in a lot of pain. 
KIRK: Sometimes pain can drive a man harder than pleasure. I'm sure you know that, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Well, don't worry, he's not going anywhere. Not this time. 
(But once the medical bay is empty, Lazarus gets out of bed and has a quick seizure.)

[Briefing room]

KIRK: What have we got, Mister Spock? A magnetic effect which produces a winking-out phenomenon. A mysterious, unidentified source of radiation on the planet. Lazarus, a walking powder keg. Your rip in the universe. A so-called murdering humanoid. 
SPOCK: True, Captain, but more significant to me is the fact that our ship's instruments are specifically designed to locate and identify any object in our universe, be it energy or matter. 
KIRK: But by using those instruments you were unable to identify the source of the radiation on the planet. 
SPOCK: Correct. Which would seem to be impossible. 
KIRK: Are the instruments in order? 
SPOCK: Perfect working condition. 
KIRK: Then what you say leads obviously to one alternative. The source of radiation is not from our universe. 
SPOCK: Nor in our universe, Captain. It came from outside. 
KIRK: Outside? Yes, that would explain a lot. Another universe, perhaps in another dimension, occupying the same space at the same time. 
SPOCK: The possible existence of a parallel universe has been scientifically conceded, Captain. 
KIRK: All right. What would happen if another universe, say a minus universe, came into contact with a positive universe such as ours? 
SPOCK: Unquestionably a warp. A distortion of physical laws on an immense scale. 
KIRK: Which is what we've been experiencing. The point where they come into contact, couldn't that be described as a hole? 
SPOCK: Indeed. I point out that a hole in the universe or in a simple container can either allow the contents to escape 
KIRK: Or what is outside to enter. The invasion that Commodore Barstow suspected. 
SPOCK: There has been no evidence of a large-scale invasion. 
KIRK: But a small scale invasion, Mister Spock. What is your analysis of the mental state of Lazarus? 
SPOCK: Difficult, Captain. One moment, paranoid, the next, calm, mild, rational. Almost as if he were two men. 
KIRK: Yes, two men. Different, but identical. And a hole in the universe. No, not a hole, A door. 
SPOCK: Through which these two beings are somehow enabled to pass. 
KIRK: Take a look at Lazarus. One minute he's at the point of death, the next he's alive, well, strong as a bull. 
SPOCK: The cut on his forehead. First he has it, then it's gone, then he has it again. 
KIRK: Which is physically impossible for one man. 
SPOCK: Quite right. Unquestionably, there are two of him. 
KIRK: What's going on? This leaping from universe to universe. This wild talk about a murdering creature who destroys civilisations What's the purpose? 
SPOCK: Jim, madness has no purpose or reason, but it may have a goal. He must be stopped, held. Destroyed if necessary. 
KIRK: I don't follow you. 
SPOCK: Two parallel universes project this. One positive, the other negative. Or, more specifically, one matter, the other antimatter. 
KIRK: Do you know what you're saying? Matter and antimatter have a tendency to cancel each other out. violently. 
SPOCK: Precisely. Under certain conditions, when two identical particles of matter and antimatter meet 
KIRK: Like Lazarus. Identical. Like both Lazarus', only one is matter and the other antimatter. If they meet. 
SPOCK: Annihilation, Jim. Total, complete, absolute annihilation. 
KIRK: Of everything that exists, everywhere.

[Corridor]

(Lazarus is prowling when he spots a High Voltage access panel. He opens it, removes a couple of transistors then puts one back to short it out. He leaves the area as smoke billows forth.)

[Engineering]

(Smoke starts to come from the main control panels.) 
MASTERS: The energiser has shorted. Get out of here. Sound the alarm. 
ENGINEER: Come on. You, too, Lieutenant. 
MASTERS: No, I've got to stay 
ENGINEER: We've got to get out of here. The whole thing might blow! 
(He bustles her out into the corridor.)

[Corridor]

MASTERS: Engineering calling Bridge. Fire! Fire in the energising circuit. 
(Hidden by the smoke, Lazarus enters Engineering.)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Fire, Captain. Engineering. Situation critical. 
KIRK: All available personnel, on the double. Spock, with me.

[Corridor]

(Two firefighters in protective gear are entering Engineering) 
KIRK: Report. 
ENGINEER: Under control, sir, but it couldn't have started by itself. 
SPOCK: Lazarus. A trick to get the crystals.

[Transporter room]

CHIEF: Sir, you shouldn't be in here. 
LAZARUS: Oh, I didn't know. 
(He knocks the poor lad out, then sets co-ordinates and is beamed to the planet carrying a bundle.)

[Corridor]

(Kirk and Spock exit Engineering.) 
KIRK: He's probably beaming down with the crystals right now. I'm going after him. You organise a security detail. Follow me as soon as you can. 
SPOCK: Spock to Bridge.

[Planet surface]

(Lazarus climbs into his saucer and unwraps the crystals.) 
LAZARUS: I'll get you now. I have a threshold. Run, run. I'll get you now.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Energise.

[Planet surface]

LAZARUS: It's done, it's done! Finished, finished. It's done. It's done. It's done, it's done. 
KIRK: Lazarus. 
LAZARUS: Done. No! Don't! Not you! 
(Kirk leans into the saucer - and vanishes.) 
LAZARUS: No! 
(Kirk goes into that negative space and finds that there is nowhere to run to. Then suddenly he's on the ground on the planet again. Or is he? He walks over to the saucer and is greeted by uninjured Lazarus.) 
LAZARUS: Welcome, Captain. I wasn't expecting you. 
KIRK: No, him. 
LAZARUS: Yes, him. You understand. 
KIRK: Not completely. This is a parallel universe? 
LAZARUS: Of course. 
KIRK: Antimatter? 
LAZARUS: Here, yes. 
KIRK: And if identical particles meet 
LAZARUS: The end of everything. Civilisation, existence, all gone. I tried to stop him, Captain. That's why I took your dilithium crystals. 
KIRK: He has two more. 
LAZARUS: That's very bad, Captain. If he comes through at a time of his own choosing. But I think if we hurry and you will help me, he can yet still be stopped. There's little time left. He meant to come through. When you accidentally passed through, it drained his crystals. It'll take him about ten minutes to re-energise with the equipment aboard his ship. That should give us enough time. 
KIRK: Exactly what did I pass through? 
LAZARUS: That's hard to explain, Captain. I call it an alternative warp. It's sort of a negative magnetic corridor where the two parallel universes meet. It's sort of a safety valve. It keeps eternity from blowing up. 
KIRK: This corridor, is it what caused the magnetic effect, the winking out phenomenon? 
LAZARUS: Precisely, Captain, but not because of its existence. Because, because my foe entered. The corridor is like a prison, with explosives at the door. Open the door, and the explosives might go off. Stay inside 
KIRK: And the universe is safe. 
LAZARUS: Both universes, Captain. Yours and mine. 
KIRK: Surely Lazarus must realise what would happen if you should meet face to face outside the corridor. 
LAZARUS: Of course he knows, Captain, but he's mad. You heard him. He's lost his mind. When our people found a way to slip through the warp and prove another universe, an identical one, existed, it was too much for him. He could not live knowing that I lived. He became obsessed with the idea of destroying me. The fact that it meant his own destruction, and everything else, meant nothing to him. 
KIRK: So you're the terrible thing, the murdering monster. The creature. 
LAZARUS: Yes, Captain. Or he is. It depends on your point of view, doesn't it? It's ready, Captain. If we can force him into the corridor while I'm waiting for him, we can put an end to this. But if he comes through at a time of his own choosing and breaks into this universe to find me 
KIRK: I understand. What do you want me to do? 
LAZARUS: Find him. Force him through his threshold, while I'm waiting for him, into the corridor, and I'll hold him there. 
KIRK: You can't hold him forever. 
LAZARUS: Can't I, Captain? You destroy his ship. 
KIRK: If I destroy his ship, won't yours also be destroyed? 
LAZARUS: It will. 
KIRK: And your door will be closed. 
LAZARUS: Yes, and so will his. 
KIRK: You'll be trapped inside that corridor with him forever. At each other's throats throughout time. 
LAZARUS: Is it such a large price to pay for the safety of two universes? 
KIRK: I'm ready. 
LAZARUS: Send him to me. I'll be waiting. 
(Lazarus activates his crystals manually, and Kirk vanishes, then reappears on 'our' planet and gestures to Spock who has come down with two guards.) 
SPOCK: Lazarus. 
(Kirk jumps him while he is distracted and knocks him down.)
KIRK: Stand back. 
(But Lazarus has him in a bear hug, and they struggle together for a while until Kirk finally gets the upper-hand again.) 
LAZARUS: No! No! No, I'm not ready! I'm not ready! 
(Kirk throws him through the threshold.) 
SPOCK: Take these crystals to the Enterprise. 
KIRK: I must destroy that ship completely. 
SPOCK: What of Lazarus? 
KIRK: And what of Lazarus?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Activate phaser banks. 
LESLEY: Phaser banks activated. 
KIRK: Stand by to fire. 
(The bright dot appears on the planet surface.) 
LESLEY: Phasers standing by, sir. 
KIRK: Fire phasers. 
(A sustained burst hits the little saucer, while the two Lazarus' wrestle in non-space. Finally it disappears.) 
KIRK: All right, Mister Lesley, let's get out of here. Ahead warp factor one. 
LESLEY: Warp one, sir. 
KIRK: Everything's all right, Mister Spock, for us. 
SPOCK: There is, of course, no escape for them, sir. 
KIRK: There is, of course, no escape. How would it be? Trapped forever with a raging madman at your throat until time itself came to a stop? For eternity. How would it be? 
SPOCK: Captain, the universe is safe. 
KIRK: For you and me. But what of Lazarus? What of Lazarus?


Errand of Mercy
Stardate: 3198.4 
Original Airdate: 23 Mar, 1967

[Bridge]
SPOCK: Captain, we've reached the designated position for scanning the coded directive tape. 
KIRK: Good. (puts it into a decoder) We both guessed right. Negotiations with the Klingon Empire are on the verge of breaking down. Starfleet Command anticipates a surprise attack. We are to proceed to Organia and take whatever steps are necessary to prevent the Klingons from using it as a base. 
SPOCK: Strategically sound. Organia is the only Class M planet in the disputed area, ideally located for use by either side. 
KIRK: Organia's description, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Inhabited by humanoids. A very peaceful, friendly people living on a primitive level. Little of intrinsic value. Approximately Class D minus on Richter's scale of cultures. 
KIRK: Another Armenia, Belgium. 
SPOCK: Sir? 
KIRK: The weak innocents who always seem to be located on the natural invasion routes. 
SULU: Captain, the automatic deflector screen just popped on. Body approaching. 
KIRK: Configuration, Mister Sulu. 
(Everyone is thrown about as the Enterprise is hit by multiple weapons fire.) 
KIRK: Phaser banks, lock on. Return fire. Maintain firing rate. One hundred percent dispersal pattern. 
SPOCK: We've hit him, Captain. He's hurt. 
KIRK: Damage control, report to the first officer. 
SULU: Captain, the other ship doesn't register. Only drifting debris. We got him. 
KIRK: All hands, maintain general alert. Hold battle stations. Damage report, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Minor, Captain. We were most fortunate. Blast damage in decks ten and eleven, minor buckling in the antimatter pods, casualties very light. 
KIRK: Maintain surveillance, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: No contact, Captain. He blew up all right. 
KIRK: Well, we've been anticipating an attack. I'd say what we've just experienced very nearly qualifies. 
SPOCK: Yes. It would seem to be an unfriendly act. 
UHURA: Automatic all-points relay from Starfleet Command, Captain, code one. 
KIRK: Well, there it is. War. We didn't want it, but we've got it. 
SPOCK: Curious how often you humans manage to obtain that which you do not want. 
KIRK: War or not, we've still got a job to do. Denying Organia to the Klingons. 
SPOCK: With the outbreak of hostilities, that might not be easy. 
KIRK: Lay in a course for Organia, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Negotiating with the Organians will be time-consuming, Captain, and time is one thing we'll have the least of. 
KIRK: We won't get it by talking about it. The trigger's been pulled. We have to get there before the hammer falls. Ahead warp factor seven.

Captain's log, stardate 3198.4. We have reached Organia and established standard orbit. No signs of hostile activities in this area.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain. Unit XY-75847 report a fleet of Klingon ships in their sector, sir. 
KIRK: What bearing? 
UHURA: Unable to ascertain, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, have the phaser crews stand by their positions. Full power deflector screens. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock and I are going to the planet's surface. You will be in command. Your responsibility is to the Enterprise, not to us. Is that clear? 
SULU: Perfectly, sir. 
KIRK: The Klingon fleet is in this quadrant. We know that Organia will be a target. If they should emerge 
SULU: We'll handle them, sir. 
KIRK: You will evaluate the situation. If there is a fleet of them, you'll get out of here, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: But, Captain 
KIRK: No buts. You'll get to safety and alert the fleet. You will not attack alone. Mister Spock and I will be all right. Mister Spock, let's you and I pay the Organians a visit.

[Planet surface]

(They beam down in front of a vaguely castle-styled wall which is completely smooth. The locals are dressed in romanticised rural mediaeval-style clothing, and take no notice of them at all.) 
KIRK: You'd think they had people beaming down every day. 
SPOCK: Yes. Curious lack of interest. Notice the ruins in the distance, Captain. Quite large. 
KIRK: Yes. A fortress, perhaps. A castle. 
SPOCK: Whatever it is, it would seem to be inconsistent with the reports we've been given on this culture. 
(A man in a loose purple robe opens his arms wide.) 
AYELBORNE: Welcome. 
KIRK: Reception committee? 
SPOCK: It would seem so. 
AYELBORNE: You are our visitors. Welcome, welcome. I am Ayelborne. 
KIRK: I am Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the United Federation of Planets. This is my first officer Mister Spock. 
AYELBORNE: You are most welcome, my friend. 
KIRK: I would like to speak to someone in authority. 
AYELBORNE: We don't have anybody in authority, but I am the chairman of the Council of Elders. Perhaps I would do. 
KIRK: You people are in great danger. Is there someplace we can go and talk? 
AYELBORNE: Oh, yes. Our council chambers are nearby. Please. 
SPOCK: Captain, if you don't mind, I should like to wander about the village and make some studies. 
AYELBORNE: Of course, my friend. Our village is yours. Captain.

[Council Chamber]

(Ayelborne and four other older men seat themselves at a simple wooden table. Beautifully polished, though.) 
KIRK: Gentlemen, my government has informed me that the Klingons are expected to move against your planet with the objective of making it a base of operation against the Federation. My mission, frankly, is to keep them from doing it. 
AYELBORNE: What you're saying, Captain, is that we seem to have a choice between dealing with you or your enemies. 
KIRK: No, sir. With the Federation, you have a choice. You have none with the Klingons. The Klingons are a military dictatorship. War is their way of life. Life under the Klingon rule would be very unpleasant. We offer you protection. 
CLAYMARE: We thank you for your altruistic offer, Captain, but we really do not need your protection. 
AYELBORNE: We are a simple people, Captain. We have nothing that anybody could want. 
KIRK: You have this planet and its strategic location. I assure you that if you don't take action to prevent it, the Klingons will move against you as surely as your sun rises. We will help you build defences, build facilities. 
AYELBORNE: We have no defences, Captain, nor are any needed. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I have seen what the Klingons do to planets like yours. They are organised into vast slave labour camps. No freedoms whatsoever. Your goods will be confiscated. Hostages taken and killed, your leaders confined. You'd be far better off on a penal planet. Infinitely better off. 
AYELBORNE: Captain, we see that your concern is genuine. We are moved. But again we assure you we are in absolutely no danger. If anybody is in danger, you are, and that concerns us greatly. It would be better if you returned to your ship as soon as possible. 
KIRK: You keep insisting there's no danger. I keep assuring you there is. Would you mind telling me 
AYELBORNE: It is our way of life, Captain. 
KIRK: That's the first thing that would be lost! Excuse me, gentlemen. I'm a soldier, not a diplomat. I can only tell you the truth. 
AYELBORNE: If you will excuse us, Captain, we will discuss your kind offer. 
KIRK: Certainly. 
(The doors open on their own and Spock enters. He and Kirk whisper in a corner.) 
SPOCK: Captain, our information on these people and their culture was not correct. This is not a primitive society making progress toward mechanisation. They are totally stagnant. There is no evidence of any progress as far back as my tricorder can register. 
KIRK: That doesn't seem likely. 
SPOCK: Nevertheless, it is true. For tens of thousands of years, there has been absolutely no advancement, no significant change in their physical environment. This is a laboratory specimen of an arrested culture. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. That might be useful. 
AYELBORNE: We have discussed your offer, Captain. Our opinion is unchanged. We are in no danger. We thank you for your kind offer of assistance, although we must decline it, and we strongly recommend that you leave Organia before you yourselves are endangered. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I must get you to reconsider. We can be of immense help to you. In addition to military aid, we can send you specialists, technicians. We can show you how to feed a thousand people where one was fed before. We can help you build schools, educate the young in the latest technological and scientific skills. Your public facilities are almost non-existent. We can help you remake your world, end disease, hunger, hardship. All we ask in return is that you let us help you. Now. 
AYELBORNE: Captain, I can see that you do not understand us. Perhaps 
KIRK: (answering communicator) Excuse me, sir. Kirk here. 
SULU: Captain, a large number of Klingon vessels have just arrived.

[Bridge]

SULU: They're opening fire. 
KIRK [OC]: Positive identification? 
SULU: Yes, sir. My screens are up. I can't drop them to beam you aboard.

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: Mister Sulu, follow your orders. Get out of here. Contact the fleet. Return if the odds are more equal. Kirk out. Gentlemen, you kept insisting that there was no danger 
AYELBORNE: That is correct, Captain. There is no danger. 
TREFAYNE: Ayelborne, eight space vehicles have assumed orbit around our planet. They are activating their material transmission units. 
AYELBORNE: Thank you, Trefayne. 
KIRK: Can you verify that? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain, but it seems a logical development. 
AYELBORNE: Captain, since it is too late for you to escape, perhaps we should do something about protecting you. 
KIRK: If you had listened to me 
CLAYMARE: We must be sure you are not harmed. 
TREFAYNE: Ayelborne, several hundred men have appeared near the citadel. They bring many weapons. 
KIRK: How does he know that? 
AYELBORNE: Oh, our friend Trefayne is really quite intuitive. You can rest assured that what he says is absolutely correct. 
KIRK: So we're stranded here, in the middle of a Klingon occupation army. 
SPOCK: So it would seem. Not a very pleasant prospect. 
KIRK: You have a gift for understatement, Mister Spock. It's not a very pleasant prospect at all.

Captain's Log. stardate 3201.7. Mister Spock and I are trapped on the planet Organia, which is in the process of being occupied by the forces of the Klingon Empire. The Organians have provided us with native clothing in the hopes we may be taken for Organians.

[Council Chamber]

SPOCK: Captain, our phasers are gone. 
KIRK: Did you take them? 
AYELBORNE: Yes, Captain. I took them. 
KIRK: I must ask you to return them. 
AYELBORNE: I'm sorry, Captain. I cannot do that. Were you armed, you might be tempted to use violence, and that we cannot permit. You, Captain, will pass as an Organian, and Mister Spock. Mister Spock presents a problem. He doesn't look like an Organian. 
CLAYMARE: A Vulcan trader, perhaps. A dealer in kevas and trillium. Harmless to the Klingons. 
KIRK: They know that Vulcan is a member of the Federation. 
SPOCK: Vulcan merchants are not uncommon, Captain. It is a practical approach. 
KIRK: What about the rest of you? 
AYELBORNE: We shall continue as before. We have nothing to fear. 
KIRK: You have a lot to learn, sir. And if I know the Klingons, you'll be learning it the hard way. 
(The doors open on their own, and two Klingons march in, followed by their leader.) 
KOR: This is the ruling council? 
AYELBORNE: I am Ayelborne, temporary head of the council. I bid you welcome. 
KOR: No doubt you do. I am Kor, military governor of Organia. (looking at Kirk) Who are you? 
AYELBORNE: He is Baroner, one of our leading citizens. 
KOR: And he has no tongue? 
KIRK: I have a tongue. 
KOR: Good. You will be taught how to use it. Where is your smile? 
KIRK: My what? 
KOR: The stupid, idiotic smile everyone else seems to be wearing. A Vulcan. Do you also have a tongue? 
SPOCK: I am Spock, a dealer in kevas and trillium. 
KOS: You do not look like a storekeeper. Take this man. Vulcans are members of the Federation. He may be a spy. 
KIRK: He's no spy. 
KOR: Well, have we a ram among the sheep? Do you object to us taking him? 
KIRK: He's done nothing. Nothing at all. 
KOR: Coming from an Organian, yours is practically an act of rebellion. Very good. (to the Council) So you welcome me. (to Kirk) Do you also welcome me? 
KIRK: You're here. There's nothing I can do about it. 
KOR: Good honest hatred. Very refreshing. However, it makes no difference whether you welcome me or not. I am here and will stay. You are now subjects of the Klingon Empire. You'll find there are many rules and regulations. They will be posted. Violation of the smallest of them will be punished by death. 
AYELBORNE: We shall obey your regulations, Commander. 
KOR: You disapprove, Baroner. 
KIRK: You need my approval? 
KOR: I need your obedience. Nothing more. Will I have it? 
KIRK: You seem to be in command. 
KOR: Yes. I am. I shall need a representative from among you. Liaison between the forces of the occupation and the civil population. Smile and smile. I don't trust men who smile too much. You, Baroner, you're the man. 
KIRK: Me? I don't want the job. 
KOR: Have I asked whether or not you want it? We Klingons have a reputation for ruthlessness. You will find that it is deserved. Should one Klingon soldier be killed, a thousand Organians will die. I will have order. Is that clear? 
AYELBORNE: Commander, I assure you our people want nothing but peace. We shall cause you no trouble. 
KOR: I'm sure you will not. Take the Vulcan to the examination room. (to Kirk) You, come with me. I will familiarise you with your new duties. 
KIRK: And Mister Spock? 
KOR: You are concerned? 
KIRK: He is my friend. 
KOR: You have a poor choice of friends. He will be examined. If he is lying, he will die. If he is telling the truth, he will find that business has taken a turn for the worse. Take him. You do not like to be pushed. Very good. You may be a man I can deal with, Baroner. Come with me.

[Kor's office]

(Probably up in the old castle.) 
KOR: From this day on, no public assemblages of more than three people. All publications to be cleared through this office. Neighbourhood controls will be established, hostages selected. A somewhat lengthy list of crimes against the state. 
(Kor hands the proclamation to Kirk, who puts it down on the desk.) 
KOR: You do not like them? (Spock is brought in.) Well? 
KLINGON: He is what he claims to be, Commander, a Vulcanian merchant named Spock. His main concern seems to be how he would carry out his business under our occupation. 
KOR: Nothing else? 
KLINGON: The usual. A certain amount of apprehension regarding us. The mind is remarkably disciplined. 
KOR: You are sure? 
KLINGON: I used force four, which is sufficient to break down any pretence. 
KOR: Very well, Lieutenant. Would you like to try our little truth finder? 
KIRK: I don't understand. 
KOR: It's a mind-sifter or mind-ripper, depending on how much force is used. We can record every thought, every bit of knowledge in a man's mind. Of course, when that much force is used, the mind is emptied. Permanently, I'm afraid. What's left is more vegetable than human. 
KIRK: And you're proud of it. 
KOR: It is a tool, a weapon. Somewhat drastic, but very efficient. 
KIRK: Are you sure you're all right? 
SPOCK: Perfectly, Baroner. But it was an interesting experience. 
KOR: All right, Vulcan, you may go. But you are an enemy alien. You will be under our scrutiny at all times. If I have to warn you 
SPOCK: Not necessary, Commander. I understand you very well. 
(He leaves, followed by the guard.) 
KOR: Return to your council, Baroner. You will receive our official notifications as soon as they are published. In the meantime keep the people in order. It is your responsibility. 
KIRK: Or I will be killed. 
KOR: That is exactly right. You will be killed.

[Village square]

KIRK: That mindsifter can't be all the terror they think it is. 
SPOCK: It should not be underestimated, Captain. It reaches directly into the mind. We Vulcans have certain mental (a Klingon walks past) certain disciplines which enable me to maintain a shield. Without those disciplines, there would be no protection. 
KIRK: I'll try and avoid it. 
KLINGON 2: Out of the way, Organian. 
SPOCK: I'm sorry, sir. We did not notice you. 
KLINGON 2: Next time, keep your eyes open, or I'll shut them permanently. 
SPOCK: Captain, I strongly suggest we direct our energies toward the immediate problem. Accomplishing our mission here. 
KIRK: You didn't really think I was going to beat his head in, did you? 
SPOCK: I thought you might. 
KIRK: You're right. But as you say, we still have a job to do. 
SPOCK: We'll receive no help from the Organians. 
KIRK: Maybe, but sooner or later they'll start resenting how the Klingons run things. If we could prove to them they could do something to strike back, to keep the Klingons off balance. 
SPOCK: Verbal persuasion seems to be ineffective. Perhaps a more direct approach? 
KIRK: That's exactly what I had in mind. Mister Spock Did I or did I not see something that looked like a munitions dump outside of Kor's headquarters? 
SPOCK: You did. 
KIRK: I think it's time we did a little simple and plain communicating. Tonight. 
SPOCK: A very meritorious idea, Captain. 
KIRK: We're short of tools. 
SPOCK: I'm certain the Klingons will provide whatever is necessary. It's a pleasure doing business with you, Mister Spock.

[Kor's Headquarters]

(Kirk jumps one Klingon and hauls his unconscious body away. Spock primes a grenade, presumably from the munitions dump.) 
KIRK: Okay so far. Sonic grenade? 
SPOCK: With a delayed action fuse. 
KIRK; Good. 
SPOCK: These crates contain chemical explosives. They should make a most satisfactory display. 
(He casually drops the grenade into a box, and they run.) 
SPOCK: Six, five, four three. 
(There's a short but bright fireworks show.) 
KIRK: You were right, Mister Spock. A most satisfactory display.

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: Of course we blew it up. Deliberately. 
AYELBORNE: But that was violence. 
KIRK: We did it to show you that you can fight back. You don't have to be sheep, you can be wolves. 
CLAYMARE: Terrible to destroy. 
KIRK: History is full of examples of civil populations fighting back successfully against a military dictatorship. We may not be able to destroy the Klingons, but we can tie them up. Blow up their installations, disrupt their communications, make Organia useless to them. 
SPOCK: Our fleet will eventually arrive. In the meantime, the battle is ours. It can be a successful one. 
AYELBORNE: Captain, I implore you never to do such a thing again. 
KIRK: Why? Are you afraid of retribution? Does your personal freedom mean so little to you? 
AYELBORNE: How little you understand us, Captain. 
KIRK: All I understand is that you apparently don't have the backbone to fight and protect your loved ones.

[Kor's office]

(Of course he had the Council Chamber bugged.) 
KIRK [OC]: I speak of courage, gentlemen. Does courage mean so little to you?

[Council Chamber]

(Kor and his troops enter.) 
KOR: You speak of courage. Obviously you do not know the difference between courage and foolhardiness. Always it is the brave ones who die. The soldiers. I hope you will continue to savour the sweetness of your life. You disgust me. 
AYELBORNE: What are you going to do with him, Commander? 
KOR: What is always done with spies and saboteurs. He will be killed, after he has had first-hand experience of our mind scanner. 
AYELBORNE: There's no need to use your machine on him, commander. I can tell you his name. It is Captain James T. Kirk. 
KIRK: Ayelborne! 
KOR: What? (A big grin spreads across his face) Captain of the USS Enterprise. A starship commander. And his first officer? I had hoped to meet you in battle, but 
AYELBORNE: For some reason, he feels that he must destroy you, Commander, just as you feel you must destroy him. 
KOR: That's going to be rather difficult now. Isn't it, Captain? What an admirable people. Do you always betray your friends? 
AYELBORNE: I didn't want you to harm him. I'm sorry, Captain. It was for the best. No harm would come of it. 
KIRK: I'm used to the idea of dying, but I have no desire to die for the likes of you. 
KOR: I don't blame you, Captain. Lock up the Vulcan. Take the Captain to my office. We'll have a talk before I do what must be done.

[Kor's office]

KOR: You'll have a drink with me, Captain? 
KIRK: No, thank you. 
KOR: I assure you it isn't drugged. With our mind-scanner, we have no need for such crude methods. 
KIRK: What do you want from me? 
KOR: Oh, a very great deal, but first I want to talk. Just talk. 
KIRK: You think I'm going to sit here and just talk with the enemy? 
KOR: You'll talk. Either here, now, voluntarily, or under our mind-scanner. The fact is, Captain, I have a great admiration for your Starfleet. A remarkable instrument. and I must confess to a certain admiration for you. I know, of course, that it was you who destroyed our supplies last night. 
KIRK: Something was destroyed? Nothing inconsequential, I hope. 
KOR: Hardly. They were quite important to us, but they can be replaced. You of the Federation, you are much like us. 
KIRK: We're nothing like you. We're a democratic body. 
KOR: Come now. I'm not referring to minor ideological differences. I mean that we are similar as a species. Here we are on a planet of sheep. Two tigers, predators, hunters, killers, and it is precisely that which makes us great. And there is a universe to be taken. 
KIRK: It's a very large universe, Commander, full of people who don't like the Klingons. 
KOR: Excellent. Then it shall be a matter of testing each other's wills. Of power. Survival must be earned, Captain. Tell me about the dispersal of your Starfleet. 
. KIRK: Go climb a tree. 
KOR: I can get what I want through our mind-scanner, but there would be very little of your mind left, Captain. I have no desire to see you become a vegetable. This friend of yours, the Vulcan. He seems to have the ability to block our scanner. I think perhaps I will find out why. I will have him dissected. Your friend killed. You, a mental vegetable. Not a pleasant prospect, Captain, but it lies ahead for you unless you tell me everything I want to know. Twelve hours, Captain. 
KIRK: It will take a lot longer than that, Commander. 
KOR: Longer than that I will not wait. I respect you, Captain, but this is war, a game we Klingons play to win. Take him to the cell with his friend. And watch him closely.

[Cell]

(It's a traditional mediaeval castle cell, big iron grills, straw on the floor, lit by ever-burning torches in sconces on the walls.) 
SPOCK: It's no use, Jim. There's no way out. 
(Later.) 
KIRK: How much of the twelve hours do we have left? 
SPOCK: Six hours, forty three minutes, if the Klingons are punctual. 
KIRK: I think we can count on them being punctual. Blowing that munitions dump wasn't enough. If we get out of here, we've got to carry the attack directly to Kor. These Organians 
SPOCK: They do not seem to understand. Most peculiar. 
KIRK: Nevertheless, our orders still stand. We've got to make some attempt to neutralise the Klingon occupation. 
SPOCK: We may not get the chance, Captain. These walls are very thick. 
KIRK: And there are guards every few feet down the hall. 
(There are sounds outside, then the door swings silently open on it's own. Spock and Kirk are ready to pounce on whoever enters.) 
AYELBORNE: Oh, there you are, gentlemen. I trust you are in good health? Shall we go? 
KIRK: Go? 
AYELBORNE: Yes. Your captors plan to do violence to you. That we cannot permit. I came to take you away. 
KIRK: You turned us over to them. You expect us to trust you now? 
AYELBORNE: Is there really a choice, Captain? I offer you safety.

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: We can't stay here. This is the first place they'll look. 
AYELBORNE: They will not come here, Captain. You may believe me. 
KIRK: First you turn us in, then get us out. What are you doing now, waiting for the Klingons to post a reward so you can turn us in again and collect it? 
AYELBORNE: How little you understand us, Captain. 
SPOCK: Nor do we understand what happened to the guard at the citadel. 
AYELBORNE: Please do not concern yourself about them. 
KIRK: What happened to them? 
AYELBORNE: Why, nothing happened to them, Captain. Nothing at all.

[Kor's office]

KLINGON: Commander! 
KOR: Don't you see I'm busy? 
KLINGON: The two Federation prisoners. They're gone. 
KOR: You mean they've escaped? 
KLINGON: I swear. No one was at fault. The guards, ten of them were constantly on duty watching the cell. Then when they opened it to give them food, they simply weren't there, and there was no way out. 
KOR: If you're lying to me. 
KLINGON: I swear! 
KOR: All right, Lieutenant. Implement Special Occupation Order Number Four. Immediately! 
KLINGON: Sir!

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: Is that's all you can do, smile? 
AYELBORNE: You are free, Captain. 
KIRK: I want to know how I'm free, and why. 
SPOCK: Indeed, there are several questions I would like to ask as well. 
KIRK: This idiotic placidity of yours, your refusal to do anything to protect yourselves 
AYELBORNE: We have already answered that question. To us, violence is unthinkable. 
KOR [OC]: Attention. Attention all Organians. Attention. This is Commander Kor. The two Federation prisoners have escaped, obviously with outside aid.

[Kor's office]

KOR: They will be returned immediately. So that you will know we mean what we say, listen.

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: Those are Klingon phasers. Take the door. Get down, gentlemen.

[Kor's office]

KOR: In the courtyard of my headquarters,

[Council Chamber]

KOR [OC]: Two hundred Organians have just been killed. 
KIRK; Two hundred of them. 
KOR [OC]: In two hours, two hundred more will die, and two hundred more after that until the two Federation spies are turned over to us. This is the order of Kor. 
KIRK: Did you hear them? 
AYELBORNE: Yes, of course, Captain. But nothing has changed. 
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock. It seems it's up to you and me. 
SPOCK: It would appear so, Captain. 
KIRK: The Federation has invested a great deal of money in our training. They're about due for a small return. We have two hours with which to do it in. 
SPOCK: But only two. More Organians will die. 
KIRK: No. No more will die on account of us, Mister Spock. Where are those phasers? 
AYELBORNE: I cannot tell you. 
KIRK: You've told us a great deal about how you hate violence. Unless you tell me where those phasers are, you're going to have more violence than you know what to do with. 
AYELBORNE: You mean you would actually use force? 
KIRK: It's entirely up to you. 
TREFAYNE: Ayelborne, this is of no matter. Perhaps you'd better let him have what he wants. He 
AYELBORNE: Very well, but it will do you no good. They're in that cabinet. 
(Spock gets them, but leaves the tricorder.) 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I have no great love for you, your planet, your culture. Despite that, Mister Spock and I are going to go out there and quite probably die, in an attempt to show you that there are some things worth dying for. 
AYELBORNE: There are only two of you against an army. Don't you realise that what you intend to do will be hopeless? 
KIRK: Come on, Mister Spock, let's get out of here. 
(The doors open politely to let them leave, then close again behind them.) 
CLAYMARE: Brave men. 
AYELBORNE: Yes, but so foolish. 
TREFAYNE: Interesting, however. 
AYELBORNE: Of course, we cannot allow it. To stop them is very bad. 
CLAYMARE: It is necessary. They may harm one another. 
AYELBORNE: Trefayne. 
TREFAYNE: They will wait until darkness. 
AYELBORNE: And then? 
TREFAYNE: Terrible. Inconceivable. Savage. 
AYELBORNE: We will wait. 
[Kor's headquarters]

(Outside, under cover of darkness and bushes.) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, can we get those two guards? What would you say the odds on our getting out of here? 
SPOCK: Difficult to be precise, Captain. I should say approximately 7,824.7 to 1. 
KIRK: Difficult to be precise? 7,824 to 1? 
SPOCK: 7,824.7 to 1. 
KIRK: That's a pretty close approximation. 
SPOCK: I endeavour to be accurate. 
KIRK: You do quite well. Set your phaser on stun. We're after the top dog, not the members of the pack. 
SPOCK: Very good. 
KIRK: But if the situation calls for it, we kill, is that clear? 
SPOCK: Clear, Captain. 
KIRK: I'll take the one on the left. Fire. 
(Two stunned Klingons fall, and Kirk and Spock run into the building.)

[Council Chamber]

TREFAYNE: It has begun. 
AYELBORNE: Very well. 
CLAYMARE: It will be hard. 
AYELBORNE: Prepare yourselves. 
(They close their eyes and concentrate.)

[Corridor]

KLINGON: No results, Commander. 
KOR: Nothing? 
KLINGON: I cannot understand these people. 
KOR: They know what death is, don't they? 
KLINGON: They do not seem to be worried about anything. 
KOR: Bad enough to be a military governor, but to govern a population of sheep! Very well, Lieutenant, round up two hundred more. 
KLINGON: Yes, sir. 
KOR: (going into his office) Fools! Will I have to kill them all? 
(The Klingons march off, and Kirk jumps one of them from a side corridor, getting his belt around the Lieutenant's neck.) 
KIRK: If you don't tell me what I want to know, I'll kill you here and now. Is that clear? 
KLINGON: Yes. 
KIRK: Is Kor's office down there? 
KLINGON: Yes. 
KIRK: What about the hostages? Talk. Talk. 
KLINGON: I am to gather two hundred more. 
KIRK: To be killed? 
(The Klingon nods.) 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
(Spock knocks the Klingon out with a neck pinch.) 
KIRK: Well, what are the odds now? 
SPOCK: Less than seven thousand to one, Captain. It's remarkable we've got this far. 
KIRK: Less than seven thousand to one. Well, getting better. Getting better.

[Kor's office]

KIRK: Just stay where you are, Commander. 
KOR: You have done well to get this far through my guards. 
SPOCK: (taking his weapon) I believe you'll find that several of them are no longer in perfect operating condition. 
KOR: So, you are here. You will be interested in knowing that a Federation fleet is on its way here at the moment. Our fleet is preparing to meet them. 
KIRK: Checkmate, Commander. 
KOR: Shall we wait and see the results before you kill me? 
KIRK: I don't intend to kill you unless I have to. 
KOR: Sentimentality, mercy. The emotions of peace. Your weakness, Captain Kirk. The Klingon Empire shall win. Think of it, as we sit here, in space above us the destiny of the galaxy will be decided for the next ten thousand years. Can I offer you a drink? We can toast the victory of the Klingon fleet. 
SPOCK: You may be premature. There are many possibilities. 
KOR: Today we conquer. If some day we are defeated, well, war has its fortunes good and bad. Do you know why we are so strong? Because we are a unit. Each of us is part of the greater whole, always under surveillance. Even a commander like myself, always under surveillance, Captain. If you will note. 
KIRK: Cover, Spock! Back! 
(The Klingons burst it, then suddenly everyone drops their weapons. Everyone.) 
KOR: Shoot! Shoot! 
(They try hand to hand, but are unable to touch each other without extreme pain. Up on the Enterprise, the crew suddenly leap out of their seats and away from their consoles.)

[Kor's office]

KIRK: What is it, Spock? 
SPOCK: Inexplicable, Captain. Extreme heat. Not only the weapons but the bodies as well. 
(Ayelborne and Claymare come in.) 
AYELBORNE: We are terribly sorry to be forced to interfere, gentlemen, but we cannot permit you to harm yourselves. 
KOR: What are you talking about? 
CLAYMARE: We have put a stop to your violence. 
KIRK: You are stopping this? You? 
CLAYMARE: All instruments of violence on this planet now radiate a temperature of three hundred and fifty degrees. They are inoperative. 
KOR: My fleet! 
AYELBORNE: The same conditions exist on both the star-fleets. There will be no battle. 
KOR: Ridiculous! 
AYELBORNE: I suggest you contact them. You too, Captain. Your ship is now within range of your communications device. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. 
SULU: Captain.

[Bridge]

SULU: I can't explain it. We were just closing in on the Klingon fleet when

[Kor's office]

SULU [OC]: Every control on our ship became too hot to handle.
(Then it all goes dark, and he can touch the consoles again) 
SULU [OC]: Our power's gone. Our phaser banks are dead. 
KIRK: Stand by, Sulu. 
KOR: My fleet, it's helpless. 
KIRK: What have you done? 
AYELBORNE: As I stand here, I also stand upon the home planet of the Klingon Empire, and the home planet of your Federation, Captain. I'm putting a stop to this insane war. 
KOR: You're what? 
KIRK: You're talking nonsense. 
AYELBORNE: It is being done. 
KIRK: You can't just stop the fleet. What gives you the right? 
KOR: You can't interfere. What happens in space is not your business. 
AYELBORNE: Unless both sides agree to an immediate cessation of hostilities, all your armed forces, wherever they may be, will be immediately immobilised. 
KIRK: We have legitimate grievances against the Klingons. They've invaded our territory, killed our citizens. They're openly aggressive. They've boasted that they'll take over half the galaxy. 
KOR: Why not? We're the stronger! You've tried to hem us in, cut off vital supplies, strangle our trade! You've been asking for war! 
KIRK: You're the ones who issued the ultimatum to withdraw from the disputed areas! 
KOR: They are not disputed! They're clearly ours. And now you step in with some kind of trick. 
AYELBORNE: It is no trick, Commander. We have simply put an end to your war. All your military forces, wherever they are, are now completely paralysed. 
CLAYMARE: We find interference in other people's affairs most disgusting, but you gentlemen have given us no choice. 
KIRK: You should be the first to be on our side. Two hundred hostages killed. 
AYELBORNE: No one has been killed, Captain. 
CLAYMARE: No one has died here in uncounted thousands of years. 
KOR: You are liars. You are meddling in things that are none of your business. 
KIRK: Even if you have some power that we don't understand, you have no right to dictate to our Federation 
KOR: Or our Empire! 
KIRK: How to handle their interstellar relations! We have the right 
AYELBORNE: To wage war, Captain? To kill millions of innocent people? To destroy life on a planetary scale? Is that what you're defending? 
KIRK: Well, no one wants war. But there are proper channels. People have a right to handle their own affairs. Eventually, we would have 
AYELBORNE: Oh, eventually you will have peace, but only after millions of people have died. It is true that in the future, you and the Klingons will become fast friends. You will work together. 
KOR: Never! 
CLAYMARE: Your emotions are most discordant. We do not wish to seem inhospitable, but gentlemen, you must leave. 
AYELBORNE: Yes, please leave us. The mere presence of beings like yourselves is intensely painful to us. 
KIRK: What do you mean, beings like yourselves? 
AYELBORNE: Millions of years ago, Captain, we were humanoid like yourselves, but we have developed beyond the need of physical bodies. That of us which you see is mere appearance for your sake. 
KOR: Captain, it's a trick. We can handle them. I have an army. 
(Kirk holds him back as Ayelborne and Claymare transform into pulsating lights, too bright to look at. Then they disappear.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. Pure energy. Pure thought. Totally incorporeal. Not life as we know it at all. 
KIRK: But what about this planet? The fields, the buildings, this citadel? 
SPOCK: Conventionalisations, I should say. Useless to the Organians. Created so that visitors such as ourselves, could have conventional points of reference. 
KOR: But is all of this possible? 
SPOCK: We have seen it with our own eyes. I should say the Organians are as far above us on the evolutionary scale as we are above the amoeba. 
KIRK: Well, Commander, I guess that takes care of the war. Obviously, the Organians aren't going to let us fight. 
KOR: A shame, Captain. It would have been glorious.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: You've been most restrained since we left Organia. 
KIRK: I'm embarrassed. I was furious with the Organians for stopping a war I didn't want. We think of ourselves as the most powerful beings in the universe. It's unsettling to discover that we're wrong. 
SPOCK: Captain, it took millions of years for the Organians to evolve into what they are. Even the gods did not spring into being overnight. You and I have no reason to be embarrassed. We did, after all, beat the odds. 
KIRK: Oh, no, no, no, Mister Spock, We didn't beat the odds. We didn't have a chance. The Organians raided the game.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Errand of Mercy
Stardate: 3198.4 
Original Airdate: 23 Mar, 1967

[Bridge]
SPOCK: Captain, we've reached the designated position for scanning the coded directive tape. 
KIRK: Good. (puts it into a decoder) We both guessed right. Negotiations with the Klingon Empire are on the verge of breaking down. Starfleet Command anticipates a surprise attack. We are to proceed to Organia and take whatever steps are necessary to prevent the Klingons from using it as a base. 
SPOCK: Strategically sound. Organia is the only Class M planet in the disputed area, ideally located for use by either side. 
KIRK: Organia's description, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Inhabited by humanoids. A very peaceful, friendly people living on a primitive level. Little of intrinsic value. Approximately Class D minus on Richter's scale of cultures. 
KIRK: Another Armenia, Belgium. 
SPOCK: Sir? 
KIRK: The weak innocents who always seem to be located on the natural invasion routes. 
SULU: Captain, the automatic deflector screen just popped on. Body approaching. 
KIRK: Configuration, Mister Sulu. 
(Everyone is thrown about as the Enterprise is hit by multiple weapons fire.) 
KIRK: Phaser banks, lock on. Return fire. Maintain firing rate. One hundred percent dispersal pattern. 
SPOCK: We've hit him, Captain. He's hurt. 
KIRK: Damage control, report to the first officer. 
SULU: Captain, the other ship doesn't register. Only drifting debris. We got him. 
KIRK: All hands, maintain general alert. Hold battle stations. Damage report, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Minor, Captain. We were most fortunate. Blast damage in decks ten and eleven, minor buckling in the antimatter pods, casualties very light. 
KIRK: Maintain surveillance, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: No contact, Captain. He blew up all right. 
KIRK: Well, we've been anticipating an attack. I'd say what we've just experienced very nearly qualifies. 
SPOCK: Yes. It would seem to be an unfriendly act. 
UHURA: Automatic all-points relay from Starfleet Command, Captain, code one. 
KIRK: Well, there it is. War. We didn't want it, but we've got it. 
SPOCK: Curious how often you humans manage to obtain that which you do not want. 
KIRK: War or not, we've still got a job to do. Denying Organia to the Klingons. 
SPOCK: With the outbreak of hostilities, that might not be easy. 
KIRK: Lay in a course for Organia, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Negotiating with the Organians will be time-consuming, Captain, and time is one thing we'll have the least of. 
KIRK: We won't get it by talking about it. The trigger's been pulled. We have to get there before the hammer falls. Ahead warp factor seven.

Captain's log, stardate 3198.4. We have reached Organia and established standard orbit. No signs of hostile activities in this area.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain. Unit XY-75847 report a fleet of Klingon ships in their sector, sir. 
KIRK: What bearing? 
UHURA: Unable to ascertain, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, have the phaser crews stand by their positions. Full power deflector screens. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock and I are going to the planet's surface. You will be in command. Your responsibility is to the Enterprise, not to us. Is that clear? 
SULU: Perfectly, sir. 
KIRK: The Klingon fleet is in this quadrant. We know that Organia will be a target. If they should emerge 
SULU: We'll handle them, sir. 
KIRK: You will evaluate the situation. If there is a fleet of them, you'll get out of here, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: But, Captain 
KIRK: No buts. You'll get to safety and alert the fleet. You will not attack alone. Mister Spock and I will be all right. Mister Spock, let's you and I pay the Organians a visit.

[Planet surface]

(They beam down in front of a vaguely castle-styled wall which is completely smooth. The locals are dressed in romanticised rural mediaeval-style clothing, and take no notice of them at all.) 
KIRK: You'd think they had people beaming down every day. 
SPOCK: Yes. Curious lack of interest. Notice the ruins in the distance, Captain. Quite large. 
KIRK: Yes. A fortress, perhaps. A castle. 
SPOCK: Whatever it is, it would seem to be inconsistent with the reports we've been given on this culture. 
(A man in a loose purple robe opens his arms wide.) 
AYELBORNE: Welcome. 
KIRK: Reception committee? 
SPOCK: It would seem so. 
AYELBORNE: You are our visitors. Welcome, welcome. I am Ayelborne. 
KIRK: I am Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the United Federation of Planets. This is my first officer Mister Spock. 
AYELBORNE: You are most welcome, my friend. 
KIRK: I would like to speak to someone in authority. 
AYELBORNE: We don't have anybody in authority, but I am the chairman of the Council of Elders. Perhaps I would do. 
KIRK: You people are in great danger. Is there someplace we can go and talk? 
AYELBORNE: Oh, yes. Our council chambers are nearby. Please. 
SPOCK: Captain, if you don't mind, I should like to wander about the village and make some studies. 
AYELBORNE: Of course, my friend. Our village is yours. Captain.

[Council Chamber]

(Ayelborne and four other older men seat themselves at a simple wooden table. Beautifully polished, though.) 
KIRK: Gentlemen, my government has informed me that the Klingons are expected to move against your planet with the objective of making it a base of operation against the Federation. My mission, frankly, is to keep them from doing it. 
AYELBORNE: What you're saying, Captain, is that we seem to have a choice between dealing with you or your enemies. 
KIRK: No, sir. With the Federation, you have a choice. You have none with the Klingons. The Klingons are a military dictatorship. War is their way of life. Life under the Klingon rule would be very unpleasant. We offer you protection. 
CLAYMARE: We thank you for your altruistic offer, Captain, but we really do not need your protection. 
AYELBORNE: We are a simple people, Captain. We have nothing that anybody could want. 
KIRK: You have this planet and its strategic location. I assure you that if you don't take action to prevent it, the Klingons will move against you as surely as your sun rises. We will help you build defences, build facilities. 
AYELBORNE: We have no defences, Captain, nor are any needed. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I have seen what the Klingons do to planets like yours. They are organised into vast slave labour camps. No freedoms whatsoever. Your goods will be confiscated. Hostages taken and killed, your leaders confined. You'd be far better off on a penal planet. Infinitely better off. 
AYELBORNE: Captain, we see that your concern is genuine. We are moved. But again we assure you we are in absolutely no danger. If anybody is in danger, you are, and that concerns us greatly. It would be better if you returned to your ship as soon as possible. 
KIRK: You keep insisting there's no danger. I keep assuring you there is. Would you mind telling me 
AYELBORNE: It is our way of life, Captain. 
KIRK: That's the first thing that would be lost! Excuse me, gentlemen. I'm a soldier, not a diplomat. I can only tell you the truth. 
AYELBORNE: If you will excuse us, Captain, we will discuss your kind offer. 
KIRK: Certainly. 
(The doors open on their own and Spock enters. He and Kirk whisper in a corner.) 
SPOCK: Captain, our information on these people and their culture was not correct. This is not a primitive society making progress toward mechanisation. They are totally stagnant. There is no evidence of any progress as far back as my tricorder can register. 
KIRK: That doesn't seem likely. 
SPOCK: Nevertheless, it is true. For tens of thousands of years, there has been absolutely no advancement, no significant change in their physical environment. This is a laboratory specimen of an arrested culture. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. That might be useful. 
AYELBORNE: We have discussed your offer, Captain. Our opinion is unchanged. We are in no danger. We thank you for your kind offer of assistance, although we must decline it, and we strongly recommend that you leave Organia before you yourselves are endangered. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I must get you to reconsider. We can be of immense help to you. In addition to military aid, we can send you specialists, technicians. We can show you how to feed a thousand people where one was fed before. We can help you build schools, educate the young in the latest technological and scientific skills. Your public facilities are almost non-existent. We can help you remake your world, end disease, hunger, hardship. All we ask in return is that you let us help you. Now. 
AYELBORNE: Captain, I can see that you do not understand us. Perhaps 
KIRK: (answering communicator) Excuse me, sir. Kirk here. 
SULU: Captain, a large number of Klingon vessels have just arrived.

[Bridge]

SULU: They're opening fire. 
KIRK [OC]: Positive identification? 
SULU: Yes, sir. My screens are up. I can't drop them to beam you aboard.

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: Mister Sulu, follow your orders. Get out of here. Contact the fleet. Return if the odds are more equal. Kirk out. Gentlemen, you kept insisting that there was no danger 
AYELBORNE: That is correct, Captain. There is no danger. 
TREFAYNE: Ayelborne, eight space vehicles have assumed orbit around our planet. They are activating their material transmission units. 
AYELBORNE: Thank you, Trefayne. 
KIRK: Can you verify that? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain, but it seems a logical development. 
AYELBORNE: Captain, since it is too late for you to escape, perhaps we should do something about protecting you. 
KIRK: If you had listened to me 
CLAYMARE: We must be sure you are not harmed. 
TREFAYNE: Ayelborne, several hundred men have appeared near the citadel. They bring many weapons. 
KIRK: How does he know that? 
AYELBORNE: Oh, our friend Trefayne is really quite intuitive. You can rest assured that what he says is absolutely correct. 
KIRK: So we're stranded here, in the middle of a Klingon occupation army. 
SPOCK: So it would seem. Not a very pleasant prospect. 
KIRK: You have a gift for understatement, Mister Spock. It's not a very pleasant prospect at all.

Captain's Log. stardate 3201.7. Mister Spock and I are trapped on the planet Organia, which is in the process of being occupied by the forces of the Klingon Empire. The Organians have provided us with native clothing in the hopes we may be taken for Organians.

[Council Chamber]

SPOCK: Captain, our phasers are gone. 
KIRK: Did you take them? 
AYELBORNE: Yes, Captain. I took them. 
KIRK: I must ask you to return them. 
AYELBORNE: I'm sorry, Captain. I cannot do that. Were you armed, you might be tempted to use violence, and that we cannot permit. You, Captain, will pass as an Organian, and Mister Spock. Mister Spock presents a problem. He doesn't look like an Organian. 
CLAYMARE: A Vulcan trader, perhaps. A dealer in kevas and trillium. Harmless to the Klingons. 
KIRK: They know that Vulcan is a member of the Federation. 
SPOCK: Vulcan merchants are not uncommon, Captain. It is a practical approach. 
KIRK: What about the rest of you? 
AYELBORNE: We shall continue as before. We have nothing to fear. 
KIRK: You have a lot to learn, sir. And if I know the Klingons, you'll be learning it the hard way. 
(The doors open on their own, and two Klingons march in, followed by their leader.) 
KOR: This is the ruling council? 
AYELBORNE: I am Ayelborne, temporary head of the council. I bid you welcome. 
KOR: No doubt you do. I am Kor, military governor of Organia. (looking at Kirk) Who are you? 
AYELBORNE: He is Baroner, one of our leading citizens. 
KOR: And he has no tongue? 
KIRK: I have a tongue. 
KOR: Good. You will be taught how to use it. Where is your smile? 
KIRK: My what? 
KOR: The stupid, idiotic smile everyone else seems to be wearing. A Vulcan. Do you also have a tongue? 
SPOCK: I am Spock, a dealer in kevas and trillium. 
KOS: You do not look like a storekeeper. Take this man. Vulcans are members of the Federation. He may be a spy. 
KIRK: He's no spy. 
KOR: Well, have we a ram among the sheep? Do you object to us taking him? 
KIRK: He's done nothing. Nothing at all. 
KOR: Coming from an Organian, yours is practically an act of rebellion. Very good. (to the Council) So you welcome me. (to Kirk) Do you also welcome me? 
KIRK: You're here. There's nothing I can do about it. 
KOR: Good honest hatred. Very refreshing. However, it makes no difference whether you welcome me or not. I am here and will stay. You are now subjects of the Klingon Empire. You'll find there are many rules and regulations. They will be posted. Violation of the smallest of them will be punished by death. 
AYELBORNE: We shall obey your regulations, Commander. 
KOR: You disapprove, Baroner. 
KIRK: You need my approval? 
KOR: I need your obedience. Nothing more. Will I have it? 
KIRK: You seem to be in command. 
KOR: Yes. I am. I shall need a representative from among you. Liaison between the forces of the occupation and the civil population. Smile and smile. I don't trust men who smile too much. You, Baroner, you're the man. 
KIRK: Me? I don't want the job. 
KOR: Have I asked whether or not you want it? We Klingons have a reputation for ruthlessness. You will find that it is deserved. Should one Klingon soldier be killed, a thousand Organians will die. I will have order. Is that clear? 
AYELBORNE: Commander, I assure you our people want nothing but peace. We shall cause you no trouble. 
KOR: I'm sure you will not. Take the Vulcan to the examination room. (to Kirk) You, come with me. I will familiarise you with your new duties. 
KIRK: And Mister Spock? 
KOR: You are concerned? 
KIRK: He is my friend. 
KOR: You have a poor choice of friends. He will be examined. If he is lying, he will die. If he is telling the truth, he will find that business has taken a turn for the worse. Take him. You do not like to be pushed. Very good. You may be a man I can deal with, Baroner. Come with me.

[Kor's office]

(Probably up in the old castle.) 
KOR: From this day on, no public assemblages of more than three people. All publications to be cleared through this office. Neighbourhood controls will be established, hostages selected. A somewhat lengthy list of crimes against the state. 
(Kor hands the proclamation to Kirk, who puts it down on the desk.) 
KOR: You do not like them? (Spock is brought in.) Well? 
KLINGON: He is what he claims to be, Commander, a Vulcanian merchant named Spock. His main concern seems to be how he would carry out his business under our occupation. 
KOR: Nothing else? 
KLINGON: The usual. A certain amount of apprehension regarding us. The mind is remarkably disciplined. 
KOR: You are sure? 
KLINGON: I used force four, which is sufficient to break down any pretence. 
KOR: Very well, Lieutenant. Would you like to try our little truth finder? 
KIRK: I don't understand. 
KOR: It's a mind-sifter or mind-ripper, depending on how much force is used. We can record every thought, every bit of knowledge in a man's mind. Of course, when that much force is used, the mind is emptied. Permanently, I'm afraid. What's left is more vegetable than human. 
KIRK: And you're proud of it. 
KOR: It is a tool, a weapon. Somewhat drastic, but very efficient. 
KIRK: Are you sure you're all right? 
SPOCK: Perfectly, Baroner. But it was an interesting experience. 
KOR: All right, Vulcan, you may go. But you are an enemy alien. You will be under our scrutiny at all times. If I have to warn you 
SPOCK: Not necessary, Commander. I understand you very well. 
(He leaves, followed by the guard.) 
KOR: Return to your council, Baroner. You will receive our official notifications as soon as they are published. In the meantime keep the people in order. It is your responsibility. 
KIRK: Or I will be killed. 
KOR: That is exactly right. You will be killed.

[Village square]

KIRK: That mindsifter can't be all the terror they think it is. 
SPOCK: It should not be underestimated, Captain. It reaches directly into the mind. We Vulcans have certain mental (a Klingon walks past) certain disciplines which enable me to maintain a shield. Without those disciplines, there would be no protection. 
KIRK: I'll try and avoid it. 
KLINGON 2: Out of the way, Organian. 
SPOCK: I'm sorry, sir. We did not notice you. 
KLINGON 2: Next time, keep your eyes open, or I'll shut them permanently. 
SPOCK: Captain, I strongly suggest we direct our energies toward the immediate problem. Accomplishing our mission here. 
KIRK: You didn't really think I was going to beat his head in, did you? 
SPOCK: I thought you might. 
KIRK: You're right. But as you say, we still have a job to do. 
SPOCK: We'll receive no help from the Organians. 
KIRK: Maybe, but sooner or later they'll start resenting how the Klingons run things. If we could prove to them they could do something to strike back, to keep the Klingons off balance. 
SPOCK: Verbal persuasion seems to be ineffective. Perhaps a more direct approach? 
KIRK: That's exactly what I had in mind. Mister Spock Did I or did I not see something that looked like a munitions dump outside of Kor's headquarters? 
SPOCK: You did. 
KIRK: I think it's time we did a little simple and plain communicating. Tonight. 
SPOCK: A very meritorious idea, Captain. 
KIRK: We're short of tools. 
SPOCK: I'm certain the Klingons will provide whatever is necessary. It's a pleasure doing business with you, Mister Spock.

[Kor's Headquarters]

(Kirk jumps one Klingon and hauls his unconscious body away. Spock primes a grenade, presumably from the munitions dump.) 
KIRK: Okay so far. Sonic grenade? 
SPOCK: With a delayed action fuse. 
KIRK; Good. 
SPOCK: These crates contain chemical explosives. They should make a most satisfactory display. 
(He casually drops the grenade into a box, and they run.) 
SPOCK: Six, five, four three. 
(There's a short but bright fireworks show.) 
KIRK: You were right, Mister Spock. A most satisfactory display.

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: Of course we blew it up. Deliberately. 
AYELBORNE: But that was violence. 
KIRK: We did it to show you that you can fight back. You don't have to be sheep, you can be wolves. 
CLAYMARE: Terrible to destroy. 
KIRK: History is full of examples of civil populations fighting back successfully against a military dictatorship. We may not be able to destroy the Klingons, but we can tie them up. Blow up their installations, disrupt their communications, make Organia useless to them. 
SPOCK: Our fleet will eventually arrive. In the meantime, the battle is ours. It can be a successful one. 
AYELBORNE: Captain, I implore you never to do such a thing again. 
KIRK: Why? Are you afraid of retribution? Does your personal freedom mean so little to you? 
AYELBORNE: How little you understand us, Captain. 
KIRK: All I understand is that you apparently don't have the backbone to fight and protect your loved ones.

[Kor's office]

(Of course he had the Council Chamber bugged.) 
KIRK [OC]: I speak of courage, gentlemen. Does courage mean so little to you?

[Council Chamber]

(Kor and his troops enter.) 
KOR: You speak of courage. Obviously you do not know the difference between courage and foolhardiness. Always it is the brave ones who die. The soldiers. I hope you will continue to savour the sweetness of your life. You disgust me. 
AYELBORNE: What are you going to do with him, Commander? 
KOR: What is always done with spies and saboteurs. He will be killed, after he has had first-hand experience of our mind scanner. 
AYELBORNE: There's no need to use your machine on him, commander. I can tell you his name. It is Captain James T. Kirk. 
KIRK: Ayelborne! 
KOR: What? (A big grin spreads across his face) Captain of the USS Enterprise. A starship commander. And his first officer? I had hoped to meet you in battle, but 
AYELBORNE: For some reason, he feels that he must destroy you, Commander, just as you feel you must destroy him. 
KOR: That's going to be rather difficult now. Isn't it, Captain? What an admirable people. Do you always betray your friends? 
AYELBORNE: I didn't want you to harm him. I'm sorry, Captain. It was for the best. No harm would come of it. 
KIRK: I'm used to the idea of dying, but I have no desire to die for the likes of you. 
KOR: I don't blame you, Captain. Lock up the Vulcan. Take the Captain to my office. We'll have a talk before I do what must be done.

[Kor's office]

KOR: You'll have a drink with me, Captain? 
KIRK: No, thank you. 
KOR: I assure you it isn't drugged. With our mind-scanner, we have no need for such crude methods. 
KIRK: What do you want from me? 
KOR: Oh, a very great deal, but first I want to talk. Just talk. 
KIRK: You think I'm going to sit here and just talk with the enemy? 
KOR: You'll talk. Either here, now, voluntarily, or under our mind-scanner. The fact is, Captain, I have a great admiration for your Starfleet. A remarkable instrument. and I must confess to a certain admiration for you. I know, of course, that it was you who destroyed our supplies last night. 
KIRK: Something was destroyed? Nothing inconsequential, I hope. 
KOR: Hardly. They were quite important to us, but they can be replaced. You of the Federation, you are much like us. 
KIRK: We're nothing like you. We're a democratic body. 
KOR: Come now. I'm not referring to minor ideological differences. I mean that we are similar as a species. Here we are on a planet of sheep. Two tigers, predators, hunters, killers, and it is precisely that which makes us great. And there is a universe to be taken. 
KIRK: It's a very large universe, Commander, full of people who don't like the Klingons. 
KOR: Excellent. Then it shall be a matter of testing each other's wills. Of power. Survival must be earned, Captain. Tell me about the dispersal of your Starfleet. 
. KIRK: Go climb a tree. 
KOR: I can get what I want through our mind-scanner, but there would be very little of your mind left, Captain. I have no desire to see you become a vegetable. This friend of yours, the Vulcan. He seems to have the ability to block our scanner. I think perhaps I will find out why. I will have him dissected. Your friend killed. You, a mental vegetable. Not a pleasant prospect, Captain, but it lies ahead for you unless you tell me everything I want to know. Twelve hours, Captain. 
KIRK: It will take a lot longer than that, Commander. 
KOR: Longer than that I will not wait. I respect you, Captain, but this is war, a game we Klingons play to win. Take him to the cell with his friend. And watch him closely.

[Cell]

(It's a traditional mediaeval castle cell, big iron grills, straw on the floor, lit by ever-burning torches in sconces on the walls.) 
SPOCK: It's no use, Jim. There's no way out. 
(Later.) 
KIRK: How much of the twelve hours do we have left? 
SPOCK: Six hours, forty three minutes, if the Klingons are punctual. 
KIRK: I think we can count on them being punctual. Blowing that munitions dump wasn't enough. If we get out of here, we've got to carry the attack directly to Kor. These Organians 
SPOCK: They do not seem to understand. Most peculiar. 
KIRK: Nevertheless, our orders still stand. We've got to make some attempt to neutralise the Klingon occupation. 
SPOCK: We may not get the chance, Captain. These walls are very thick. 
KIRK: And there are guards every few feet down the hall. 
(There are sounds outside, then the door swings silently open on it's own. Spock and Kirk are ready to pounce on whoever enters.) 
AYELBORNE: Oh, there you are, gentlemen. I trust you are in good health? Shall we go? 
KIRK: Go? 
AYELBORNE: Yes. Your captors plan to do violence to you. That we cannot permit. I came to take you away. 
KIRK: You turned us over to them. You expect us to trust you now? 
AYELBORNE: Is there really a choice, Captain? I offer you safety.

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: We can't stay here. This is the first place they'll look. 
AYELBORNE: They will not come here, Captain. You may believe me. 
KIRK: First you turn us in, then get us out. What are you doing now, waiting for the Klingons to post a reward so you can turn us in again and collect it? 
AYELBORNE: How little you understand us, Captain. 
SPOCK: Nor do we understand what happened to the guard at the citadel. 
AYELBORNE: Please do not concern yourself about them. 
KIRK: What happened to them? 
AYELBORNE: Why, nothing happened to them, Captain. Nothing at all.

[Kor's office]

KLINGON: Commander! 
KOR: Don't you see I'm busy? 
KLINGON: The two Federation prisoners. They're gone. 
KOR: You mean they've escaped? 
KLINGON: I swear. No one was at fault. The guards, ten of them were constantly on duty watching the cell. Then when they opened it to give them food, they simply weren't there, and there was no way out. 
KOR: If you're lying to me. 
KLINGON: I swear! 
KOR: All right, Lieutenant. Implement Special Occupation Order Number Four. Immediately! 
KLINGON: Sir!

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: Is that's all you can do, smile? 
AYELBORNE: You are free, Captain. 
KIRK: I want to know how I'm free, and why. 
SPOCK: Indeed, there are several questions I would like to ask as well. 
KIRK: This idiotic placidity of yours, your refusal to do anything to protect yourselves 
AYELBORNE: We have already answered that question. To us, violence is unthinkable. 
KOR [OC]: Attention. Attention all Organians. Attention. This is Commander Kor. The two Federation prisoners have escaped, obviously with outside aid.

[Kor's office]

KOR: They will be returned immediately. So that you will know we mean what we say, listen.

[Council Chamber]

KIRK: Those are Klingon phasers. Take the door. Get down, gentlemen.

[Kor's office]

KOR: In the courtyard of my headquarters,

[Council Chamber]

KOR [OC]: Two hundred Organians have just been killed. 
KIRK; Two hundred of them. 
KOR [OC]: In two hours, two hundred more will die, and two hundred more after that until the two Federation spies are turned over to us. This is the order of Kor. 
KIRK: Did you hear them? 
AYELBORNE: Yes, of course, Captain. But nothing has changed. 
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock. It seems it's up to you and me. 
SPOCK: It would appear so, Captain. 
KIRK: The Federation has invested a great deal of money in our training. They're about due for a small return. We have two hours with which to do it in. 
SPOCK: But only two. More Organians will die. 
KIRK: No. No more will die on account of us, Mister Spock. Where are those phasers? 
AYELBORNE: I cannot tell you. 
KIRK: You've told us a great deal about how you hate violence. Unless you tell me where those phasers are, you're going to have more violence than you know what to do with. 
AYELBORNE: You mean you would actually use force? 
KIRK: It's entirely up to you. 
TREFAYNE: Ayelborne, this is of no matter. Perhaps you'd better let him have what he wants. He 
AYELBORNE: Very well, but it will do you no good. They're in that cabinet. 
(Spock gets them, but leaves the tricorder.) 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I have no great love for you, your planet, your culture. Despite that, Mister Spock and I are going to go out there and quite probably die, in an attempt to show you that there are some things worth dying for. 
AYELBORNE: There are only two of you against an army. Don't you realise that what you intend to do will be hopeless? 
KIRK: Come on, Mister Spock, let's get out of here. 
(The doors open politely to let them leave, then close again behind them.) 
CLAYMARE: Brave men. 
AYELBORNE: Yes, but so foolish. 
TREFAYNE: Interesting, however. 
AYELBORNE: Of course, we cannot allow it. To stop them is very bad. 
CLAYMARE: It is necessary. They may harm one another. 
AYELBORNE: Trefayne. 
TREFAYNE: They will wait until darkness. 
AYELBORNE: And then? 
TREFAYNE: Terrible. Inconceivable. Savage. 
AYELBORNE: We will wait. 
[Kor's headquarters]

(Outside, under cover of darkness and bushes.) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, can we get those two guards? What would you say the odds on our getting out of here? 
SPOCK: Difficult to be precise, Captain. I should say approximately 7,824.7 to 1. 
KIRK: Difficult to be precise? 7,824 to 1? 
SPOCK: 7,824.7 to 1. 
KIRK: That's a pretty close approximation. 
SPOCK: I endeavour to be accurate. 
KIRK: You do quite well. Set your phaser on stun. We're after the top dog, not the members of the pack. 
SPOCK: Very good. 
KIRK: But if the situation calls for it, we kill, is that clear? 
SPOCK: Clear, Captain. 
KIRK: I'll take the one on the left. Fire. 
(Two stunned Klingons fall, and Kirk and Spock run into the building.)

[Council Chamber]

TREFAYNE: It has begun. 
AYELBORNE: Very well. 
CLAYMARE: It will be hard. 
AYELBORNE: Prepare yourselves. 
(They close their eyes and concentrate.)

[Corridor]

KLINGON: No results, Commander. 
KOR: Nothing? 
KLINGON: I cannot understand these people. 
KOR: They know what death is, don't they? 
KLINGON: They do not seem to be worried about anything. 
KOR: Bad enough to be a military governor, but to govern a population of sheep! Very well, Lieutenant, round up two hundred more. 
KLINGON: Yes, sir. 
KOR: (going into his office) Fools! Will I have to kill them all? 
(The Klingons march off, and Kirk jumps one of them from a side corridor, getting his belt around the Lieutenant's neck.) 
KIRK: If you don't tell me what I want to know, I'll kill you here and now. Is that clear? 
KLINGON: Yes. 
KIRK: Is Kor's office down there? 
KLINGON: Yes. 
KIRK: What about the hostages? Talk. Talk. 
KLINGON: I am to gather two hundred more. 
KIRK: To be killed? 
(The Klingon nods.) 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
(Spock knocks the Klingon out with a neck pinch.) 
KIRK: Well, what are the odds now? 
SPOCK: Less than seven thousand to one, Captain. It's remarkable we've got this far. 
KIRK: Less than seven thousand to one. Well, getting better. Getting better.

[Kor's office]

KIRK: Just stay where you are, Commander. 
KOR: You have done well to get this far through my guards. 
SPOCK: (taking his weapon) I believe you'll find that several of them are no longer in perfect operating condition. 
KOR: So, you are here. You will be interested in knowing that a Federation fleet is on its way here at the moment. Our fleet is preparing to meet them. 
KIRK: Checkmate, Commander. 
KOR: Shall we wait and see the results before you kill me? 
KIRK: I don't intend to kill you unless I have to. 
KOR: Sentimentality, mercy. The emotions of peace. Your weakness, Captain Kirk. The Klingon Empire shall win. Think of it, as we sit here, in space above us the destiny of the galaxy will be decided for the next ten thousand years. Can I offer you a drink? We can toast the victory of the Klingon fleet. 
SPOCK: You may be premature. There are many possibilities. 
KOR: Today we conquer. If some day we are defeated, well, war has its fortunes good and bad. Do you know why we are so strong? Because we are a unit. Each of us is part of the greater whole, always under surveillance. Even a commander like myself, always under surveillance, Captain. If you will note. 
KIRK: Cover, Spock! Back! 
(The Klingons burst it, then suddenly everyone drops their weapons. Everyone.) 
KOR: Shoot! Shoot! 
(They try hand to hand, but are unable to touch each other without extreme pain. Up on the Enterprise, the crew suddenly leap out of their seats and away from their consoles.)

[Kor's office]

KIRK: What is it, Spock? 
SPOCK: Inexplicable, Captain. Extreme heat. Not only the weapons but the bodies as well. 
(Ayelborne and Claymare come in.) 
AYELBORNE: We are terribly sorry to be forced to interfere, gentlemen, but we cannot permit you to harm yourselves. 
KOR: What are you talking about? 
CLAYMARE: We have put a stop to your violence. 
KIRK: You are stopping this? You? 
CLAYMARE: All instruments of violence on this planet now radiate a temperature of three hundred and fifty degrees. They are inoperative. 
KOR: My fleet! 
AYELBORNE: The same conditions exist on both the star-fleets. There will be no battle. 
KOR: Ridiculous! 
AYELBORNE: I suggest you contact them. You too, Captain. Your ship is now within range of your communications device. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. 
SULU: Captain.

[Bridge]

SULU: I can't explain it. We were just closing in on the Klingon fleet when

[Kor's office]

SULU [OC]: Every control on our ship became too hot to handle.
(Then it all goes dark, and he can touch the consoles again) 
SULU [OC]: Our power's gone. Our phaser banks are dead. 
KIRK: Stand by, Sulu. 
KOR: My fleet, it's helpless. 
KIRK: What have you done? 
AYELBORNE: As I stand here, I also stand upon the home planet of the Klingon Empire, and the home planet of your Federation, Captain. I'm putting a stop to this insane war. 
KOR: You're what? 
KIRK: You're talking nonsense. 
AYELBORNE: It is being done. 
KIRK: You can't just stop the fleet. What gives you the right? 
KOR: You can't interfere. What happens in space is not your business. 
AYELBORNE: Unless both sides agree to an immediate cessation of hostilities, all your armed forces, wherever they may be, will be immediately immobilised. 
KIRK: We have legitimate grievances against the Klingons. They've invaded our territory, killed our citizens. They're openly aggressive. They've boasted that they'll take over half the galaxy. 
KOR: Why not? We're the stronger! You've tried to hem us in, cut off vital supplies, strangle our trade! You've been asking for war! 
KIRK: You're the ones who issued the ultimatum to withdraw from the disputed areas! 
KOR: They are not disputed! They're clearly ours. And now you step in with some kind of trick. 
AYELBORNE: It is no trick, Commander. We have simply put an end to your war. All your military forces, wherever they are, are now completely paralysed. 
CLAYMARE: We find interference in other people's affairs most disgusting, but you gentlemen have given us no choice. 
KIRK: You should be the first to be on our side. Two hundred hostages killed. 
AYELBORNE: No one has been killed, Captain. 
CLAYMARE: No one has died here in uncounted thousands of years. 
KOR: You are liars. You are meddling in things that are none of your business. 
KIRK: Even if you have some power that we don't understand, you have no right to dictate to our Federation 
KOR: Or our Empire! 
KIRK: How to handle their interstellar relations! We have the right 
AYELBORNE: To wage war, Captain? To kill millions of innocent people? To destroy life on a planetary scale? Is that what you're defending? 
KIRK: Well, no one wants war. But there are proper channels. People have a right to handle their own affairs. Eventually, we would have 
AYELBORNE: Oh, eventually you will have peace, but only after millions of people have died. It is true that in the future, you and the Klingons will become fast friends. You will work together. 
KOR: Never! 
CLAYMARE: Your emotions are most discordant. We do not wish to seem inhospitable, but gentlemen, you must leave. 
AYELBORNE: Yes, please leave us. The mere presence of beings like yourselves is intensely painful to us. 
KIRK: What do you mean, beings like yourselves? 
AYELBORNE: Millions of years ago, Captain, we were humanoid like yourselves, but we have developed beyond the need of physical bodies. That of us which you see is mere appearance for your sake. 
KOR: Captain, it's a trick. We can handle them. I have an army. 
(Kirk holds him back as Ayelborne and Claymare transform into pulsating lights, too bright to look at. Then they disappear.) This Side of Paradise
Stardate: 3417.3
Original Airdate: 2 Mar, 1967

[Bridge]
PAINTER: Approaching Omicron Ceti Three, sir. 
KIRK: Standard orbit, Mister Painter. 
PAINTER: Yes, sir. 
UHURA: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: I've been transmitting a contact signal every five minutes. All I get is dead air. Shall I continue? 
KIRK: Maintain transmission pattern until we've established orbit. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, there were one hundred and fifty men, women, and children in that colony. What are the chances of survivors? 
SPOCK: Absolutely none, Captain. Berthold rays are such a recent discovery. We do not yet have full knowledge of their nature. It is known, however, that living animal tissue disintegrates under exposure. Sandoval's group could not have survived after three years. 
KIRK: Are you saying that those people built a future in a place knowing they might not survive? 
SPOCK: I am saying they knew there was a risk. 
KIRK: And what about us? Can we afford to send people to the planet's surface? 
SPOCK: The breakdown of tissue does not develop immediately. We can risk a limited exposure. 
PAINTER: We've established orbit, sir, and I've pinpointed a settlement. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Painter. Mister Spock, equip a landing party of five to accompany me to the planet's surface. Include Doctor McCoy and a biologist. I'll want them in ten minutes.

[Farm yard]

(The group beam down into a farm, complete with wooden fence and a tarmacadamed paths. There are clap-board buildings and even a stable block.) 
KIRK: Another dream that failed. There's nothing sadder. It took these people a year to make the trip from Earth. They came all that way and died. 
ELIAS: Hardly that, sir. Welcome to Omicron Ceti Three. I'm Elias Sandoval.

Captain's log, stardate 3417.3. We thought our mission to Omicron Ceti Three would be an unhappy one. We had expected to find no survivors of the agricultural colony there. Apparently, our information was incorrect.

[Farm yard]

ELIAS: We haven't seen anyone outside our group for four years since we left Earth. We've been expecting someone for some time. Our subspace radio didn't work properly, and I'm afraid we didn't have anyone who could master its intricacies. 
KIRK: Actually, Mister Sandoval, we didn't come here because of your silent radio. 
ELIAS: It makes little difference, Captain. You're here. We're happy to see you. Come, let me show you our settlement. 
MCCOY: On pure speculation, just an educated guess, I'd say that man is alive. 
SPOCK: Captain, this planet is being bombarded by Berthold rays, as our reports indicated. At this intensity, we'll be safe for a week if necessary. But 
KIRK: But these people shouldn't be alive. 
SULU: Is it possible that they're not? 
MCCOY: You shook hands with him, Jim. His flesh was warm. He's alive. There's no doubt about that. 
SPOCK: There's also no question of the fact that Berthold rays are incontrovertibly deadly. There's no miracle connected with it, Doctor, you know that. No cures, no serums, no antidotes. If a man is exposed long enough, he dies. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, we're debating in a vacuum. Let's go get some answers.

[Farmhouse]

(Elias leads the way into a comfortable room with wooden furniture and gingham curtains.) 
ELIAS: There are two other settlements, but we have forty five colonists here. 
KIRK: What was the reason for the dispersal? 
ELIAS: We felt three groups would have better potential. If disease were to strike one group, the others would be less likely to be affected. You see, Omicron is an ideal agricultural planet. We determined not to suffer the fate of expeditions that went before us. 
LEILA: Elias. 
ELIAS: Leila, come meet our guests. This is Leila Kalomi, our botanist. This is Captain Kirk, Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock. 
LEILA: Mister Spock and I have met before. It's been a long time. 
KIRK: Mister Sandoval, we do have a mission here. Examinations, tests. 
ELIAS: By all means, make them. I think you'll find our settlement an interesting one. Our philosophy is a simple one, that men should return to a less complicated life. We have few mechanical things here. No vehicles, no weapons. We have harmony here. Complete peace. 
KIRK: We'll try not to interfere with your work. 
ELIAS: Make yourselves at home, gentlemen.

[Outside, by the barn]

KELOWITZ: What exactly are we looking for anyway, sir? 
SULU: Whatever doesn't look right, whatever that is. When it comes to farms, I wouldn't know what looked right or wrong if it were two feet from me. 
(You mean like that weird alien plant right next to you?) 
KELOWITZ: (opening up the barn door) Hey. 
SULU: What is it? 
KELOWITZ: No cows. This barn isn't even built for them, Just for storage. 
SULU: Come to think of it, we haven't seen any animals. No horses, no pigs, not even a dog. Nothing.

[Farmhouse]

ELIAS: You've known the Vulcanian? 
LEILA: On Earth, six years ago. 
ELIAS: Did you love him? 
LEILA: If I did, it was important only to myself. 
ELIAS: How did he feel? 
LEILA: Mister Spock's feelings were never expressed to me. It is said he has none to give. 
ELIAS: Would you like him to stay with us now, to be as one of us? 
LEILA: There is no choice, Elias. He will stay.

[Drawing room]

(In another part of the farmhouse, McCoy is conducting medical examinations.) 
MCCOY: That'll be all. Thank you very much. 
(The man leaves, Kirk enters.) 
KIRK: Anything? 
MCCOY: I've examined nine men so far, varying in ages from twenty three to fifty nine. They're all in perfect condition. Text book responses. Heart, lungs, excellent. Co-ordination, excellent. Reflexes, excellent. If there are many more of them, I could throw away my shingle. 
(Communicator beeps) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 

[Pasture]

SPOCK: Spock here, Captain. There seems to be a total absence of life on the planet, with the exception of the colonists and various types of flora. 
KIRK [OC]: Sulu had the same observation. Any explanations? 
SPOCK: Not at the moment, sir. I am conducting various tests with the tricorder, but results are inconclusive.

[Drawing room]

KIRK: Very well. Continue investigations. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: No animals. That's peculiar. 
KIRK: Yes, especially in view of the fact that the records for this expedition indicate that they did have some for breeding and food purposes. Apparently, none of them survived. 
MCCOY: I'd like to see the medical records on the expedition. 
KIRK: Yes, I thought you might. 
(Hands over a computer disc) 
ELIAS: Captain, I've been looking for you. You haven't seen our fields and crops. I'd like to show you and the Doctor what we've accomplished here. 
MCCOY: I'm afraid I'll have to bow out. I have to continue with these medical examinations. However, if I find everyone else's health to be as perfect as yours, I 
KIRK: He promised to throw away his shingle. 
ELIAS: You'll find no weaklings here. Captain.

[Field]

ELIAS: This is the reason, Captain. This soil will grow anything we plant in it. It's a perfect world. We have a moderate climate, moderate rains all year round. It gives us all we need. It is perfect. 
LESLIE: Pardon me, Captain. Biology report ready, sir. 
ELIAS: I have work to attend to myself, Captain. 
(He leaves them.) 
KIRK: Go ahead, Lieutenant. 
LESLIE: I heard Sandoval saying they could grow anything here. That's true, sir. They've got a variety of crops in. Grains, potatoes, beans. 
KIRK: Make your point. 
LESLIE: Well, sir, for an agricultural colony, they have actually very little acreage planted. There's enough to sustain the colony, but very little more. 
KIRK: It's like a jigsaw puzzle all one colour. No key to where the pieces fit in. Why? 
(Communicator beeps) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
MCCOY: This is McCoy, Jim. I think you'd better get back here. 
KIRK: Trouble? 
MCCOY: No, but I'd like you to see this for yourself. 
KIRK: On my way.

[Farmhouse]

MCCOY: Sandoval's medical record, four years ago when the expedition left Earth. He registered scar tissue on his lungs from lobar pneumonia suffered when he was a child. No major operations, but there was an appendectomy. Received all required inoculations, et cetera. 
KIRK: What's so strange about that? 
MCCOY: Nothing, but I examined that man no more than two hours ago. You know what his readings were? Perfect, perfect, and perfect. Just like everyone else I've examined here. 
KIRK: Instrument malfunction? 
MCCOY: No. I thought of that and tested it on myself. It accurately recorded my lack of tonsils and those two broken ribs I had once. It did not record the scar tissue on Sandoval's lungs, but it did record a healthy appendix where one was supposedly removed.

[Field]

(Spock is scanning amongst the rows of dry-looking somethings.) 
SPOCK: Nothing. Not even insects. Yet your plants grow, and you've survived exposure to Berthold rays. 
LEILA: That can be explained. 
SPOCK: Please do. 
LEILA: Later. 
SPOCK: I have never understood the female capacity to avoid a direct answer to any question. 
LEILA: And I never understood you. Until now. There was always a place in here where no one could come. There was only the face you allow people to see. Only one side you'd allow them to know. 
SPOCK: I would like to know how your people have managed to survive here. 
LEILA: I missed you. 
SPOCK: Logically, you should all be dead. 
LEILA: If I tell you how we survived, will you try to understand how we feel about our life here? About each other? 
SPOCK: Emotions are alien to me. I'm a scientist. 
LEILA: Someone else might believe that. Your shipmates, your Captain, but not me. Come.

[Drawing Room]

KIRK: Mister Sandoval, within the hour I've received orders from Starfleet Command to evacuate all personnel from this colony. Naturally, you'll inform your people to begin preparations. We will have accommodations for you aboard the Enterprise. 
ELIAS: No. 
KIRK: It's not an arbitrary decision on my part. I have my orders. 
ELIAS: Captain, it's entirely unnecessary. We're in no danger here. 
MCCOY: We've explained the Berthold rays to you and their effect. Can't you understand? 
ELIAS: Doctor, how can I make you understand? Your own instruments have shown that we're all in perfect health. We've had no deaths here. 
KIRK: What about your animals? 
ELIAS: We're vegetarians. 
KIRK: That doesn't answer my question, sir. Why did all your animals die? 
ELIAS: Captain, you stress very unimportant matters. We will not leave.

[Pasture]

(The grass is brown and dry, but the pink flowers are growing.) 
LEILA: It's not much further. 
SPOCK: You've not yet explained the nature of this thing. 
LEILA: Its basic properties and elements are not important. What is important is it gives life, peace, love. 
SPOCK: What you're describing was once known in the vernacular as a happiness pill. And you, as a scientist, should know that that's not possible. 
LEILA: Come. I was one of the first to find them. The spores. 
SPOCK: Spores? 
(One of the pink flowers shoots things at him. Spock clutches his head and falls to the ground in pain.) 
SPOCK: No. 
LEILA: It shouldn't hurt. 
SPOCK: No, I can't. Please, don't! 
LEILA: Not like this. It didn't hurt us. 
SPOCK: I am not like you. 
(Suddenly the pain is gone.) 
LEILA: Now. Now, you belong to all of us and we to you. There's no need to hide your inner face any longer. We understand. 
SPOCK: I love you. I can love you. 
(They kiss.)

Captain's log, supplemental. We have been ordered by Starfleet Command to evacuate the colony on Omicron Three. However, the colony leader, Elias Sandoval, has refused all co-operation and will not listen to any arguments.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Sandoval. 
ELIAS: Captain, your arguments are very valid, but they do not apply to us. 
KIRK: You're being unreasonable. 
ELIAS: Well, nevertheless. Excuse me. 
KIRK: Excuse me. My orders are to remove all the colonists. That's exactly what I intend to do, with or without your help. 
ELIAS; Without, I should think. 
MCCOY: Would you like to use a butterfly net on him, Captain? 
KIRK: No, I think we'll use a 
SULU: Captain, we've checked out everything. It all seems normal, except for the absence of any animals. 
KIRK: We have orders to evacuate all colonists to Starbase Twenty Seven. 
I want landing parties to co-ordinate the colonists and prepare them for transport up to the ship. We'll need extra accommodations aboard. Where's Mister Spock and Mister DeSalle? 
SULU: We haven't seen them since we began our check. 
MCCOY: DeSalle said he was going to examine some native plants he found. Did Spock call in at all? 
KIRK: No, he didn't. (gets out communicator) Spock? See to the landing parties, would you, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Spock?

[Pasture]

(Spock's communicator is beeping to itself while he is lying in Leila's lap, looking at the clouds. He has changed out of his uniform into an overall.) 
SPOCK: That one looks like a dragon. You see the tail and the dorsal spines? 
LEILA: I've never seen a dragon. 
SPOCK: I have. On Berengaria Seven. But I've never stopped to look at clouds before. Or rainbows. You know, I can tell you exactly why one appears in the sky, but considering its beauty has always been out of the question. 
LEILA: Not here. 
(She picks up the communicator and it opens.) 
KIRK [OC]: Spock! 
SPOCK: Yes, what did you want?

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Spock, is that you?

[Pasture]

SPOCK: Yes, Captain. What did you want? 
KIRK [OC]: Where are you? 
SPOCK: I don't believe I want to tell you.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Spock, I don't know what you think you're doing, but this is an order. Report back to me at the settlement in ten minutes. We're evacuating all colonists to Starbase Twenty Seven.

[Pasture]

SPOCK: No, I don't think so.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: You don't think so, what?

[Pasture]

SPOCK: I don't think so, sir.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Spock, report to me immediately.

[Pasture]

(But the communicator drops to the ground during another kiss) 
KIRK [OC]: Spock? Acknowledge.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Spock. The frequency is open, but he doesn't answer. 
MCCOY: That didn't sound at all like Spock, Jim. 
KIRK: No. I thought you said you might like him if he mellowed a little. 
MCCOY: I didn't say that. 
KIRK: You said that. 
MCCOY: Not exactly. He might be in trouble. 
KIRK: Yes, take over the landing party detail and start getting those colonists aboard. 
MCCOY: How will you find Spock? 
KIRK: The frequency is open. It'll act as a homing device. Contact DeSalle. Have him meet you here. Make sure the landing party work in teams of two. I don't want anybody left alone down here.

[Pasture]

(They find the communicator, and hear laughter. Spock is hanging upside down from a branch of a nearby tree.) 
KIRK: Spock. (clears throat) Mister Spock.

[Beam-down point]

(Items are being collected to be taken up to the ship. DeSalle has brought some of the pink plants.) 
MCCOY: What are you doing with those things, DeSalle? 
DESALLE: I want you to take a close look at these, Doc. They're very interesting.

[Pasture]

KIRK: Mister Spock. Are you out of your mind? You were told to report to me at once. 
SPOCK: I didn't want to, Jim. 
KIRK: You? Yes, I can see that. Miss Kalomi, you'll have to come back to the settlement and prepare to transport up to the ship. 
SPOCK: There'll be no evacuation, Jim, but perhaps we should go back and get you straightened out. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, Mister Spock is under arrest, and he's in your custody until we get back to the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: Very well. Come with me. 
(He takes Leila's hand and leads the group to a clump of the plants, where they all get sprayed with spores.) 
KIRK: What's? 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu understands, don't you, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Yes, I see now. Of course we can't remove the colony. It'd be wrong. 
KIRK: I don't know what these plants are or how they work, but you're all going back to the settlement with me, and those colonists are going aboard the ship. 
(Kirk leaves them.) 
SPOCK: I can see the Captain is going to be difficult.

[Another pasture]

(No equipment or colonists now, just plants going up to the ship.) MCCOY: (with an extreme southern drawl) Ready to beam up. Hiya, Jimmy boy! Hey, I've taken care of everything. All y'all gotta do is relax. Doctor's orders. 
KIRK: How many of those did you beam up? 
MCCOY: Oh, must be nigh onto a hundred by now. 
CHIEF [OC]: Hey, Doc, I'm ready to energise. Everything okay with those plants? 
KIRK: This is the Captain. Beam me up. 
CHIEF [OC]: Well, sure, if you want. 
KIRK: I most certainly do. Energise.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Lieutenant, put me through to Admiral Komack at Starfleet. 
UHURA: Oh, I'm sorry, Captain. I can't do that. 
KIRK: What do you mean, you can't do that. Follow standard procedure. That's an order. 
UHURA: Oh, I know it is, Captain, but you see, all communications are out. 
KIRK: Out? 
UHURA: I short-circuited them, except ship to surface. We'll need that for a while. It's really for the best, Captain. 
(She leaves the Bridge. Kirk finds a plant and throws it angrily across the helm console before storming out himself.)

[Corridor]

(There's a long queue of crewmembers lounging against the wall outside the transporter room.) 
KIRK: Get back to your stations. Get back to your stations. 
CREWMAN: I'm sorry, sir. We're all transporting down to join the colony. 
KIRK: I said get back to your station. 
CREWMAN: No, sir. 
KIRK: This is mutiny, mister. 
CREWMAN: Yes, sir. It is.

Captain's log, stardate 3417.5. The pod plants have spread spores throughout the ship, carried by the ventilation system. Under their influence, my crew is deserting to join the Omicron colony, and I can't stop them. I don't know why I have not been infected, nor can I get Doctor McCoy to explain the physical-psychological aspects of the infection.

[Pasture]

MCCOY: I'm not interested in any physical-psychological aspects, Jim boy. We all perfectly healthy down here.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I've heard that word a lot lately. Perfect. Everything's perfect. 
MCCOY [OC]: Yeah. That's right. That's just what it is. 
KIRK: I'll bet you've even grown your tonsils back.

[Pasture]

MCCOY: Sho'nuf. Hey, Jim boy, y'all ever have a real cold Georgia-style mint julep, huh?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Look, Bones, I need your help. Can you run tests, blood samples, anything at all to give us a lead on what these things are, how to counteract them?

[Pasture]

MCCOY: Who wants to counteract paradise, Jim boy?

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: McCoy out. 
KIRK: Bones. Bones.

[Farmhouse]

(Spock is pouring tea.) 
SPOCK: Almost the entire ship's complement has beamed down. 
ELIAS: I'm very pleased. The entire landing operation is proceeding quite well. 
(Kirk enters) 
KIRK: Where's McCoy? 
SPOCK: He went off to create something called a mint julep. That's a drink, Jim. 
ELIAS: Captain, why don't you join us? 
KIRK: In your own private paradise. 
ELIAS: The spores have made it that. 
KIRK: Where did they originate? 
SPOCK: It's impossible to say. They drifted through space until they finally landed here. You see, they actually thrive on Berthold rays. The plants act as a repository for thousands of microscopic spores until they find a human body to inhabit. 
ELIAS: In return, they give you complete health and peace of mind. 
KIRK: That's paradise? 
ELIAS: We have no need or want, Captain. 
SPOCK: It's a true Eden, Jim. There's belonging and love. 
KIRK: No wants. No needs. We weren't meant for that. None of us. Man stagnates if he has no ambition, no desire to be more than he is. 
ELIAS: We have what we need. 
KIRK: Except a challenge. 
SPOCK: You don't understand, Jim, but you'll come around sooner or later. Join us. Please. 
KIRK: I'm going back to the ship.

[Bridge]

(All the panels are lit, the lights are on, but nobody is home except one.) 
KIRK: Engineering? Scotty? Biochemistry lab? Security? Is there anyone on board? This is the Captain. 
(He sits in his chair.) 
KIRK: Captain's log, stardate 3417.7. Except for myself, all crew personnel have transported to the surface of the planet. Mutinied. Lieutenant Uhura has effectively sabotaged the communications station. I can only contact the surface of the planet. The ship can be maintained in orbit for several months, but even with automatic controls, I cannot pilot her alone. In effect, I am marooned here. I'm beginning to realise just how big this ship really is, how quiet. I don't know how to get my crew back, how to counteract the effect of the spores. I don't know what I can offer against paradise. 
(The plant that he had thrown earlier, now sprays him with spores.) 
KIRK: Enterprise to Mister Spock.

[Pasture]

SPOCK: Yes, Jim. What is it now?

[Bridge]

KIRK: I've joined you. I understand now.

[Field]

SPOCK: Wonderful, Jim. When will you beam down?

[Bridge]

KIRK: There are some things in my quarters I want to pack.

[Field]

SPOCK: Good. Leila and I will meet you at the beam down point. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk out.

[Kirk's quarters]

(He packs a suitcase with a smile on his face, then goes to the safe and gets out his medals. He loses the smile.)

[Transporter room]

(Kirk puts his suitcase on the transporter pad and goes over to the controls.) 
KIRK: No. No! I can't leave! (he's very relieved) Emotions. Violent emotions. Needs. Anger. Captain's log, supplemental. I think I've discovered the answer, but to carry out my plan entails considerable risk. Mister Spock is much stronger than the ordinary human being. Aroused, his great physical strength could kill. But it's a risk I'll have to take.

[Field]

KIRK [OC]: Enterprise to Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Spock here. 
KIRK [OC]: It's Jim. 
SPOCK: What's keeping you, Jim? We've been waiting.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: I've been packing some things, and I realise there's some equipment here that we should have down at the settlement.

[Field]

KIRK [OC]: You know we can't come back on board once the last of us has left. 
SPOCK: Do you want me to beam up a party?

[Transporter room]

KIRK: No, I think you and I can handle it. Why don't you beam up now?

[Field]

SPOCK: Just a moment. It won't take long. Do you mind? 
LEILA: I'll wait. 
SPOCK: Ready to beam up, Jim.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: (with a large metal bar in his hand) Energising. 
(Spock materialises.) 
KIRK: All right, you mutinous, disloyal, computerised, half-breed, we'll see about you deserting my ship. 
SPOCK: The term half-breed is somewhat applicable, but computerised is inaccurate. A machine can be computerised, not a man. 
KIRK: What makes you think you're a man? You're an overgrown jackrabbit, an elf with a hyperactive thyroid. 
SPOCK: Jim, I don't understand. 
KIRK: Of course you don't understand. You don't have the brains to understand. All you have is printed circuits. 
SPOCK: Captain, if you'll excuse me. 
KIRK: What can you expect from a simpering, devil-eared freak whose father was a computer and his mother an encyclopedia? 
SPOCK: My mother was a teacher. My father an ambassador. 
KIRK: Your father was a computer, like his son. An ambassador from a planet of traitors. A Vulcan never lived who had an ounce of integrity. 
SPOCK: Captain, please don't 
KIRK: You're a traitor from a race of traitors. Disloyal to the core, rotten like the rest of your subhuman race, and you've got the gall to make love to that girl. 
SPOCK: That's enough. 
KIRK: Does she know what she's getting, Spock? A carcass full of memory banks who should be squatting in a mushroom, instead of passing himself off as a man? You belong in a circus, Spock, not a starship. Right next to the dog-faced boy. 
(Spock bends the metal bar with one blow, and throws Kirk around the transporter room with ease. Fortunately, Kirk is able to dodge the blows that damage the walls and equipment until finally...) 
KIRK: Had enough? I didn't realise what it took to get under that thick hide of yours. Anyhow, I don't know what you're so mad about. It isn't every first officer who gets to belt his Captain several times. 
SPOCK: You did that to me deliberately. 
KIRK: Believe me, Mister Spock, it was painful in more ways than one. 
SPOCK: The spores. They're gone. I don't belong anymore. 
KIRK: You said they were benevolent and peaceful. Violent emotions overwhelm them, destroy them. I had to make you angry enough to shake off their influence. That's the answer, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: That may be correct, Captain, but trying to initiate a brawl with over five hundred crewmen and colonists is hardly logical. 
KIRK: I had something else in mind. Can you put together a subsonic transmitter. Something we can hook into the communications station and broadcast over the communicator? 
SPOCK: It can be done. 
KIRK: Good. Let's get to work. 
SPOCK: Captain. Striking a fellow officer is a court martial offence. 
KIRK: Well, if we're both in the Brig, who's going to build the subsonic transmitter? 
SPOCK: That is quite logical, Captain.

[Field]

MCCOY: Well now, it's a little early to be counting stars, Miss Leila. 
LEILA: I'm waiting for Mister Spock and the Captain to transport down. They had some equipment to be moved. But it's been so long. I wish he'd come back. 
MCCOY: Well, now, I think I can fix that for you. Enterprise?

[Bridge]

(Spock is back in uniform and under the console when it beeps.)
SPOCK: Enterprise. Spock here.

[Field]

LEILA: This is Leila. I borrowed the doctor's communicator. I was worried something might have happened to you.

[Bridge]

LEILA [OC]: You are all right, aren't you? 
SPOCK: Yes. Yes. I'm quite well.

[Field]

LEILA: Can I come aboard? I've never seen a starship before

[Bridge]

LEILA [OC]: and I want to talk to you. 
SPOCK: Are you still at the beam down point, and is the doctor there?

[Field]

LEILA: Yes to both questions.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Give your communicator back to Doctor McCoy. You won't need it to beam up. It'll take a few moments. Just wait there. Out. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, Miss Kalomi is strictly your concern, but should you talk to her while she's still under the influence of the spores? 
SPOCK: I'll be back shortly, Captain.

[Transporter room]

(Once she's materialised she rushes to put her arms around him, but he doesn't respond.) 
LEILA: You're no longer with us, are you? I felt something was wrong. 
SPOCK: It was necessary. 
LEILA: Come back to the planet with me. You can belong again. Come back with me, please. 
SPOCK: I can't. 
LEILA: I love you. I said that six years ago, and I can't seem to stop repeating myself. On Earth, you couldn't give anything of yourself. You couldn't even put your arms around me. We couldn't have anything together there. We couldn't have anything together anyplace else. We're happy here. (crying) I can't lose you now, Mister Spock. I can't. 
SPOCK: I have a responsibility to this ship, to that man on the Bridge. I am what I am, Leila, and if there are self-made purgatories, then we all have to live in them. Mine can be no worse than someone else's. 
LEILA: I have lost you, haven't I? And not only you, I've lost all of it. The spores. I've lost them, too. 
KIRK: The Captain discovered that strong emotions and needs destroy the spore influence. 
LEILA: And this is for my good? Do you mind if I say I still love you? You never told me if you had another name, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: (wiping away her tears) You couldn't pronounce it.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: They'll not hear this, of course. It'll be more a sensation of feeling it. 
KIRK: As though somebody had put itching powder on their skin. 
SPOCK: Precisely. It should begin to work on their nerves in a few minutes.

[Field] SULU: Sorry, DeSalle. 
DESALLE: What do you think you're doing? 
SULU: I said I was sorry. 
DESALLE: More like you're clumsy. 
SULU: If you hadn't gotten in my way 
(They fight with their spades.) 
(Elsewhere around the settlement, fights are breaking out.) 
KELOWITZ: Come on. Break it up. Break it up.

[Pasture]

(McCoy is resting under a tree, with a tall glass of mint julep in his hand.) 
ELIAS: Well, Doctor, I've been thinking about what sort of work I could assign you to. 
MCCOY: What do you mean, what sort of work? I'm a doctor. 
ELIAS: Not any more, of course. We don't need you. Not as a doctor. 
MCCOY: Oh, no? Would you like to see how fast I can put you in a hospital? 
ELIAS: I am the leader of this colony. I'll assign you whatever work I think suitable. 
MCCOY: Just a minute. You'd better make me a mechanic. Then I can treat little tin gods like you. (He punches Elias) Sorry, Sandoval. I don't know what made me do that. 
ELIAS: We've done nothing here. No accomplishments, no progress. Three years wasted. We wanted to make this planet a garden. 
MCCOY: You can't stay here. You can't survive without the spores. After you've cleared at the Starbase, you could be relocated. It depends upon what you want. 
ELIAS: I think I'd, I think we'd like to get some work done. The work we started out to do. 
MCCOY: Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Enterprise. Spock here.

[Pasture]

MCCOY: This is McCoy. Sandoval would like to talk to the Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Just a moment. They're all beginning to call in, Captain. Rather contritely, I should say. Sandoval wishes to speak to you. 
KIRK: Put him on the speaker. Kirk here.

[Pasture]



ELIAS: Oh, Captain, as I understood it, you were to transport us to Starbase Twenty Seven. We'll give you every co-operation.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Start making preparations, Mister Sandoval. We'll begin transporting your people aboard as soon as more of our crew checks in.

[Bridge]

(Later, when everyone is back on duty.) 
MCCOY: Well, Jim, I've just examined the last of the colonists, and they're all in absolutely perfect, perfect health. A fringe benefit left over by the spores. 
KIRK: Good. 
MCCOY: Well, that's the second time man's been thrown out of paradise. 
KIRK: No, no, Bones. This time we walked out on our own. Maybe we weren't meant for paradise. Maybe we were meant to fight our way through. Struggle, claw our way up, scratch for every inch of the way. Maybe we can't stroll to the music of the lute. We must march to the sound of drums. 
SPOCK: Poetry, Captain. Non-regulation. 
KIRK: We haven't heard much from you about Omicron Ceti Three, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: I have little to say about it, Captain, except that for the first time in my life I was happy.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.
SPOCK: Fascinating. Pure energy. Pure thought. Totally incorporeal. Not life as we know it at all. 
KIRK: But what about this planet? The fields, the buildings, this citadel? 
SPOCK: Conventionalisations, I should say. Useless to the Organians. Created so that visitors such as ourselves, could have conventional points of reference. 
KOR: But is all of this possible? 
SPOCK: We have seen it with our own eyes. I should say the Organians are as far above us on the evolutionary scale as we are above the amoeba. 
KIRK: Well, Commander, I guess that takes care of the war. Obviously, the Organians aren't going to let us fight. 
KOR: A shame, Captain. It would have been glorious.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: You've been most restrained since we left Organia. 
KIRK: I'm embarrassed. I was furious with the Organians for stopping a war I didn't want. We think of ourselves as the most powerful beings in the universe. It's unsettling to discover that we're wrong. 
SPOCK: Captain, it took millions of years for the Organians to evolve into what they are. Even the gods did not spring into being overnight. You and I have no reason to be embarrassed. We did, after all, beat the odds. 
KIRK: Oh, no, no, no, Mister Spock, We didn't beat the odds. We didn't have a chance. The Organians raided the game.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

This Side of Paradise
Stardate: 3417.3
Original Airdate: 2 Mar, 1967

[Bridge]
PAINTER: Approaching Omicron Ceti Three, sir. 
KIRK: Standard orbit, Mister Painter. 
PAINTER: Yes, sir. 
UHURA: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: I've been transmitting a contact signal every five minutes. All I get is dead air. Shall I continue? 
KIRK: Maintain transmission pattern until we've established orbit. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, there were one hundred and fifty men, women, and children in that colony. What are the chances of survivors? 
SPOCK: Absolutely none, Captain. Berthold rays are such a recent discovery. We do not yet have full knowledge of their nature. It is known, however, that living animal tissue disintegrates under exposure. Sandoval's group could not have survived after three years. 
KIRK: Are you saying that those people built a future in a place knowing they might not survive? 
SPOCK: I am saying they knew there was a risk. 
KIRK: And what about us? Can we afford to send people to the planet's surface? 
SPOCK: The breakdown of tissue does not develop immediately. We can risk a limited exposure. 
PAINTER: We've established orbit, sir, and I've pinpointed a settlement. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Painter. Mister Spock, equip a landing party of five to accompany me to the planet's surface. Include Doctor McCoy and a biologist. I'll want them in ten minutes.

[Farm yard]

(The group beam down into a farm, complete with wooden fence and a tarmacadamed paths. There are clap-board buildings and even a stable block.) 
KIRK: Another dream that failed. There's nothing sadder. It took these people a year to make the trip from Earth. They came all that way and died. 
ELIAS: Hardly that, sir. Welcome to Omicron Ceti Three. I'm Elias Sandoval.

Captain's log, stardate 3417.3. We thought our mission to Omicron Ceti Three would be an unhappy one. We had expected to find no survivors of the agricultural colony there. Apparently, our information was incorrect.

[Farm yard]

ELIAS: We haven't seen anyone outside our group for four years since we left Earth. We've been expecting someone for some time. Our subspace radio didn't work properly, and I'm afraid we didn't have anyone who could master its intricacies. 
KIRK: Actually, Mister Sandoval, we didn't come here because of your silent radio. 
ELIAS: It makes little difference, Captain. You're here. We're happy to see you. Come, let me show you our settlement. 
MCCOY: On pure speculation, just an educated guess, I'd say that man is alive. 
SPOCK: Captain, this planet is being bombarded by Berthold rays, as our reports indicated. At this intensity, we'll be safe for a week if necessary. But 
KIRK: But these people shouldn't be alive. 
SULU: Is it possible that they're not? 
MCCOY: You shook hands with him, Jim. His flesh was warm. He's alive. There's no doubt about that. 
SPOCK: There's also no question of the fact that Berthold rays are incontrovertibly deadly. There's no miracle connected with it, Doctor, you know that. No cures, no serums, no antidotes. If a man is exposed long enough, he dies. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, we're debating in a vacuum. Let's go get some answers.

[Farmhouse]

(Elias leads the way into a comfortable room with wooden furniture and gingham curtains.) 
ELIAS: There are two other settlements, but we have forty five colonists here. 
KIRK: What was the reason for the dispersal? 
ELIAS: We felt three groups would have better potential. If disease were to strike one group, the others would be less likely to be affected. You see, Omicron is an ideal agricultural planet. We determined not to suffer the fate of expeditions that went before us. 
LEILA: Elias. 
ELIAS: Leila, come meet our guests. This is Leila Kalomi, our botanist. This is Captain Kirk, Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock. 
LEILA: Mister Spock and I have met before. It's been a long time. 
KIRK: Mister Sandoval, we do have a mission here. Examinations, tests. 
ELIAS: By all means, make them. I think you'll find our settlement an interesting one. Our philosophy is a simple one, that men should return to a less complicated life. We have few mechanical things here. No vehicles, no weapons. We have harmony here. Complete peace. 
KIRK: We'll try not to interfere with your work. 
ELIAS: Make yourselves at home, gentlemen.

[Outside, by the barn]

KELOWITZ: What exactly are we looking for anyway, sir? 
SULU: Whatever doesn't look right, whatever that is. When it comes to farms, I wouldn't know what looked right or wrong if it were two feet from me. 
(You mean like that weird alien plant right next to you?) 
KELOWITZ: (opening up the barn door) Hey. 
SULU: What is it? 
KELOWITZ: No cows. This barn isn't even built for them, Just for storage. 
SULU: Come to think of it, we haven't seen any animals. No horses, no pigs, not even a dog. Nothing.

[Farmhouse]

ELIAS: You've known the Vulcanian? 
LEILA: On Earth, six years ago. 
ELIAS: Did you love him? 
LEILA: If I did, it was important only to myself. 
ELIAS: How did he feel? 
LEILA: Mister Spock's feelings were never expressed to me. It is said he has none to give. 
ELIAS: Would you like him to stay with us now, to be as one of us? 
LEILA: There is no choice, Elias. He will stay.

[Drawing room]

(In another part of the farmhouse, McCoy is conducting medical examinations.) 
MCCOY: That'll be all. Thank you very much. 
(The man leaves, Kirk enters.) 
KIRK: Anything? 
MCCOY: I've examined nine men so far, varying in ages from twenty three to fifty nine. They're all in perfect condition. Text book responses. Heart, lungs, excellent. Co-ordination, excellent. Reflexes, excellent. If there are many more of them, I could throw away my shingle. 
(Communicator beeps) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 

[Pasture]

SPOCK: Spock here, Captain. There seems to be a total absence of life on the planet, with the exception of the colonists and various types of flora. 
KIRK [OC]: Sulu had the same observation. Any explanations? 
SPOCK: Not at the moment, sir. I am conducting various tests with the tricorder, but results are inconclusive.

[Drawing room]

KIRK: Very well. Continue investigations. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: No animals. That's peculiar. 
KIRK: Yes, especially in view of the fact that the records for this expedition indicate that they did have some for breeding and food purposes. Apparently, none of them survived. 
MCCOY: I'd like to see the medical records on the expedition. 
KIRK: Yes, I thought you might. 
(Hands over a computer disc) 
ELIAS: Captain, I've been looking for you. You haven't seen our fields and crops. I'd like to show you and the Doctor what we've accomplished here. 
MCCOY: I'm afraid I'll have to bow out. I have to continue with these medical examinations. However, if I find everyone else's health to be as perfect as yours, I 
KIRK: He promised to throw away his shingle. 
ELIAS: You'll find no weaklings here. Captain.

[Field]

ELIAS: This is the reason, Captain. This soil will grow anything we plant in it. It's a perfect world. We have a moderate climate, moderate rains all year round. It gives us all we need. It is perfect. 
LESLIE: Pardon me, Captain. Biology report ready, sir. 
ELIAS: I have work to attend to myself, Captain. 
(He leaves them.) 
KIRK: Go ahead, Lieutenant. 
LESLIE: I heard Sandoval saying they could grow anything here. That's true, sir. They've got a variety of crops in. Grains, potatoes, beans. 
KIRK: Make your point. 
LESLIE: Well, sir, for an agricultural colony, they have actually very little acreage planted. There's enough to sustain the colony, but very little more. 
KIRK: It's like a jigsaw puzzle all one colour. No key to where the pieces fit in. Why? 
(Communicator beeps) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
MCCOY: This is McCoy, Jim. I think you'd better get back here. 
KIRK: Trouble? 
MCCOY: No, but I'd like you to see this for yourself. 
KIRK: On my way.

[Farmhouse]

MCCOY: Sandoval's medical record, four years ago when the expedition left Earth. He registered scar tissue on his lungs from lobar pneumonia suffered when he was a child. No major operations, but there was an appendectomy. Received all required inoculations, et cetera. 
KIRK: What's so strange about that? 
MCCOY: Nothing, but I examined that man no more than two hours ago. You know what his readings were? Perfect, perfect, and perfect. Just like everyone else I've examined here. 
KIRK: Instrument malfunction? 
MCCOY: No. I thought of that and tested it on myself. It accurately recorded my lack of tonsils and those two broken ribs I had once. It did not record the scar tissue on Sandoval's lungs, but it did record a healthy appendix where one was supposedly removed.

[Field]

(Spock is scanning amongst the rows of dry-looking somethings.) 
SPOCK: Nothing. Not even insects. Yet your plants grow, and you've survived exposure to Berthold rays. 
LEILA: That can be explained. 
SPOCK: Please do. 
LEILA: Later. 
SPOCK: I have never understood the female capacity to avoid a direct answer to any question. 
LEILA: And I never understood you. Until now. There was always a place in here where no one could come. There was only the face you allow people to see. Only one side you'd allow them to know. 
SPOCK: I would like to know how your people have managed to survive here. 
LEILA: I missed you. 
SPOCK: Logically, you should all be dead. 
LEILA: If I tell you how we survived, will you try to understand how we feel about our life here? About each other? 
SPOCK: Emotions are alien to me. I'm a scientist. 
LEILA: Someone else might believe that. Your shipmates, your Captain, but not me. Come.

[Drawing Room]

KIRK: Mister Sandoval, within the hour I've received orders from Starfleet Command to evacuate all personnel from this colony. Naturally, you'll inform your people to begin preparations. We will have accommodations for you aboard the Enterprise. 
ELIAS: No. 
KIRK: It's not an arbitrary decision on my part. I have my orders. 
ELIAS: Captain, it's entirely unnecessary. We're in no danger here. 
MCCOY: We've explained the Berthold rays to you and their effect. Can't you understand? 
ELIAS: Doctor, how can I make you understand? Your own instruments have shown that we're all in perfect health. We've had no deaths here. 
KIRK: What about your animals? 
ELIAS: We're vegetarians. 
KIRK: That doesn't answer my question, sir. Why did all your animals die? 
ELIAS: Captain, you stress very unimportant matters. We will not leave.

[Pasture]

(The grass is brown and dry, but the pink flowers are growing.) 
LEILA: It's not much further. 
SPOCK: You've not yet explained the nature of this thing. 
LEILA: Its basic properties and elements are not important. What is important is it gives life, peace, love. 
SPOCK: What you're describing was once known in the vernacular as a happiness pill. And you, as a scientist, should know that that's not possible. 
LEILA: Come. I was one of the first to find them. The spores. 
SPOCK: Spores? 
(One of the pink flowers shoots things at him. Spock clutches his head and falls to the ground in pain.) 
SPOCK: No. 
LEILA: It shouldn't hurt. 
SPOCK: No, I can't. Please, don't! 
LEILA: Not like this. It didn't hurt us. 
SPOCK: I am not like you. 
(Suddenly the pain is gone.) 
LEILA: Now. Now, you belong to all of us and we to you. There's no need to hide your inner face any longer. We understand. 
SPOCK: I love you. I can love you. 
(They kiss.)

Captain's log, supplemental. We have been ordered by Starfleet Command to evacuate the colony on Omicron Three. However, the colony leader, Elias Sandoval, has refused all co-operation and will not listen to any arguments.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Sandoval. 
ELIAS: Captain, your arguments are very valid, but they do not apply to us. 
KIRK: You're being unreasonable. 
ELIAS: Well, nevertheless. Excuse me. 
KIRK: Excuse me. My orders are to remove all the colonists. That's exactly what I intend to do, with or without your help. 
ELIAS; Without, I should think. 
MCCOY: Would you like to use a butterfly net on him, Captain? 
KIRK: No, I think we'll use a 
SULU: Captain, we've checked out everything. It all seems normal, except for the absence of any animals. 
KIRK: We have orders to evacuate all colonists to Starbase Twenty Seven. 
I want landing parties to co-ordinate the colonists and prepare them for transport up to the ship. We'll need extra accommodations aboard. Where's Mister Spock and Mister DeSalle? 
SULU: We haven't seen them since we began our check. 
MCCOY: DeSalle said he was going to examine some native plants he found. Did Spock call in at all? 
KIRK: No, he didn't. (gets out communicator) Spock? See to the landing parties, would you, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Spock?

[Pasture]

(Spock's communicator is beeping to itself while he is lying in Leila's lap, looking at the clouds. He has changed out of his uniform into an overall.) 
SPOCK: That one looks like a dragon. You see the tail and the dorsal spines? 
LEILA: I've never seen a dragon. 
SPOCK: I have. On Berengaria Seven. But I've never stopped to look at clouds before. Or rainbows. You know, I can tell you exactly why one appears in the sky, but considering its beauty has always been out of the question. 
LEILA: Not here. 
(She picks up the communicator and it opens.) 
KIRK [OC]: Spock! 
SPOCK: Yes, what did you want?

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Spock, is that you?

[Pasture]

SPOCK: Yes, Captain. What did you want? 
KIRK [OC]: Where are you? 
SPOCK: I don't believe I want to tell you.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Spock, I don't know what you think you're doing, but this is an order. Report back to me at the settlement in ten minutes. We're evacuating all colonists to Starbase Twenty Seven.

[Pasture]

SPOCK: No, I don't think so.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: You don't think so, what?

[Pasture]

SPOCK: I don't think so, sir.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Spock, report to me immediately.

[Pasture]

(But the communicator drops to the ground during another kiss) 
KIRK [OC]: Spock? Acknowledge.

[Farmyard]

KIRK: Spock. The frequency is open, but he doesn't answer. 
MCCOY: That didn't sound at all like Spock, Jim. 
KIRK: No. I thought you said you might like him if he mellowed a little. 
MCCOY: I didn't say that. 
KIRK: You said that. 
MCCOY: Not exactly. He might be in trouble. 
KIRK: Yes, take over the landing party detail and start getting those colonists aboard. 
MCCOY: How will you find Spock? 
KIRK: The frequency is open. It'll act as a homing device. Contact DeSalle. Have him meet you here. Make sure the landing party work in teams of two. I don't want anybody left alone down here.

[Pasture]

(They find the communicator, and hear laughter. Spock is hanging upside down from a branch of a nearby tree.) 
KIRK: Spock. (clears throat) Mister Spock.

[Beam-down point]

(Items are being collected to be taken up to the ship. DeSalle has brought some of the pink plants.) 
MCCOY: What are you doing with those things, DeSalle? 
DESALLE: I want you to take a close look at these, Doc. They're very interesting.

[Pasture]

KIRK: Mister Spock. Are you out of your mind? You were told to report to me at once. 
SPOCK: I didn't want to, Jim. 
KIRK: You? Yes, I can see that. Miss Kalomi, you'll have to come back to the settlement and prepare to transport up to the ship. 
SPOCK: There'll be no evacuation, Jim, but perhaps we should go back and get you straightened out. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, Mister Spock is under arrest, and he's in your custody until we get back to the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: Very well. Come with me. 
(He takes Leila's hand and leads the group to a clump of the plants, where they all get sprayed with spores.) 
KIRK: What's? 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu understands, don't you, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Yes, I see now. Of course we can't remove the colony. It'd be wrong. 
KIRK: I don't know what these plants are or how they work, but you're all going back to the settlement with me, and those colonists are going aboard the ship. 
(Kirk leaves them.) 
SPOCK: I can see the Captain is going to be difficult.

[Another pasture]

(No equipment or colonists now, just plants going up to the ship.) MCCOY: (with an extreme southern drawl) Ready to beam up. Hiya, Jimmy boy! Hey, I've taken care of everything. All y'all gotta do is relax. Doctor's orders. 
KIRK: How many of those did you beam up? 
MCCOY: Oh, must be nigh onto a hundred by now. 
CHIEF [OC]: Hey, Doc, I'm ready to energise. Everything okay with those plants? 
KIRK: This is the Captain. Beam me up. 
CHIEF [OC]: Well, sure, if you want. 
KIRK: I most certainly do. Energise.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Lieutenant, put me through to Admiral Komack at Starfleet. 
UHURA: Oh, I'm sorry, Captain. I can't do that. 
KIRK: What do you mean, you can't do that. Follow standard procedure. That's an order. 
UHURA: Oh, I know it is, Captain, but you see, all communications are out. 
KIRK: Out? 
UHURA: I short-circuited them, except ship to surface. We'll need that for a while. It's really for the best, Captain. 
(She leaves the Bridge. Kirk finds a plant and throws it angrily across the helm console before storming out himself.)

[Corridor]

(There's a long queue of crewmembers lounging against the wall outside the transporter room.) 
KIRK: Get back to your stations. Get back to your stations. 
CREWMAN: I'm sorry, sir. We're all transporting down to join the colony. 
KIRK: I said get back to your station. 
CREWMAN: No, sir. 
KIRK: This is mutiny, mister. 
CREWMAN: Yes, sir. It is.

Captain's log, stardate 3417.5. The pod plants have spread spores throughout the ship, carried by the ventilation system. Under their influence, my crew is deserting to join the Omicron colony, and I can't stop them. I don't know why I have not been infected, nor can I get Doctor McCoy to explain the physical-psychological aspects of the infection.

[Pasture]

MCCOY: I'm not interested in any physical-psychological aspects, Jim boy. We all perfectly healthy down here.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I've heard that word a lot lately. Perfect. Everything's perfect. 
MCCOY [OC]: Yeah. That's right. That's just what it is. 
KIRK: I'll bet you've even grown your tonsils back.

[Pasture]

MCCOY: Sho'nuf. Hey, Jim boy, y'all ever have a real cold Georgia-style mint julep, huh?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Look, Bones, I need your help. Can you run tests, blood samples, anything at all to give us a lead on what these things are, how to counteract them?

[Pasture]

MCCOY: Who wants to counteract paradise, Jim boy?

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: McCoy out. 
KIRK: Bones. Bones.

[Farmhouse]

(Spock is pouring tea.) 
SPOCK: Almost the entire ship's complement has beamed down. 
ELIAS: I'm very pleased. The entire landing operation is proceeding quite well. 
(Kirk enters) 
KIRK: Where's McCoy? 
SPOCK: He went off to create something called a mint julep. That's a drink, Jim. 
ELIAS: Captain, why don't you join us? 
KIRK: In your own private paradise. 
ELIAS: The spores have made it that. 
KIRK: Where did they originate? 
SPOCK: It's impossible to say. They drifted through space until they finally landed here. You see, they actually thrive on Berthold rays. The plants act as a repository for thousands of microscopic spores until they find a human body to inhabit. 
ELIAS: In return, they give you complete health and peace of mind. 
KIRK: That's paradise? 
ELIAS: We have no need or want, Captain. 
SPOCK: It's a true Eden, Jim. There's belonging and love. 
KIRK: No wants. No needs. We weren't meant for that. None of us. Man stagnates if he has no ambition, no desire to be more than he is. 
ELIAS: We have what we need. 
KIRK: Except a challenge. 
SPOCK: You don't understand, Jim, but you'll come around sooner or later. Join us. Please. 
KIRK: I'm going back to the ship.

[Bridge]

(All the panels are lit, the lights are on, but nobody is home except one.) 
KIRK: Engineering? Scotty? Biochemistry lab? Security? Is there anyone on board? This is the Captain. 
(He sits in his chair.) 
KIRK: Captain's log, stardate 3417.7. Except for myself, all crew personnel have transported to the surface of the planet. Mutinied. Lieutenant Uhura has effectively sabotaged the communications station. I can only contact the surface of the planet. The ship can be maintained in orbit for several months, but even with automatic controls, I cannot pilot her alone. In effect, I am marooned here. I'm beginning to realise just how big this ship really is, how quiet. I don't know how to get my crew back, how to counteract the effect of the spores. I don't know what I can offer against paradise. 
(The plant that he had thrown earlier, now sprays him with spores.) 
KIRK: Enterprise to Mister Spock.

[Pasture]

SPOCK: Yes, Jim. What is it now?

[Bridge]

KIRK: I've joined you. I understand now.

[Field]

SPOCK: Wonderful, Jim. When will you beam down?

[Bridge]

KIRK: There are some things in my quarters I want to pack.

[Field]

SPOCK: Good. Leila and I will meet you at the beam down point. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk out.

[Kirk's quarters]

(He packs a suitcase with a smile on his face, then goes to the safe and gets out his medals. He loses the smile.)

[Transporter room]

(Kirk puts his suitcase on the transporter pad and goes over to the controls.) 
KIRK: No. No! I can't leave! (he's very relieved) Emotions. Violent emotions. Needs. Anger. Captain's log, supplemental. I think I've discovered the answer, but to carry out my plan entails considerable risk. Mister Spock is much stronger than the ordinary human being. Aroused, his great physical strength could kill. But it's a risk I'll have to take.

[Field]

KIRK [OC]: Enterprise to Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Spock here. 
KIRK [OC]: It's Jim. 
SPOCK: What's keeping you, Jim? We've been waiting.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: I've been packing some things, and I realise there's some equipment here that we should have down at the settlement.

[Field]

KIRK [OC]: You know we can't come back on board once the last of us has left. 
SPOCK: Do you want me to beam up a party?

[Transporter room]

KIRK: No, I think you and I can handle it. Why don't you beam up now?

[Field]

SPOCK: Just a moment. It won't take long. Do you mind? 
LEILA: I'll wait. 
SPOCK: Ready to beam up, Jim.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: (with a large metal bar in his hand) Energising. 
(Spock materialises.) 
KIRK: All right, you mutinous, disloyal, computerised, half-breed, we'll see about you deserting my ship. 
SPOCK: The term half-breed is somewhat applicable, but computerised is inaccurate. A machine can be computerised, not a man. 
KIRK: What makes you think you're a man? You're an overgrown jackrabbit, an elf with a hyperactive thyroid. 
SPOCK: Jim, I don't understand. 
KIRK: Of course you don't understand. You don't have the brains to understand. All you have is printed circuits. 
SPOCK: Captain, if you'll excuse me. 
KIRK: What can you expect from a simpering, devil-eared freak whose father was a computer and his mother an encyclopedia? 
SPOCK: My mother was a teacher. My father an ambassador. 
KIRK: Your father was a computer, like his son. An ambassador from a planet of traitors. A Vulcan never lived who had an ounce of integrity. 
SPOCK: Captain, please don't 
KIRK: You're a traitor from a race of traitors. Disloyal to the core, rotten like the rest of your subhuman race, and you've got the gall to make love to that girl. 
SPOCK: That's enough. 
KIRK: Does she know what she's getting, Spock? A carcass full of memory banks who should be squatting in a mushroom, instead of passing himself off as a man? You belong in a circus, Spock, not a starship. Right next to the dog-faced boy. 
(Spock bends the metal bar with one blow, and throws Kirk around the transporter room with ease. Fortunately, Kirk is able to dodge the blows that damage the walls and equipment until finally...) 
KIRK: Had enough? I didn't realise what it took to get under that thick hide of yours. Anyhow, I don't know what you're so mad about. It isn't every first officer who gets to belt his Captain several times. 
SPOCK: You did that to me deliberately. 
KIRK: Believe me, Mister Spock, it was painful in more ways than one. 
SPOCK: The spores. They're gone. I don't belong anymore. 
KIRK: You said they were benevolent and peaceful. Violent emotions overwhelm them, destroy them. I had to make you angry enough to shake off their influence. That's the answer, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: That may be correct, Captain, but trying to initiate a brawl with over five hundred crewmen and colonists is hardly logical. 
KIRK: I had something else in mind. Can you put together a subsonic transmitter. Something we can hook into the communications station and broadcast over the communicator? 
SPOCK: It can be done. 
KIRK: Good. Let's get to work. 
SPOCK: Captain. Striking a fellow officer is a court martial offence. 
KIRK: Well, if we're both in the Brig, who's going to build the subsonic transmitter? 
SPOCK: That is quite logical, Captain.

[Field]

MCCOY: Well now, it's a little early to be counting stars, Miss Leila. 
LEILA: I'm waiting for Mister Spock and the Captain to transport down. They had some equipment to be moved. But it's been so long. I wish he'd come back. 
MCCOY: Well, now, I think I can fix that for you. Enterprise?

[Bridge]

(Spock is back in uniform and under the console when it beeps.)
SPOCK: Enterprise. Spock here.

[Field]

LEILA: This is Leila. I borrowed the doctor's communicator. I was worried something might have happened to you.

[Bridge]

LEILA [OC]: You are all right, aren't you? 
SPOCK: Yes. Yes. I'm quite well.

[Field]

LEILA: Can I come aboard? I've never seen a starship before

[Bridge]

LEILA [OC]: and I want to talk to you. 
SPOCK: Are you still at the beam down point, and is the doctor there?

[Field]

LEILA: Yes to both questions.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Give your communicator back to Doctor McCoy. You won't need it to beam up. It'll take a few moments. Just wait there. Out. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, Miss Kalomi is strictly your concern, but should you talk to her while she's still under the influence of the spores? 
SPOCK: I'll be back shortly, Captain.

[Transporter room]

(Once she's materialised she rushes to put her arms around him, but he doesn't respond.) 
LEILA: You're no longer with us, are you? I felt something was wrong. 
SPOCK: It was necessary. 
LEILA: Come back to the planet with me. You can belong again. Come back with me, please. 
SPOCK: I can't. 
LEILA: I love you. I said that six years ago, and I can't seem to stop repeating myself. On Earth, you couldn't give anything of yourself. You couldn't even put your arms around me. We couldn't have anything together there. We couldn't have anything together anyplace else. We're happy here. (crying) I can't lose you now, Mister Spock. I can't. 
SPOCK: I have a responsibility to this ship, to that man on the Bridge. I am what I am, Leila, and if there are self-made purgatories, then we all have to live in them. Mine can be no worse than someone else's. 
LEILA: I have lost you, haven't I? And not only you, I've lost all of it. The spores. I've lost them, too. 
KIRK: The Captain discovered that strong emotions and needs destroy the spore influence. 
LEILA: And this is for my good? Do you mind if I say I still love you? You never told me if you had another name, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: (wiping away her tears) You couldn't pronounce it.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: They'll not hear this, of course. It'll be more a sensation of feeling it. 
KIRK: As though somebody had put itching powder on their skin. 
SPOCK: Precisely. It should begin to work on their nerves in a few minutes.

[Field] SULU: Sorry, DeSalle. 
DESALLE: What do you think you're doing? 
SULU: I said I was sorry. 
DESALLE: More like you're clumsy. 
SULU: If you hadn't gotten in my way 
(They fight with their spades.) 
(Elsewhere around the settlement, fights are breaking out.) 
KELOWITZ: Come on. Break it up. Break it up.

[Pasture]

(McCoy is resting under a tree, with a tall glass of mint julep in his hand.) 
ELIAS: Well, Doctor, I've been thinking about what sort of work I could assign you to. 
MCCOY: What do you mean, what sort of work? I'm a doctor. 
ELIAS: Not any more, of course. We don't need you. Not as a doctor. 
MCCOY: Oh, no? Would you like to see how fast I can put you in a hospital? 
ELIAS: I am the leader of this colony. I'll assign you whatever work I think suitable. 
MCCOY: Just a minute. You'd better make me a mechanic. Then I can treat little tin gods like you. (He punches Elias) Sorry, Sandoval. I don't know what made me do that. 
ELIAS: We've done nothing here. No accomplishments, no progress. Three years wasted. We wanted to make this planet a garden. 
MCCOY: You can't stay here. You can't survive without the spores. After you've cleared at the Starbase, you could be relocated. It depends upon what you want. 
ELIAS: I think I'd, I think we'd like to get some work done. The work we started out to do. 
MCCOY: Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Enterprise. Spock here.

[Pasture]

MCCOY: This is McCoy. Sandoval would like to talk to the Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Just a moment. They're all beginning to call in, Captain. Rather contritely, I should say. Sandoval wishes to speak to you. 
KIRK: Put him on the speaker. Kirk here.

[Pasture]

ELIAS: Oh, Captain, as I understood it, you were to transport us to Starbase Twenty Seven. We'll give you every co-operation.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Start making preparations, Mister Sandoval. We'll begin transporting your people aboard as soon as more of our crew checks in.

[Bridge]

(Later, when everyone is back on duty.) 
MCCOY: Well, Jim, I've just examined the last of the colonists, and they're all in absolutely perfect, perfect health. A fringe benefit left over by the spores. 
KIRK: Good. 
MCCOY: Well, that's the second time man's been thrown out of paradise. 
KIRK: No, no, Bones. This time we walked out on our own. Maybe we weren't meant for paradise. Maybe we were meant to fight our way through. Struggle, claw our way up, scratch for every inch of the way. Maybe we can't stroll to the music of the lute. We must march to the sound of drums. 
SPOCK: Poetry, Captain. Non-regulation. 
KIRK: We haven't heard much from you about Omicron Ceti Three, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: I have little to say about it, Captain, except that for the first time in my life I was happy.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

A Taste of Armageddon
Stardate: 3192.1
Original Airdate: 23 Feb, 1967

Captain's log, stardate 3192.1. The Enterprise is en route to star cluster NGC 321. Objective, to open diplomatic relations with the civilisations known to be there. We have sent a message to Eminiar Seven, principal planet of the star cluster, informing them of our friendly intentions. We are awaiting an answer.
[Bridge]

KIRK: Nothing yet, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Nothing, Captain. Hailing frequencies are open. 
(Ambassador Fox enters the Bridge from the turbolift.) 
FOX: Have you received an answer to your message yet, Captain? 
KIRK: Nothing yet, Ambassador. We're awaiting a reply. Today's the first time we've had any evidence they've picked up our signal. 
UHURA: Captain, message coming in from Eminiar Seven. Sir, it's code seven-ten. 
KIRK: Are you sure? 
UHURA: Positive. It repeats over and over. 
FOX: Is that supposed to mean something? 
KIRK: Code seven-ten means under no circumstances are we to approach that planet. No circumstances what so ever. 
FOX: You will disregard that signal, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Fox, it is their planet. 
FOX: Captain, in the past twenty years, thousands of lives have been lost in this quadrant. Lives that could have been saved if the Federation had a treaty port here. We mean to have that port and I'm here to get it. 
KIRK: By disregarding code seven-ten, you might well involve us in an interplanetary war. 
FOX: I'm quite prepared to take that risk. 
KIRK: You are. I'm thinking about this ship, my crew. 
FOX: I have my orders, Captain, and now you have yours. You will proceed on course. Achieve orbit status and just leave the rest to me. You're well aware that my mission gives me the power of command. I now exercise it. You will proceed on course. That's a direct order. 
(He leaves.) 
SPOCK: In view of code seven-ten, Captain, may I suggest 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. This is the Captain. Condition Yellow Alert. Phaser crews stand by. Deflector shields up. We're going in. Peacefully, I hope. But peacefully or not, we're going in.

Captain's log, stardate 3192.5. Now in standard orbit around planet Eminiar Seven. My orders are clear. We must establish diplomatic relations at all cost. Preparing to beam down to planet surface.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: We know very little about them. Their civilisation is advanced. They've had space flight for several centuries, but they've never ventured beyond their own solar system. When first contacted more than fifty years ago, Eminiar Seven was at war with its nearest neighbour. 
KIRK: Anything else? 
SPOCK: The Earth expedition making the report failed to return from its mission. The USS Valiant. Listed as missing in space. 
FOX: Kirk, what's this about you going down alone? 
KIRK: Not alone. I'm taking some security people with me. 
FOX: It is my prerogative. 
KIRK: I can't risk beaming you down there until I know what kind of reception you're going to receive. Your safety is my responsibility. Those are my orders, sir. Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Transporter room standing by, Captain. 
KIRK: What co-ordinates? 
SPOCK: We've selected a site which from the traffic seems to be near an official establishment. 
KIRK: Final sensor readings? 
SPOCK: No hostility directed toward us. No apparent notice taken of us at all, which seems strange. They did scan us when we assumed orbit. Obviously, they know we're here. 
KIRK: Ship's defences? 
SPOCK: Screens down, but all defensive details on general alert status, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. Landing party will pick up phaser number one's from the arsenal. Keep them inconspicuous. Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: The ship is yours. Take care of her until I come back. 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, sir. And have a bonny trip. 
KIRK: We'll do our best. Let's go.

[Eminiar Seven]

(A young woman in black tights and a skillfully draped scarf is accompanied by two guards. She uses a scanning device.) 
MEA: They will materialise there. Remember your instructions; They are to be treated correctly, nothing more. 
(Kirk, Spock, a yeoman and two guards materialise next to a sculpture) 
KIRK: I'm Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the United Federation of Planets. 
MEA: I know. I'm Mea 3. I congratulate you on your instrumentation. You've come directly to the Division of Control. If you'll follow me, please.

[Corridor]

MEA: Captain, I wish 
KIRK: Yes? 
MEA: You were warned not to come here. 
KIRK: I had orders to come here. Why did your people tell us to stay away? 
MEA: It was for your own safety, Captain. 
KIRK: I see no danger here. 
MEA: The danger exists. Nevertheless, you are here. It would be morally incorrect to do less than extend our hospitality. Anan 7 and members of the High Council await you. If you will come this way, please.

[Council Room]

(Five stern looking men sit along a table facing the door.) 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk. This is my first officer, Mister Spock, Lieutenants Galloway, Osborne, Yeoman Tamula. 
ANAN: Welcome to Eminiar Seven. Well, Captain, what can we do for you? 
KIRK: My mission is to establish diplomatic relations between your people and mine. 
ANAN: That is impossible. 
KIRK: Would you mind telling me why? 
ANAN: Because of the war. 
KIRK: You're still at war? 
ANAN: We have been at war for five hundred years. 
KIRK: You conceal it very well. Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Sir, we have completely scanned your planet. We find it highly advanced, prosperous in a material sense, comfortable for your people, and peaceful in the extreme. Yet you say you are at war. There is no evidence of this. 
ANAN: Casualties among our civilian population total from one to three million dead each year from direct enemy attack. That is one reason, Captain, why we told you to stay away. As long as your ship is orbiting our planet, it is in severe danger. 
SPOCK: With whom are you at war? 
ANAN: The third planet in our system, called Vendikar. Originally settled by our people and now a ruthless enemy. Highly advanced technologically. 
(An alarm sounds.) 
ANAN: Please excuse me. Vendikar is attacking. Mea, care for our guests. 
(The Council adjourn into an adjacent room filled with computer equipment.) 
SPOCK: Strange. 
KIRK: To say the least. 
MEA: It will not last long. 
KIRK: Don't you take shelter? 
MEA: There is no shelter, Captain. 
SPOCK: Are these attacks frequent? 
MEA: Oh yes, and we will retaliate immediately. 
(She sees an area flare on a map) 
MEA: Oh! 
KIRK: What is it? 
MEA: A hit right here in the city. 
KIRK: Do you hear any explosions, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: None, Captain. Yeoman Tamula. 
TAMULA: Sir? 
SPOCK: Tricorder readings. Radiation. Disturbances of any kind. 
(She scans the area) 
TAMULA: Working, sir. No evidence. 
KIRK: Mea, if this is an attack, may I ask what weapons the enemy is using? 
MEA: Fusion bombs, materialised by the enemy over their targets. 
KIRK: Kirk to Bridge. Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, Captain. 
KIRK: Scanners operative on the planet's surface? 
SCOTT [OC]: Of course, sir. As per orders. 
KIRK: Anything unusual? 
SCOTT [OC]: Nothing, sir. All quiet. 
KIRK: Thank you. Kirk out.

[War Room]

SAR: Look, Anan. (another flare on another screen) 
ANAN: Yes, I see it. They were warned. 
SAR: Just as it happened fifty years ago. 
ANAN: Alert a security detachment. They may be needed.

[Council Room]

(Anan rejoins the group) 
ANAN: It's a vicious attack, extremely destructive. Fortunately, our defences are firming, but our casualties are high. Very high. 
KIRK: Sir, I have been in contact with my ship, which has had this entire planet under surveillance. All during this so-called attack of yours, we have been monitoring you. There's been no attack, no explosions, no radiations, no disturbances whatsoever. If this is some sort of game you're playing 
ANAN: This is no game, Captain. Half a million people have just been killed. Activate the attack units, Sar. 
SAR: Yes, Councilman. 
ANAN: Launch immediate counter attack. 
SPOCK: Computers, Captain. They fight their war with computers. Totally. 
ANAN: Yes, of course. 
KIRK: Computer don't kill a half million people. 
ANAN: Deaths have been registered. Of course they have twenty four hours to report. 
KIRK: To report? 
ANAN: To our disintegration machines. You must understand, Captain, we have been at war for five hundred years. Under ordinary conditions, no civilisation could withstand that. But we have reached a solution. 
SPOCK: Then the attack by Vendikar was theoretical. 
ANAN: Oh, no, quite real. An attack is mathematically launched. I lost my wife in the last attack. Our civilisation lives. The people die, but our culture goes on. 
KIRK: You mean to tell me your people just walk into a disintegration machine when they're told to? 
ANAN: We have a high consciousness of duty, Captain. 
SPOCK: There is a certain scientific logic about it. 
ANAN: I'm glad you approve. 
SPOCK: I do not approve. I understand. 
ANAN: Good. Then you will recall I warned you not to come here. You chose to ignore my warning. I'm sorry, but it's happened. 
KIRK: What has happened? 
ANAN: Once your ship was in orbit about our planet, it became a legitimate target. It has been classified destroyed by a tricobalt satellite explosion. All persons aboard your ship have twenty four hours to report to our disintegration machines. In order to ensure their co-operation, I have ordered you, Captain, and your party held in custody until they surrender. If possible, we shall spare your ship, Captain, but its passengers and crew are already dead.

Captain's log, delayed. The Enterprise, in orbit about Eminiar Seven, has been declared a casualty of an incredible war fought by computers. I and my landing party, though apparently not included as casualties aboard the Enterprise, are confined on the planet's surface, awaiting what?

[Room]

MEA: I have been sent to ask if you require anything. 
KIRK: We require a great deal. I wish to speak to Anan Seven. 
MEA: He's busy co-ordinating casualty lists. 
KIRK: He'll have more casualty lists than he knows what to do with if he doesn't get in here and talk to me. 
MEA: Don't you understand? Our duty 
KIRK: Your duty doesn't include stepping into a disintegrator and disappearing. 
MEA: I'm afraid mine does, Captain. I too have been declared a casualty. I must report to a disintegrator by noon tomorrow. 
KIRK: Is that all it means to you? To report and die? 
MEA: My life is as dear to me as yours is to you, Captain. 
KIRK: Then how can you stand 
MEA: Don't you see? If I refuse to report, and others refuse, then Vendikar would have no choice but to launch real weapons. We would have to do the same to defend ourselves. More than people would die then. A whole civilisation would be destroyed. Surely you can see that ours is a better way. 
KIRK: No, I don't see that at all. 
MEA: It's been our way for almost five hundred years. Is there anything I can bring you? 
KIRK: Yes. Anan Seven.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: I tell you, we should have heard something by now. 
SCOTT: Aye, Doctor, that we should, but we haven't, and we cannot raise them. You know, if there'd been trouble, they should have at least managed to get word back to us. 
MCCOY: We can't just sit here. 
SCOTT: What would you suggest? 
MCCOY: Me? I'm a doctor. If I were an officer of the line, I'd
SCOTT: Would you have me open fire? 
MCCOY: Of course not. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, message coming in from the Captain. 
SCOTT: Scott here, Captain. 
KIRK: Good news, Mister Scott. The Eminians have agreed to the establishment of full normal diplomatic relations. 
SCOTT: Mister Fox'll be glad to hear about that. 
KIRK: They've also extended an invitation to all personnel to come ashore, for shore leave. They've assured me that our people will have a wonderful time. 
SCOTT: Er, Captain?

[War Room]

(It sounds like Kirk but it isn't.) ANAN: Yes, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT [OC]: All personnel? 
ANAN: All personnel. We'll transport up trained Eminians to assume support positions. Those are my orders, Mister Scott.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, aye, Captain. We'll start forming shore parties immediately. Scott out. Well now, what do you think of that? 
MCCOY: I don't know. 
SCOTT: Well, I do. Computer, last message received and recorded from Captain Kirk. 
COMPUTER: In place. 
SCOTT: Run it through analyser. Question. Is it or is it not the Captain's voice? 
COMPUTER: Negative. A close copy. 
SCOTT: A voice duplicator? 
COMPUTER: Ninety eight percent probability. 
SCOTT: Well, they've got them, Doctor, and now they're trying to get us.

[Room]

KIRK: Are you sure you can do it, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Limited telepathic abilities are inherent in Vulcanians, Captain. It may work. It may not. 
KIRK: Do your best. 
(Spock goes to the door and begins to slowly work his way across it. Outside, the guard starts to blink and shake his head. Spock reaches the place directly behind the guard and looks as if he is doing a mind meld through the wall. Slowly, the guard opens the door and enters. He is swiftly disarmed and knocked out.) 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: My pleasure, Captain. 
TAMULA: What do we do now, Captain? 
KIRK: We get our communicators back and try and contact the ship. Mister Spock, we'll need more weapons. 
SPOCK: I understand. 
KIRK: We'll try to take it easy, but if we're forced to kill 
(As holder of the only gun, Kirk leads the way into the corridors of the city.)

[Corridor]

(At a junction, they watch as first a young woman, then a security guard go into a booth.) 
SPOCK: An entrance, Captain, but no exit. They go in, but they do not come out. 
KIRK: A disintegration machine. 
SPOCK: So I would assume. 
(They move forward carefully and meet - ) 
KIRK: Mea. What do you think you're doing? 
MEA: I'm going 
KIRK: You're not going in there. 
MEA: But I must. 
KIRK: No you're not. 
MEA: Please. All right, don't worry about me. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, that guard. I'll cover you. 
(Spock walks nonchalantly up to the guard in charge of disintegrating the waiting queue of people.) 
SPOCK: Sir, there's a multi-legged creature crawling on your shoulder. 
(He neck-pinches him, as the rest just stare. They now have two weapons. Spock rejoins Kirk.) 
KIRK: All right, you people, clear out of the way. 
(Kirk fires at the booth.) 
MEA: What are you doing? 
KIRK: Throwing a monkey wrench into the machinery. 
MEA: You can't do this. 
KIRK: I've done it. (The booth finally blows up.) Come on, let's get out of here.

[Council Room]

SECURITY [OC]: The Federation prisoners have attacked their guard and escaped. They are armed. Disintegration station number twelve destroyed, Councilman, apparently by disruptor fire. 
ANAN: All security personnel, Federation prisoners have escaped. They are to be found. They are armed. If they resist, do what is necessary. Planetary disruptor banks, calculate orbit of star cruiser now circling. Stand by to fire. Full power. 
SECURITY [OC]: Councilman, planetary disruptor banks locked onto target. Standing by. 
ANAN: In ten seconds, open fire. Destroy the star cruiser. Those are the orders of the Council.

Ship's log, stardate 3193.0. Chief Engineer Scott recording. The Captain and First Officer are overdue and missing on the surface of Eminiar Seven. I have taken standard precautionary measures while we continue our attempts to locate them.

[Bridge]

DEPAUL: All stations reporting. Deflector screens rigged at full power. Phaser crews ready. Sensors reading zero. Correction. Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Yes, Mister DePaul? 
DEPAUL: Sensor readings just shot off the scale. 
SCOTT: Well, now. They're taking pot shots at us. Holding, Mister DePaul? 
DEPAUL: Screens firm, sir. Extremely powerful sonic vibrations. Decibels eighteen to the twelfth power. If those screens weren't up, we'd be totally disrupted by now. 
MCCOY: Well, I guess that answers our questions, Mister Scott. They're not very friendly, are they? 
SCOTT: Aye, but what about our Captain and the landing party down there somewhere? 
MCCOY: We get them out. 
SCOTT: If they're alive, and if we can find them. That's a big planet. 
MCCOY: Not too big for the Enterprise to handle if it has to. 
SCOTT: We can't fire full phasers with our screens up, and We can't lower our screens with their disruptors on us. Of course I could treat them to a few dozen photon torpedoes. 
FOX: (entering the Bridge) You'll do no such thing, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Mister Fox, we're under attack. They're trying to knock us down. 
FOX: You have taken defensive measures. 
SCOTT: Of course, but 
FOX: There are no buts. Obviously it's a misunderstanding, and one of my jobs is to clear up misunderstandings. 
MCCOY: They're holding our Captain. 
FOX: We have no proof of that. 
SCOTT: I'm responsible for the safety of this ship. 
FOX: And I'm responsible for the success of this mission, and that's more important than this ship. Is that clear? We came here to establish diplomatic relations with these people. 
SCOTT: But they're the ones who're looking for a fight, Mister Fox. 
FOX: This is a diplomatic matter. If you check your regulations, you'll find that my orders get priority. I'll try to make contact with the planetary officials. Lieutenant, open up a channel and keep it open. Tell them to expect a priority one message from me. There will be no punitive measures, gentlemen. Those are my orders. 
(He leaves the Bridge.) 
SCOTT: Diplomats. The best diplomat I know is a fully activated phaser bank.

[Room]

TAMULA: Why did we come back here, Captain? 
KIRK: The last place they'll look for us is the place we escaped from. (gives her a gun) Cover the door. 
MEA: Captain, you've got to let me go. My time is almost up. 
KIRK: Are you that anxious to die? 
MEA: You don't understand. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, how did that little raid work out? 
SPOCK: We captured four of their disrupter-type weapons, two complete outfits of male clothing, and perhaps most important of all, one of their communication devices. 
KIRK: Will it reach the ship? 
SPOCK: Not at this time. Its range is restricted in comparison with ours. I may be able to alter its components, but it will take time. 
KIRK: Work on it. We've got to contact the ship. Mea, I want you to give me a complete layout of this building complex. How do I get to the War Room? 
MEA: No! 
KIRK: Now listen to me. I'm trying to help you. To save your life and the lives of millions like you. If you help me, maybe I can do it. If you don't, you'll die, we'll die, and the killing will go on. Or are you that fond of the war? 
MEA: What are you going to do? 
KIRK: We're going to try and stop the killing. We're trying to help. Believe me. 
MEA: I believe you, but 
KIRK: Tell me what I want to know. Please.

[Council Room]

ANAN: Time is running out. We have been unable to destroy the Earth ship. One of our disintegration chambers has been eliminated and we have already fallen far behind in our quota. This is a grave crisis and I am at a loss to know how to proceed. 
SAR: The central channel, Anan. The Earth ambassador's calling with an urgent message. 
ANAN: What is the great immorality, open honesty or a deception which may save our lives? Put me through to the Earth Ambassador.

[Bridge]

UHURA: A channel is open, Mister Ambassador. You will be speaking to Anan Seven, head of the High Council of the Eminian Union. 
FOX: Mister Anan, this is Robert Fox

[Council Room]

FOX [OC]: Special Ambassador for the United Federation of Planets. 
ANAN: A great honour, Mister Ambassador.

[Bridge]

FOX: We have approached you openly

[Council Room]

FOX [OC]: With the intent of establishing formal and friendly relations between our peoples, but now,

[Bridge]

FOX: For some reason, you have attacked us, and apparently you're holding several special representatives of our Federation.

[Council Room]

ANAN: A mistake, Mister Ambassador. We are at war.

[Bridge]

ANAN [OC]: An error in our sensors indicated that your ship was about to attack us.

[Council Room]

ANAN: I'm giving orders that our attack be stopped.

[Bridge]

ANAN [OC]: Now, as to your representatives, you have my sacred word as an Eminian that they are alive and well. 
FOX: Thank you. I thought perhaps it was all a mistake. 
DEPAUL: Mister Scott, disruptor beams are no longer hitting us. 
SCOTT: Maintain status, Mister DePaul. 
ANAN [OC]: We are most anxious to establish relations with you, Mister Fox.

[Council Room]

ANAN: We will make arrangements to receive you. (to Sar, closing the channel) The minute their screens are down, open fire. 
SAR: Yes, Councilman. 
ANAN: (reopening the channel) I apologise deeply for the misunderstanding. These are trying times for us, you understand.

[Bridge]

FOX: I understand. Mister Anan, I presume that you have our ship's Captain on hand when I beam down.

[Council Room]

ANAN: He will be there, sir.

[Bridge]

ANAN [OC]: I give you my word. 
FOX: I'm sure that from this day forward, your planet and our Federation will attain the deepest friendship. I look forward to seeing you. 
(He gestures to Uhura to end transmission.) 
FOX: Diplomacy, gentlemen, should be a job left to diplomats. You will, of course, immediately resume a peaceful status. 
SCOTT: No, sir, I will not. 
FOX: What did you say? 
SCOTT: I'll not lower the screens, not until the Captain tells me to. 
FOX: You are taking orders from me. You will lower the screens as a sign of good faith. My authority. 
SCOTT: I know about your authority, but the screens stay up. 
MCCOY: Mister Fox, they faked a message from the Captain, they've launched an attack against our ship. Now you want us to trust them openly? 
FOX: I want you and expect you to obey my lawful orders. 
SCOTT: No, sir. I won't lower the screens. 
FOX: Your refusal to comply with my orders has endangered the entire success of this mission. I can have you sent to a penal colony for this. 
SCOTT: That you can, sir, but I won't lower the screens. 
FOX: Your name will figure prominently in my report to the Federation Central. 
(Fox leaves the Bridge) 
MCCOY: Well, Scotty, now you've done it. 
SCOTT: Aye. The haggis is in the fire for sure, but I'll not lower my defences on the word of that mealy-mouthed gentleman down below. Not until I know what happened to the Captain.

[Anan's room]

(Kirk enters, quietly, but Anan knows he is there without turning around.) 
ANAN: Won't you join me in a drink, Captain? You'll find our trova most interesting. 
KIRK: I didn't come to drink. 
ANAN: I assume that is what you used to destroy disintegration chamber number twelve. 
KIRK: A very efficient weapon. I'm not afraid of using it. 
ANAN: My first impression was correct. You are a barbarian. 
KIRK: I am? 
ANAN: Don't sound so incredulous, Captain. Of course you are. We all are. A killer first, a builder second. A hunter, a warrior, and let's be honest, a murderer. That is our joint heritage, is it not? 
KIRK: We're less cold-blooded about it than you are. 
ANAN: What do you want, Captain? 
KIRK: I want to contact my ship. Where are my communicators? 
ANAN: In a safe place. 
KIRK: You take a lot of chances, Councilman. 
ANAN: You're worried about your ship, Captain. I'm trying to save a world. 
KIRK: If I were you, I'd think about saving my life. 
ANAN: Won't you have a drink, Captain? 
(Kirk pours himself a slug of trova, and as he turns his back, Anan presses concealed buttons.) 
ANAN: And then we can discuss our differences. 
KIRK: I'm not interested in discussing our differences. You don't seem to realise the risk you're taking. We don't make war with computers and herd the casualties into suicide stations. We make the real thing, Councilman. I could destroy this planet. 
ANAN: Why do you think I don't let you talk to your ship ? 
KIRK: I don't need the ship for that. 
ANAN: You mean, all by yourself with a disruptor, you can destroy this planet? 
KIRK: That's exactly what I mean. 
ANAN: I had no idea you were so formidable. 
KIRK: You seem to think I'm joking. Where are the communicators? 
ANAN: If I told you, Captain, would you walk right out and get them? 
KIRK: Something like that. 
ANAN: Very well, Captain. They're in the War Room. Go left down the corridor, left again. They are unguarded.

[Corridor]

(Kirk gestures Anan to leave in front of him, and pushes him into the first guard outside the door. Then Kirk tackles the second guard, but finally the pair knock him out.) 
ANAN: Is he alive? Pity. Man like that would have preferred to die fighting. Take him to the Council Room. 
(Kirk is half-dragged away)

[Eminiar Seven]

(Fox and his aide beam down to exactly the same place as the original landing party.) 
ANAN: Ambassador Fox? 
FOX: I am Robert Fox. Have I the honour of addressing Anan Seven? 
ANAN: Welcome to Eminiar, Mister Ambassador.

[Corridor]

ANAN: Mister Ambassador, I am truly sorry for what must happen. 
FOX: I beg your pardon? 
ANAN: You and your party have been declared war casualties. You will be taken immediately to one of our casualty stations so that your deaths may be recorded. 
FOX: You mean we are to be killed? 
ANAN: That is correct, Mister Ambassador. I regret it very much, but there is nothing I can do about it.

[Room]

(The two security guards are in Eminian uniform and look like something out of Thunderbirds - the puppet show, that is.) 
SPOCK: Spock to Enterprise, come in.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Mister Scott, it's Mister Spock. 
SCOTT: Scotty here, Mister Spock. Go ahead.

[Room]

SPOCK: Is the ship all right? 
SCOTT [OC]: We've been through a bit, but we're all right now. How about the Captain and you? 
SPOCK: The Captain is overdue. We've suffered no casualties among us. This is important. Under no circumstances shall any one beam down from the Enterprise. They'd be killed the moment they arrived.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: That ties it. That popinjay Fox went down a couple minutes ago.

[Room]

SPOCK: The Ambassador?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I knew it had a rotten ring to it.

[Room]

SPOCK: Orbit out to maximum phaser range and stand by for further orders. Spock out. 
TAMULA: What are you going to do, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Find the Ambassador and the Captain. Yeoman Tamula, you stay here and prevent this young lady from immolating herself. Knock her down if necessary. This is a killing situation. Do what you must to protect yourself. Clear? 
TAMULA: Yes, sir.

[Disintegration chamber]

(A guard is trying to force Fox inside when Spock and the two guards arrive.) 
FOX: What are you doing? I'm a representative of the United Federation of Planets! A special representative! 
GUARD: Get in line. 
(They disarm and disable the Eminian guards) 
FOX: Spock! 
SPOCK: Please, Mister Fox. Ladies and gentlemen, please move quickly away from the chamber or you may be injured. 
FOX: What are you doing, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Practicing a peculiar variety of diplomacy, sir. 
(He uses the disrupter to destroy the disintegration chamber) 
SPOCK: I'll take you to a place of comparative safety, then I must find the Captain. 
FOX: They have him. The guards told us. They took him to the Council Room under heavy guard. 
SPOCK: By now, Mister Ambassador, I'm sure you realise that normal diplomatic procedures are ineffective here. 
FOX: I've never been a soldier, Mister Spock, but I learn very quickly. 
SPOCK: Very well, sir. We need all the help we can get.

[Council Room]

ANAN: Captain, surely you can see the position we are in. If your people do not report to our disintegration chambers, it is a violation of an agreement that dates back five hundred years. 
KIRK: My people are not responsible for your agreements. 
ANAN: You will be responsible for an escalation that will destroy everything. Millions of people horribly killed. Complete destruction of our culture here and yes, the culture on Vendikar. Disaster, disease, starvation, horrible, lingering death, pain and anguish! 
KIRK: That seems to frighten you. 
ANAN: It would frighten any sane man. 
KIRK: Yes. You're quite right. 
ANAN: Don't you understand, Captain? We have done away with all that. Now you are threatening to bring it down on us again. Are those five hundred people of yours more important than the hundreds of millions of innocent people on Eminiar and Vendikar? What kind of monster are you? 
KIRK: I'm a barbarian. You said it yourself. 
ANAN: I had hoped I'd spoken only figuratively. 
KIRK: Oh, no. You were quite accurate. I plan to prove it to you. 
ANAN: Open a channel to the Enterprise. You give me no choice, Captain. We are not bandits, but you force us to act as bandits. 
SCOTT [OC]: This is the USS Enterprise. 
KIRK: Scotty, General Order Twenty Four. Two hours! In two hours! 
ANAN: Enterprise, this is Anan Seven, First Councilman of the High Council of Eminiar.

[Bridge]

ANAN [OC]: We hold your Captain, his party, your Ambassador and his party prisoners.

[Council Room]

ANAN: Unless you immediately start transportation of all personnel aboard your ship to the surface, the hostages will be killed. You have thirty minutes. I mean it, Captain. 
KIRK: All that it means is that I won't be around for the destruction. You heard me give General Order Twenty Four. That means in two hours the Enterprise will destroy Eminiar Seven. 
ANAN: Planetary defence System, open fire on the Enterprise! 
SECURITY [OC]: I'm sorry, Councilman. The target has moved out of range. 
ANAN: You wouldn't do this. Hundreds of millions of people. 
KIRK: I didn't start it, Councilman, but I'm liable to finish it. 
(Meanwhile Spock and his group are moving through the corridors. Fox's aide gets injured in one weapons exchange so they leave him behind.) 
SAR: Councilman, I received a message from Vendikar. Our time is nearly up. Our quota is short by several thousand. They accuse us of reneging on the treaty. 
ANAN: You see? It's started. 
KIRK: You're wrong. It hasn't begun. 
SECURITY [OC]: Councilman, Disintegrator station eleven has been destroyed. Guard positions in tunnels eight and ten fail to answer. Earth party reported seen in corridor 4A. 
KIRK: You have less than two hours, Councilman. 
ANAN: What I want or don't want has nothing to do with it. Escalation is automatic. You can stop it! 
KIRK: Stop it? I'm counting on it.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Open a channel, Lieutenant. This is the commander of the USS Enterprise.

[Council Room]

SCOTT [OC]: All cities and installations on Eminiar Seven have been located, identified, and fed into our fire-control system. In one hour and forty five minutes

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The entire inhabited surface of your planet will be destroyed.

[Council Room]

SCOTT: You have that long to surrender your hostages. 
ANAN: What can I do? Somebody, please tell me. 
(Kirk lures a guard to him, knocks him down, gets his weapon and holds off the others.) 
KIRK: Hold it! Over there. You, over there. Move, move, move. 
(Everyone goes over against a wall, while Kirk gets a second weapon and stands by the council table.) 
KIRK: Now we'll talk. 
(Spock and Fox enter.) 
SPOCK: I had assumed you needed help. I see I'm in error. 
KIRK: No. I need the help. In there, Mister Spock. 
(Spock enters the War Room) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in, Scotty. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, Captain, are you all right? 
KIRK: Everything's secure here. Maintain position. If everything goes according to plan, you can beam us up in ten minutes. If you don't hear from us, carry out General Order Twenty Four on schedule. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, aye, Captain. Is there anything else we can do? 
KIRK: Cross your fingers. Kirk out. Death, destruction, disease, horror. That's what war is all about, Anan. That's what makes it a thing to be avoided. You've made it neat and painless. So neat and painless, you've had no reason to stop it. And you've had it for five hundred years. Since it seems to be the only way I can save my crew and my ship, I'm going to end it for you, one way or another. Mister Ambassador. 
FOX: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Would you mind taking these people out into the corridor and holding them there. 
FOX: Gentlemen, if you please. 
KIRK: (to Sar) You. Come with me. Mister Osborne.

[War Room]

KIRK: Our communicators, weapons. 
(Sar opens a cupboard and Osborne gets them.) 
KIRK: All right, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: These are the attack computers, Captain. That one's defence, that one computes the casualties. They're all tied in with a subspace transmission unit, which keeps them in constant contact with their Vendikan counterparts. 
KIRK: Yes, go on. 
SPOCK: At the moment contact is broken, it abrogates the agreement between the two warring parties. 
SAR: What are you going to do? 
SPOCK: This one's the key. The circuit is now locked. Destroy this one, and they'll all go. 
KIRK: Good. Get him out of here. 
SAR: Now wait a minute. Please, please! 
(Kirk uses his phaser to destroy the computer.) 
KIRK: Let's go.

[Corridor]

KIRK: Against the wall! 
(There is a very satisfying series of explosions.) 
ANAN: You realise what you have done? 
KIRK: Yes, I do. I've given you back the horrors of war. The Vendikans now assume that you've broken your agreement and that you're preparing to wage real war with real weapons. They'll want do the same. Only the next attack they launch will do a lot more than count up numbers in a computer. They'll destroy cities, devastate your planet. You of course will want to retaliate. If I were you, I'd start making bombs. Yes, Councilman, you have a real war on your hands. You can either wage it with real weapons, or you might consider an alternative. Put an end to it. Make peace. 
ANAN: There can be no peace. Don't you see? We've admitted it to ourselves. We're a killer species. It's instinctive. It's the same with you. Your General Order Twenty Four. 
KIRK: All right. It's instinctive. But the instinct can be fought. We're human beings with the blood of a million savage years on our hands, but we can stop it. We can admit that we're killers, but we're not going to kill today. That's all it takes. Knowing that we won't kill today. Contact Vendikar. I think you'll find that they're just as terrified, appalled, horrified as you are, that they'll do anything to avoid the alternative I've given you. Peace or utter destruction. It's up to you. 
FOX: As a third party interested only in peace and the establishment of normal relations, I should be glad to offer my services as negotiator between you and Vendikar. I've had some small experiences in such matters. 
ANAN: There may be a chance. We have a direct channel with Vendikar's High Council. It hasn't been used in centuries. 
FOX: Then it's long overdue. Shall we go? 
(Anan and Fox leave.) 
SPOCK: There's a chance it may work, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, Captain. 
KIRK: Cancel implementation of General Order Twenty Four. Alert transporter room. We're ready to beam up.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Lay in a course for Argona Two, Navigator. Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Space details set, Captain. 
UHURA: Message from Eminiar Seven, Captain. Ambassador Fox reports negotiations underway with Vendikar. Outlook hopeful. 
KIRK: Good. 
SPOCK: Captain, you took a big chance. 
KIRK: Did I, Mister Spock? They've been killing three million people a year. It had been going on for five hundred years. An actual attack wouldn't have killed any more people than one of their computer attacks, but it would have ended their ability to make war. The fighting would have been over permanently. 
MCCOY: But you didn't know that it would work. 
KIRK: No. It was a calculated risk. Still, the Eminians keep a very orderly society, and actual war is a very messy business. A very, very messy business. I had a feeling that they would do anything to avoid it, even talk peace. 
SPOCK: A feeling is not much to go on. 
KIRK: Sometimes a feeling, Mister Spock, is all we humans have to go on. 
SPOCK: Captain, you almost make me believe in luck. 
KIRK: Why, Mister Spock, you almost make me believe in miracles.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios INC. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Space Seed
Stardate: 3141.9
Original Airdate: 16 Feb, 1967

[Bridge]
SPINELLI: Coming up on it fast, sir. 
KIRK: Are you certain of your sensor readings? 
SPOCK: Definitely a space vessel of some type. 
KIRK: Origin? 
SPOCK: Unknown. It could hardly be an Earth ship. There have been no flights into this sector for years. 
UHURA: I'm picking up a signal, sir. (a series of beeps comes over the speakers) Captain, that's the old Morse code call signal. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
UHURA: CQ. CQ. 
KIRK: We're reading it, Lieutenant. I thought you said it couldn't possibly be an Earth vessel. 
SPOCK: I fail to understand why it always gives you pleasure to see me proven wrong. 
KIRK: An emotional Earth weakness of mine. There it is. 
(The ship appears on the viewscreen.) 
KIRK: An old Earth vessel, similar to the DY=500 class. 
SPOCK: Much older. DY-100 class, to be exact. Captain, the last such vessel was built centuries ago, back in the 1990s. 
KIRK: Then it's a derelict, its signal left on automatic. 
SPOCK: Or an old Earth ship being used by aliens. 
KIRK: Weapons status. 
WEAPONS [OC]: Deflector shields on maximum. Phasers manned, sir. 
KIRK: Bioscanners report. 
MCCOY [OC]: Life science bioscanners are picking up heart beats from over there. Can't be human, though. They're too faint, and average only four beats per minute. 
SPOCK: Sensor reading, Captain. Some sort of equipment functioning on that vessel. 
KIRK: All decks go to full alert. 
(Enterprise comes alongside the smaller ship, which is still as big as the engineering hull.

Captain's log, stardate 3141.9. A full hour has elapsed since interception of the strange vessel. Our presence alongside is still being completely ignored. Although our sensors continue to show signs of equipment and life aboard, there has been no indication of danger to us.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Weapons department, maintain battle stations. All other decks standby alert. 
UHURA: All decks acknowledging, sir. 
MCCOY: We're continuing to pick up some form of heart action over there. Very faint, very slow. Seems to be coming from about sixty or seventy bodies, as near as I can tell. 
KIRK: Alien bodies, Bones? 
MCCOY: Could be. There's no sign of breathing or other form of respiration. 
SPOCK: Hull surface is pitted with meteor scars. However, scanners make out a name. SS Botany Bay. 
KIRK: Then you can check the registry. 
SPOCK: No such vessel listed. Records of that period are fragmentary, however. The mid=1990s was the era of your last so-called World War. 
MCCOY: The Eugenics Wars. 
SPOCK: Of course. Your attempt to improve the race through selective breeding. 
MCCOY: Now, wait a minute. Not our attempt, Mister Spock. A group of ambitious scientists. I'm sure you know the type. Devoted to logic, completely unemotional 
KIRK: All right, all right, gentlemen. As you were. Rig for tractor beam, Helm. Lock onto that vessel. 
SPINELLI: Rigging for tractor beam, sir. 
KIRK: The Bridge is yours, Mister Spock. Care to join the landing party, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Well, if you're actually giving me a choice 
KIRK: I'm not. Oh, I'll need somebody familiar with the late 20th-Century Earth. Here's a chance for that historian to do something for a change. What's her name? McIvers? 
SPOCK: Lieutenant McGivers.

[McGiver's quarters]

(Lt McGivers is just about to settle down to some painting, when) 
SPOCK [OC]: Attention. The following personnel report to transporter room. Engineering Officer Scott, Lieutenant McGivers. Acknowledge. 
MARLA: McGivers. On my way.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Well, it looks like that ship was expecting us. We read heat coming on, complete oxygen atmosphere. 
KIRK: Very interesting. You ready, Bones? 
MCCOY: No. I signed aboard this ship to practice medicine, not to have my atoms scattered back and forth across space by this gadget. 
KIRK: You're an old-fashioned boy, McCoy. Where's that historian? (McGivers enters) Come on, Lieutenant 
MARLA: McGivers, sir. 
KIRK: Energise.

[SS Botany Bay]

(Men and women are lying in clear-sided compartments, seemingly asleep.) KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT: Definitely Earth-type mechanism, sir. Twentieth century vessel. Old type atomic power. Bulky, solid. I think they used to call them transistor units. I'd love to tear this baby apart. 
MARLA: Captain, it's a sleeper ship. 
KIRK: Suspended animation. 
MARLA: I've seen old photographs of this. Necessary because of the time involved in space travel until about the year 2018. It took years just to travel from one planet to another. 
KIRK: Is it possible they're still alive after centuries of travel? 
MCCOY: It's theoretically possible. I've never heard of it being tested for this long a period. 
MARLA: What a handsome group of people. 
MCCOY: Jim, I have a new reading. The lights must have triggered some mechanism. 
MARLA: Captain, look here. 
(They go to the compartment holding a dark-haired man.) 
KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT: Beats me what's happening. 
MCCOY: We've triggered something, all right. His heart beat's increasing. Now passing eight beats per minute. There are some signs of respiration beginning. 
SCOTT: This one was probably programmed to be triggered first. 
KIRK: Could he be the leader? The leader. Lieutenant? 
MARLA: (dragging herself back from just gazing at the man) Yes, sir. The leader was often set to revive first. This would allow him to decide whether the conditions warranted revival of the others. 
MCCOY: Heart beat now approaching forty per minute. The respiration pattern is firming up. 
MARLA: From the northern India area, I'd guess. Probably a Sikh. They were the most fantastic warriors. 
MCCOY: Heart beat now fifty two and increasing. 
KIRK: The others? 
SCOTT: There's no change, and they're mixed types. Western, mid-European, Latin, Oriental. 
MARLA: A man from the twentieth century coming alive. 
MCCOY: Maybe. Heart beat dropping. 
KIRK: Circuit shorting. 
SCOTT: Probably some dust. 
MCCOY: Heartbeat now thirty, dropping fast. It's a heart flutter. He's dying. 
MARLA: Do something, Captain. 
KIRK: Can we? 
SCOTT: It'd take an hour to figure it out. 
KIRK: What happens if we get him out of there? 
MCCOY: He'll die in seconds if we don't. 
(Kirk uses something metal in his hand to break the glass and open the compartment. The man is slid out on a trolley, gasping and awake. He tries to speak.) 
KHAN: How long? 
KIRK: How long have you been sleeping? Two centuries we estimate. Landing party to Enterprise. Come in. 
UHURA: Go ahead, boarding party. We read you. 
KIRK: Lock in on McCoy's beam. He's transporting back with a casualty we discovered here. 
MARLA: Magnificent.

Captain's log, supplemental. Alongside the SS Botany Bay for ten hours now. A boarding party of engineering and medical specialists are now completing their examination of the mysterious vessel. Attempts to revive other sleepers await our success or failure with the casualty already beamed over. Doctor McCoy is frankly amazed at his physical and recuperative power.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk to boarding party. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here. 
KIRK: Scotty, any records, log books of any kind?

[SS Botany Bay]

SCOTT: Negative, Captain. It appears they were in suspended animation when the ship took off.

KIRK: How many alive? 
SCOTT [OC]: Twelve units have malfunctioned, leaving seventy two still operating. Thirty of those are women. 
KIRK: Kirk out. Seventy two alive. A group of people dating back to the 1990s. A discovery of some importance, Mister Spock. There are a great many unanswered questions about those years. 
SPOCK: A strange, violent period in your history. I find no record what so ever of an SS Botany Bay. Captain, the DY-100 class vessel was designed for interplanetary travel only. With simple nuclear-powered engines, star travel was considered impractical at that time. It was ten thousand to one against their making it to another star system. And why no record of the trip? 
KIRK: Botany Bay. That was the name of a penal colony on shores of Australia, wasn't it? If they took that name for their vessel 
SPOCK: If you're suggesting this was a penal deportation vessel, you've arrived at a totally illogical conclusion. 
KIRK: Oh? 
SPOCK: Your Earth was on the verge of a dark ages. Whole populations were being bombed out of existence. A group of criminals could have been dealt with far more efficiently than wasting one of their most advanced spaceships. 
KIRK: Yes. So much for my theory. I'm still waiting to hear yours. 
SPOCK: Even a theory requires some facts, Captain. So far I have none. 
KIRK: And that irritates you, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Irritation? 
KIRK: Yeah. 
SPOCK: I am not capable of that emotion. 
KIRK: My apologies, Mister Spock. You suspect some danger in them? 
SPOCK: Insufficient facts always invites danger, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, we'd better get some facts. Rig for towing. 
SPINELLI: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Make course for Starbase Twelve. 
SPOCK: Aye, sir.

[Sickbay - medical ward]

(At Khan's bedside) 
MCCOY: (to nurse) That'll be all. (she leaves) 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: He'll live. 
KIRK: My compliments. 
MCCOY: No, I'm good, but not that good. There's something inside this man that refuses to accept death. Look at that. Even as he is now, his heart valve action has twice the power of yours and mine. Lung efficiency is fifty percent better. 
(McGivers enters) 
KIRK: An improved breed of human. That's what the Eugenics War was all about. 
MCCOY: I'd estimate he could lift us both with one arm. It will be interesting to see if his brain matches his body. 
MARLA: Doctor, will he live? 
MCCOY: It appears he will, Lieutenant. (leaves) 
KIRK: I'd like to talk to you. 
(They go out into the main area, where McCoy is at his desk) 
KIRK: If I were to rate your performance as a member of the landing party today I 
MARLA: I know, sir. I'm sorry. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, at any one time, the safety of this entire vessel might depend upon the performance of a single crewman, and the fact that you find a man strangely compelling to you personally 
MARLA: Not personally, Captain. Professionally. My profession is historian, and when I find a specimen from the past alive, I'm in the sheer delight of examining his mind. 
KIRK: And men were more adventuresome then. Bolder, more colourful. 
MARLA: Yes, sir, I think they were. 
KIRK: Good. If I can have honesty, it's easier to overlook mistakes. That's all. 
MARLA: Yes, sir. 
(She leaves) 
MCCOY: A pity you wasted your life on command, Jim. You'd have made a fair psychologist. 
KIRK: Fair? (leaves) 
(In the ward, Khan wakes, gets out of bed and does some stretches. He hears McCoy's voice.) 
MCCOY: Sickbay to lab. Anything new on those bios? 
LAB TECH [OC]: They all came out fine, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Good. McCoy out. 
(Khan sees a display of old medical instruments on the wall, takes a scalpel, and is back in bed when McCoy walks in to check on him. As the good doctor leans over, Khan grabs him by the throat and holds the blade to his neck.) 
MCCOY: Well, either choke me or cut my throat. Make up your mind. 
KHAN: English. I thought I dreamed hearing it. Where am I? 
MCCOY: You're in (a squeeze makes him lower his voice) You're in bed, holding a knife at your doctor's throat. 
KHAN: Answer my question. 
MCCOY: It would be most effective if you would cut the carotid artery, just under the left ear. 
(Khan releases him.) 
KHAN: I like a brave man. 
MCCOY: I was simply trying to avoid an argument. (takes the scalpel) You're aboard the United Spaceship Enterprise. Your vessel is in tow. 
KHAN: I remember a voice. Did I hear it say I had been sleeping for two centuries? 
MCCOY: That is correct. 
KHAN: Where is your Captain? I have many questions. 
(McCoy goes to the intercom) 
KIRK [OC]: Bridge. 
MCCOY: I have a patient here with many questions, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: On my way. 
(A little later, and Khan is sitting up more) 
KIRK: James Kirk, commanding the starship Enterprise. 
KHAN: I see. 
KIRK: And your name? 
KHAN: I have a few questions first. What is your heading? 
KIRK: Our heading is Starbase Twelve, a planet in the Gamma 400 star system. Our command base in this sector. Is that of any use to you? 
KHAN: And my people? 
KIRK: Seventy two of your life-support canisters are still functioning. 
KHAN: You will revive them. 
KIRK: As soon as we reach Starbase Twelve. 
KHAN: I see. 
KIRK: And now 
KHAN: Khan is my name. 
KIRK: Khan. Nothing else? 
KHAN: Khan. 
KIRK: What was the exact date of your lift off? We know it was sometime in the early 1990s, but 
KHAN: I find myself growing fatigued, Doctor. May we continue this questioning at some other time? 
KIRK: The facts I need, Mister Khan, will take very little time. For example, the nature of your expedition. 
MCCOY: Jim. A little later might be better. 
KHAN: Captain, I wonder if I could have something to read during my convalescence. I was once an engineer of sorts. I would be most interested in studying the technical manuals on your vessel. 
KIRK: Yes, I understand. You have two hundred years of catching up to do. 
KHAN: Precisely. 
KIRK: They're available to any patient on the viewing screen. Doctor McCoy will show you how to tie into the library tapes. 
KHAN: Thank you, Captain. You are very co-operative.

[Bridge]

KIRK: This Khan is not what I expected of a twentieth century man. 
SPOCK: I note he's making considerable use of our technical library. 
KIRK: Common courtesy, Mister Spock. He'll spend the rest of his days in our time. It's only decent to help him catch up. Would you estimate him to be a product of selective breeding? 
SPOCK: There is that possibility, Captain. His age would be correct. In 1993, a group of these young supermen did seize power simultaneously in over forty nations. 
KIRK: Well, they were hardly supermen. They were aggressive, arrogant. They began to battle among themselves. 
SPOCK: Because the scientists overlooked one fact. Superior ability breeds superior ambition. 
KIRK: Interesting, if true. They created a group of Alexanders, Napoleons. 
SPOCK: I have collected some names and made some counts. By my estimate, there were some eighty or ninety of these young supermen unaccounted for when they were finally defeated. 
KIRK: That fact isn't in the history texts. 
SPOCK: Would you reveal to war-weary populations that some eighty Napoleons might still be alive?

[Sickbay - medical ward]

(Khan is lounging, showing off his chest and calves.) 
MARLA: Ship's historian, Lieutenant 
KHAN: Marla McGivers. 
MARLA: Yes. 
KHAN: I am told you participated in my rebirth. 
MARLA: In a small way. 
KHAN: I've been reading up on starships, but they have one luxury not mentioned in the manuals. 
MARLA: I don't understand. 
KHAN: A beautiful woman. My name is Khan. Please sit and entertain me. 
(She perches on another bed) 
MARLA: I'd like some historical information about your ship, its purpose and 
KHAN: And why do you wear your hair in such an uncomplimentary fashion? 
MARLA: It's comfortable. 
KHAN: But it's not attractive. (He takes her to a mirror and loosens a couple of strands at the back.) There. Soft. Natural. Simple. 
MARLA: Mister Khan, I'm here on business. 
KHAN: You find no pleasure here? 
MARLA: My interest is scientific. Men of. That is, the world of the past. I'm sure you understand to actually talk to a man of your century 
KHAN: There. Simple, soft. Please remember. 
MARLA: Perhaps some other time, when you feel more like talking about the past. 
KHAN: I'm glad you came. Please do it again.

[Officer's Mess]

(The dining table is laid out, and the senior staff are in dress uniform.) 
MCCOY: Very impressive. Are we expecting a fleet admiral for dinner? 
KIRK: Lieutenant McGivers' idea to welcome Khan to our century. Just how strongly is she attracted to him? 
MCCOY: Well, there aren't any regulations against romance, Jim. 
KIRK: My curiosity's official, not personal, Bones. 
MCCOY: Well, he has a magnetism. Almost electric. You felt it. And it could over power McGivers with her preoccupation with the past.

[McGiver's quarters]

(A crewwoman shows Khan in.) 
KHAN: Thank you. I hoped you might guide me to our dinner engagement. (sees a picture on the wall) Very good. Fine technique. 
MARLA: It's a gladiator named Flavius. He once 
KHAN: And you've rearranged your hair for me. Excellent. 
KHAN: All bold men from the past. Richard, Leif Ericson, Napoleon. A hobby of yours, such men? 
(He uncovers a work in progress - a man in a turban) 
KHAN: I am honoured. Thank you. But I caution you. Such men dare take what they want. 
(He kisses her, and she responds.)

[Officer's mess]

(After dinner, as liqueurs are being served.) 
KIRK: Forgive my curiosity, Mister Khan, but my officers are anxious to know more about your extraordinary journey. 
SPOCK: And how you managed to keep it out of the history books. 
KHAN: Adventure, Captain. Adventure. There was little else left on Earth. 
SPOCK: There was the war to end tyranny. Many considered that a noble effort. 
KHAN: Tyranny, sir? Or an attempt to unify humanity? 
SPOCK: Unify, sir? Like a team of animals under one whip? 
KHAN: I know something of those years. Remember, it was a time of great dreams, of great aspiration. 
SPOCK: Under dozens of petty dictatorships. 
KHAN: One man would have ruled eventually. As Rome under Caesar. Think of its accomplishments. 
SPOCK: Then your sympathies were with 
KHAN: You are an excellent tactician, Captain. You let your second in command attack while you sit and watch for weakness. 
KIRK: You have a tendency to express ideas in military terms, Mister Khan. This is a social occasion. 
KHAN: It has been said that social occasions are only warfare concealed. Many prefer it more honest, more open. 
KIRK: You fled. Why? Were you afraid? 
KHAN: I've never been afraid. 
KIRK: But you left at the very time mankind needed courage. 
KHAN: We offered the world order! 
KIRK: We? 
KHAN: Excellent. Excellent. But if you will excuse me, gentlemen and ladies, I grow fatigued again. With your permission, Captain, I will return to my quarters. 
(Kirk stands, and Khan leaves.)

[Khan's quarters]

(Khan is pacing when Marla enters.) 
MARLA: I wanted to apologise. They had no right to treat you that way. 
KHAN: Quite understandable, since I'm something of a mystery to them. 
MARLA: You're no mystery to me. I know exactly who you are. 
KHAN: Do you? 
MARLA: Leif Ericson, Richard the Lion Heart, Napoleon. I don't know if you're going to like living in our time. 
KHAN: Then I'll have to remold it to my liking. 
(Embraces her)
MARLA: Please don't. 
(Pushes her away.) 
KHAN: Go. Or stay. But do it because it is what you wish to do. Well? 
MARLA: I'll stay a little longer. 
KHAN: How many minutes do you graciously offer? 
MARLA: I only meant 
KHAN: This grows tiresome. You must now ask to stay. 
MARLA: I'd like to stay. Please. 
(He takes her hand, then forces her down onto her knees.) 
KHAN: Open your heart. Will you open your heart? 
MARLA: Yes. 
KHAN: I intend to take this ship. Do you agree? 
MARLA: Oh, please don't ask me 
KHAN: I need your help. 
MARLA: You won't harm anyone? 
KHAN: Now you question me? 
MARLA: No. 
KHAN: Will you assist me? 
MARLA: Oh, please, Khan, don't ask me 
KHAN: Leave me then. Go, I say. 
MARLA: No. I promise. I'll do anything you ask.

[Briefing room]

(A large picture of their guest in on a screen) 
KIRK: Name, Khan, as we know him today. (Spock changes the picture) Name, Khan Noonien Singh. 
SPOCK: From 1992 through 1996, absolute ruler of more than a quarter of your world. From Asia through the Middle East. 
MCCOY: The last of the tyrants to be overthrown. 
SCOTT: I must confess, gentlemen. I've always held a sneaking admiration for this one. 
KIRK: He was the best of the tyrants and the most dangerous. They were supermen, in a sense. Stronger, braver, certainly more ambitious, more daring. 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, this romanticism about a ruthless dictator is 
KIRK: Mister Spock, we humans have a streak of barbarism in us. Appalling, but there, nevertheless. 
SCOTT: There were no massacres under his rule. 
SPOCK: And as little freedom. 
MCCOY: No wars until he was attacked. 
SPOCK: Gentlemen. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, you misunderstand us. We can be against him and admire him all at the same time. 
SPOCK: Illogical. 
KIRK: Totally. This is the Captain. Put a twenty four hour security on Mister Khan's quarters, effective immediately.

[Khan's quarters]

(Khan is seated at a plain table, dressed in a red Enterprise uniform shirt, when Kirk bursts in and sits opposite him.) 
KHAN: I'm sorry, Captain. I was lost in thought. My door. Locked from outside, a guard posted. 
KIRK: Unusual treatment for Khan Noonien Singh. 
KHAN: Excellent. You identified me with your computer system, I imagine. 
KIRK: I'd like those answers now. First, the purpose of your star flight. 
KHAN: A new life, a chance to build a world. Other things I doubt you would understand. 
KIRK: Why? Because I'm not a product of controlled genetics? 
KHAN: Captain, although your abilities intrigue me, you are quite honestly inferior. Mentally, physically. In fact, I am surprised how little improvement there has been in human evolution. Oh, there has been technical advancement, but, how little man himself has changed. Yes, it appears we will do well in your century, Captain. Do you have any other questions? 
KIRK: Thank you. They've all been answered. 
(He leaves, and the guard resumes his post. Khan summons his strength, wrenches the locked door open and knocks out his guard with a single blow.)

[Transporter room]

(Marla is holding a phaser on the transporter chief.) 
MARLA: Move away. 
(Khan comes in and incapacitates him with pressure at the base of the skull. She beams him to the Botany Bay.)

[SS Botany Bay]

(Freshly revived supermen and women are stretching their muscles when Khan greets them.)
KHAN: Otto. Joaquin. The trip is over. The battle begins again. Only this time it's not a world we win. It's a universe. Kati.

[Bridge]

SPINELLI: On course, sir. Warp factor two. 
KIRK: Maintain. (he answers the intercom) Bridge. 
SECURITY [OC]: Captain, Security here. Khan's escaped. 
KIRK: Sound security alert. 
UHURA: Security alert, Captain. Communication channels are down, Captain. 
(Kirk heads to the lift, but the doors do not open) 
SPOCK: Turbo elevators inoperative. Jammed, Captain. 
(Kirk rushes to a panel on the far bulkhead and pushes buttons.) 
KIRK: Atmospheric controls cut off. 
SPOCK: Useless. They're on override in Engineering. 
KIRK: Engineering. Scotty. This is the Bridge.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain! 
(He gets knocked out)

[Bridge]

KIRK: What's going on down there?

[Engineering]

KHAN: He's not able to answer you at the moment, Captain.

[Bridge]

KHAN [OC]: Your ship is mine. I have shut off the life-support system to your Bridge, and jammed up your exit routes. I am willing to negotiate. 
KIRK: Flood all decks with neural gas. 
SPOCK: Impossible. Intruder control systems inoperative. Mister Khan was very thorough in his study of our tech manuals. 
KIRK: Contact Starbase Twelve. 
UHURA: All channels are totally jammed, Captain. 
SPOCK: Brilliant. Every contingency anticipated. 
KHAN [OC]: Your air should be getting quite thin by now.

[Engineering]

KHAN: Do you surrender the Bridge?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Negative.

[Engineering]

KHAN: Academic, Captain. Refuse,

[Bridge]

KHAN [OC]: And every person on the Bridge will suffocate. 
(A little later, with everyone else unconscious, Kirk makes his last log entry.) 
Stardate 3142.8. They have my ship, discarding their own worthless vessel. Only moments of air left on the Bridge now. Commendations recommended for Lieutenant Uhura, Technicians First Class Thule and Harrison, Lieutenant Spinelli and, of course, Mister Spock. I take full responsibility. I take full (He passes out)

[Briefing room]

(The senior staff are awake again, and listening to a speech at gunpoint.) 
KHAN: Nothing ever changes, except man. Your technical accomplishments? Improve a mechanical device and you may double productivity. But improve man and you gain a thousand fold. I am such a man. Join me. I'll treat you well. I need your training to operate a vessel this complex. 
SCOTT: Where is Captain Kirk? 
KHAN: I see now I made one serious error. You are the Communications Officer? Engage the viewing screen, please. 
(Uhura doesn't move, so Joaquin drags her to the table, then hits her. As he raises his hand again, Marla intervenes.) 
MARLA: No! 
KHAN: I should have realised that suffocating together on the Bridge would create heroic camaraderie among you. But it is quite a different thing to watch it happening to someone else. Engage the viewing screen. I'm sure you recognise your medical decompression chamber here, Doctor. And the meaning of that indicator. (It is dropping to 10Hg) Your Captain will die. If you join me, Mister Spock, I will save his life. My vessel was useless. I need you and yours to select a colony planet. One with a population willing to be led by us. 
MCCOY: To be conquered by you. A starship would make that most simple, wouldn't it? 
KHAN: Each of you in turn will go in there. Die while the others watch. 
MARLA: Khan. There's no reason I must watch this, is there? 
KHAN: (Shakes his head) But I hoped you would be stronger. (She leaves) If any one of you joins me, anyone! I'll let him live. It's so useless! 
JOACHIM: We've lost the channel. How do I regain picture? 
KHAN: It does not matter. The Captain is dead. Take Mister Spock next.

[Decompression chamber]

(There is one young man standing guard by the chamber door.) 
MARLA: Khan said to watch him very closely. He may decide to co-operate. 
(As he turns to look in the porthole, she injects him. He passes out and she repressurises the chamber, freeing Kirk.) 
MARLA: Captain, I saved your life. Now please don't kill him. 
(The outer Sickbay door opens, Kirk waits and then tackles Spock's guard. Spock neck-pinches him.) 
SPOCK: Surprised to see you, Captain, though pleased. 
KIRK: I'm a little pleased myself. Situation? 
SPOCK: Khan is holding our staff in the briefing room. His men have control of the ship. 
KIRK: Our only chance is the intruder control circuit. Although he's cut it off at the Bridge. 
SPOCK: There's a relay junction down the corridor. 
KIRK: Gas all decks but this one.

[Briefing room]

KHAN: Armoury, this is Khan. Report. Rodriguez. Ling. McPherson. Anyone. Report status. 
(Gas starts coming out of the ventilation grill. Khan flees, Scott hits a guard and gives chase. Everyone else coughs.)

[Corridor]

KIRK: Where's Khan? 
SCOTT: I don't know. He got out just as the gas 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Anesthesia gas in all sections except Engineering. Someone just closed that line.

[Engineering]

(Khan is working controls and listening to the intercom messages.) 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain, acknowledge. Unable to flood Engineering section. I suspect 
SCOTT [OC]: This is Scott. Captain's headed for the Engineering section. I'll follow in case 
SPOCK [OC]: Negative. We must retake the vessel while the anesthesia lasts. Meet me in the Armoury. I'm blowing it clear first. Spock out. 
(Kirk dashes into Engineering and straight into Khan, who easily disarms him then crushes the phaser. Then an alarm beeps.) 
KHAN: If I understood your manuals, that's an overload in progress. Your ship flares up like an exploding sun within minutes. 
(The two fight. Khan can throw Kirk around with little effort.) 
KHAN: I have five times your strength. You're no match for me.
(But Kirk gets himself a weapon and clubs Khan into unconsciousness before stopping the overload and saving his ship.)

Captain's Log. Stardate 3143.3. Control of the Enterprise has been regained. I wish my next decisions were no more difficult. Khan and his people. What a waste to put them in a reorientation centre. And what do I do about McGivers?

[Briefing room]

(The senior staff are in dress uniform again.) 
UHURA: Record tapes engaged and ready, Captain. 
KIRK: This hearing is now in session. Under the authority vested in me by Starfleet Command, I declare all charges and specifications in this matter have been dropped. 
MCCOY: Jim. Agreed you have the authority 
KIRK: Mister Spock, our heading takes us near the Ceti Alpha star system. 
SPOCK: Quite correct, Captain. Planet number five there is habitable, although a bit savage, somewhat inhospitable. 
KIRK: But no more than Australia's Botany Bay colony was at the beginning. Those men went on to tame a continent, Mister Khan. Can you tame a world? 
KHAN: Have you ever read Milton, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes. I understand. Lieutenant Marla McGivers. Given a choice of court martial or accompanying them there. 
KHAN: (gazing into her eyes) It will be difficult. A struggle at first even to stay alive, to find food. 
MARLA: I'll go with him, sir. 
KHAN: A superior woman. I will take her. And I've gotten something else I wanted. A world to win, an empire to build. 
KIRK: This hearing is closed. 
(Khan and McGivers are escorted out.)
SCOTT: It's a shame for a good Scotsman to admit it, but I'm not up on Milton. 
KIRK: The statement Lucifer made when he fell into the pit. 'It is better to rule in hell than serve in heaven.' 
SPOCK: It would be interesting, Captain, to return to that world in a hundred years and to learn what crop has sprung from the seed you planted today. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock, it would indeed.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders

The Return of The Archons
Stardate: 3156.2
Original Airdate: 9 Feb, 1967

[Street]
(Two men in colonial style clothing, complete with tri-corn hats, are running for their lives. One falls.) 
SULU: O'Neil, we've got to keep going. Come on, get up. 
O'NEIL: It's no use. They're everywhere. 
SULU: The Captain gave us an order. We've got to find some clue. 
O'NEIL: It's no use, Mister Sulu. Look, there's one of them. There's another one. 
(Ominous figures in long red gowns and hoods are slowly advancing on them, carrying staves.) 
SULU: Scouting party to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SULU [OC]: Come in. 
KIRK: What is it, Mister Sulu?

[Street]

SULU: Captain, beam us up quick. Emergency.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Transporter room, lock onto Sulu and O'Neil. Beam up immediately.

[Street]

O'NEIL: We've got to make a run for it. We can't just stand here. 
SULU: Mister O'Neil, stand tight. They'll beam us up any minute. 
O'NEIL: Run, I tell you. We've got to get out of here. You know what they're capable of. 
(He makes a dash for it.) 
SULU: O'Neil! 
(One of the robed figures reaches Sulu and points his hollow stave at him. Sulu stiffens, then relaxes with a smile on his face. The transporter takes him away.)

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Sulu, what is it? Where's Lieutenant O'Neil? 
SULU: What? Who? 
KIRK: Lieutenant O'Neil. Where is he? 
SULU: You. You're not of the Body. 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy. 
SCOTT: Doctor McCoy, transporter room. Quickly. 
SULU: You, you did it. They knew we were Archons. These are the clothes they wear, not these. 
(Throws a bundle at a man, and takes his jacket off.) 
KIRK: Sulu, take it easy. 
SULU: Landru. Landru. 
KIRK: Sit down. (McCoy enters) What happened? 
SULU: They're wonderful. They're the sweetest, friendliest people in the universe. It's paradise, my friend. Paradise. 
KIRK: Lieutenant O'Neil. Where is he? 
SULU: Paradise. Paradise.

Captain's Log. Stardate 3156.2. While orbiting planet Beta Three trying to find some trace of the starship Archon that disappeared here a hundred years ago, a search party consisting of two Enterprise officers were sent to the planet below. Mister Sulu has returned, but in a highly agitated mental state. His condition requires I beam down with an additional search detail.

[Street]

(The extensive landing party is now in more late 19th Century American style clothes, with bootlace ties and long jackets. Spock has a cape with the hood raised to cover his ears.) 
KIRK: Materialisation completed. Kirk out. 
(A man walks slowly past them, hand on his heart and smile on his face. He bows politely and carries on his way.) 
SPOCK: Odd. The expression on that man's face. The mindlessness. Vacant contentment. 
KIRK: Like Sulu. If everybody on this planet is like him. Let's go. 
BILAR: Joy to you, friends. 
KIRK: Joy to you. 
BILAR: You be strangers. Come for the Festival, are ya? 
KIRK: Yes. 
BILAR: Got a place to sleep it off yet? Go round to Reger's house. He's got rooms. But you'll have to hurry. It's almost the Red Hour. 
(The town hall clock shows a few minutes to six o'clock.) 
KIRK: This Festival, it starts at six o'clock? 
BILAR: Tula, these folks come for the Festival. Your daddy can put them up, can't he? 
TULA: You're from the Valley? 
LINDSTROM: We've just arrived. 
TULA: My father will be glad to put you up, though. It's right over there. 
(The clock strikes the hour, and everybody shouts and goes wild. Clothing gets loosened, women are carries away by men, there are shouts and screams everywhere.) 
BILAR: Tula, come! 
(Windows are broken, fights break out, a woman jumps on Kirk and kisses him.) 
KIRK: Let's get out of here. 
(They run to Reger's house and get in.)

[Hallway]

(Three older men turn in surprise.) 
KIRK; I'm sorry to break in on you like this. We didn't expect that kind of a welcome. 
TAMAR: Welcome? You are strangers? 
KIRK: Yes, that's right. We're from the valley. 
HACOM: You came for the Festival? 
KIRK: Yes. 
HACOM: Then how come you here? 
LINDSTROM: Are you Reger? 
REGER: Yes. 
LINDSTROM: You have a daughter named Tula. 
REGER: Yes. 
LINDSTROM: Well, you'd better do something. She's outside. 
REGER: I know. It's Festival. It's the will of Landru. 
HACOM: Reger, these are young men. They are not old enough to be excused. 
REGER: They're visitors. 
HACOM: Well, have they no Lawgivers in the Valley? Why be they not at the Festival? 
KIRK: We heard that you might have rooms for us. 
REGER: There. You see, Hacom? They've merely come looking for a place to rest afterwards. 
HACOM: The Red Hour has already struck. 
TAMAR: Hacom, these be strangers. The Valley has different ways. 
HACOM: Do you say that Landru is not everywhere? 
TAMAR: No, of course not. It's simply they may have different ways. 
REGER: They've come looking for shelter. Can I turn them away? Come, please. 
LINDSTROM: But the girl, out there. 
HACOM: She is in festival, as you should be. 
REGER: Come, please. Hurry. 
(He leads the way upstairs.) 
HACOM: The Lawgivers should know. 
TAMAR: Surely, Hacom, they already know. Are they not infallible? 
HACOM: You mock them! You mock the Lawgivers. And the strangers are not of the Body. You will see. 
TAMAR: But, Hacom 
(Hacom leaves the house.

[Room]

(Reger shows them into a sparsely furnished room with bunk beds, and turns up the gas light.) 
REGER: You can return here at the close of the Festival. It's quiet. You'll have need of rest. 
KIRK: We have no plans to attend the Festival, sir. 
REGER: The hour is struck. You can hear. 
KIRK: I'd like to hear more about this Festival, and Landru. 
REGER: (alarmed) Landru? You ask? You're strange. You scorn Festival? Are you? Are you? 
KIRK: What about Landru? 
(Outside are scenes of rioting, willful destruction of property, random violence and lust. Reger leaves the group, unseen to us.) 
RIOTER: Festival! Festival! 
KIRK: Landru. My guess is we have until morning. Let's put the time to good use. Doctor, do atmospheric readings to determine whether there's anything in the air to account for all this. Mister Lindstrom, correlate all that you've seen with any other sociological parallels, if any. 
Mister Spock, you and I have some serious thinking to do. When we leave here tomorrow morning, I want to have a plan of action. 
(Kirk, as sixth man in the group, didn't get a bunk bed or chair to sleep on. When the town clock strikes 6 am, everybody outside stops and then goes on their placid way as if nothing had happened.) 
KIRK: Spock. Spock, Lindstrom. Doc. 
(They hear crying outside, and go to investigate.)

[Hallway]

REGER: No, no it's all over now. It's all over now, child. That's all right. Quiet. 
MCCOY: Excuse me. 
(Leads the distressed Tula away) 
REGER: It's all right. It's all over. 
KIRK: He'll give her a shot. It'll calm her down. Trust us. 
LINDSTROM: You didn't even try to bring her back. What kind of father are you? 
REGER: It's Landru's will. 
KIRK: What about Landru? Who is he? 
TAMAR: It is true then. You did not attend the Festival last night. 
KIRK: No. 
REGER: Then you're not of the Body. You couldn't be.

[Drawing room]

MCCOY: She's asleep. 
REGER: Are you, are you Archons? 
KIRK: What if we are? 
REGER: It was said more would follow. If you are indeed 
TAMAR: We must hide them. Quickly. The Lawgivers. 
KIRK: We can take care of ourselves. 
TAMAR: Landru will know. He will come. 
(Hacom storms in with two robed figures.) 
HACOM: He is the one. He mocked the Lawgivers. I heard him. 
TAMAR: No, Hacom. It was a jest. 
HACOM: The others, they were here, but they scorned the Festival. I saw it. 
LAWGIVER: Tamar, stand clear. 
TAMAR: I hear and obey the voice of Landru. 
(The Lawgiver kills him with his hollow stave) 
LAWGIVER: You attacked the Body. You have heard the Word and disobeyed. You will be absorbed. 
KIRK: What do you mean, absorbed? 
HACOM: There, you see? Not of the body. 
LAWGIVER: You will be absorbed. The Good is all. Landru is gentle. You will come. 
KIRK: We're not going anywhere. 
LAWGIVER: It is the law. You must come. 
KIRK: I said we're not going anywhere. 
(The two lawgivers turn and face each other.) 
SPOCK: Evidently they're not prepared to deal with out right disobedience. How did you know? 
KIRK: Everything we've seen here so far seems to indicate some sort of compulsive involuntary stimulus to action. 
SPOCK: Your analysis seems logical. 
LAWGIVER: It is clear that you simply did not understand. I will re-phrase. You are ordered to accompany us to the absorption chambers. 
KIRK: Why did you kill that man? 
LAWGIVER: Out of order. You will obey. It is the word of Landru. 
KIRK: You tell Landru that we'll come in our own time and that we'll speak to him. 
(Kirk takes the stave from the lawgiver, and hands it to Spock for inspection.) 
LAWGIVER: You cannot. It is Landru. 
HACOM: Landru. 
(Hacom leaves quickly) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. This is merely a hollow tube, Captain. No mechanism. 
REGER: They're communing. We have time. Come with me. 
KIRK: Where to? 
REGER: To a place I know. You'll be safe there, but we must hurry. Landru will come.

[Street]

(They hurry slowly, smiling and bowing to passers by.) 
KIRK: Quite a festival they had. 
REGER: Peace. 
KIRK: What do you make of all this? 
SPOCK: Totally illogical. Yesterday, without apparent cause or reason, they wrought total havoc. Yet today, now 
KIRK: Now they're back to normal. 
BILAR: Morning, friends. 
ALL: Good morning, Bilar. 
LINDSTROM: Your daughter. That's the man. 
REGER: No, it wasn't Bilar. It was Landru. Let's hurry, we haven't much time. 
(But a few paces further on, the passers by all stop.) 
REGER: It's too late. Look. 
KIRK: What is it? 
REGER: Landru. He's summoning the body. 
SPOCK: Telepathy, Captain. 
(The people pick up weapons from the debris in the street.) 
KIRK: Phasers on stun. Which way, Reger? 
REGER: Perhaps through there, but Landru 
KIRK: We'll handle Landru, Just get us out of this. 
(They get trapped in an alley) 
KIRK: I don't want to hurt them. Warn them back. 
REGER: They're in the Body. It's Landru. 
KIRK: Phasers on stun, wide field. Fire. 
(They drop the first wave, but more come.) 
KIRK: Fire. 
(They get down the alley) 
KIRK: Security. 
MCCOY: Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant O'Neil. He's one of our men. 
REGER: Not anymore. He's been absorbed. 
KIRK: Bring him along. 
REGER: The Lieutenant is one of them. When he wakes, Landru will find us through him. Leave him there. He's our enemy. He's been absorbed. 
LINDSTROM: Captain, now that we've got Lieutenant O'Neil, let's beam up out of here. 
KIRK: We still don't know what's happened to the Archons. Which way? Bring him along.

[Chamber]

(Reger leads them into a building made of massive stones. He goes over to a corner and unwraps a flat panel, which gives off light.) 
MCCOY: Put him over there. 
KIRK: A lighting panel. 
SPOCK: Amazing in this culture. 
REGER: Comes from a time before Landru. 
KIRK: Before Landru? How long ago was that? 
REGER: Nobody knows positively. Some say as long ago as six thousand years. 
SPOCK: It took a very advanced technology to construct a device like this. Inconsistent with this environment 
KIRK: But not inconsistent with what we've seen. Security. 
(The two spare members of the group go to stand guard.) 
KIRK: Those staffs. Hollow tubes. Antennae for some sort of broadcast power. What is it, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Strong power generations, Captain. Near here, but radiating in all directions. 
MCCOY: He'll be coming around soon, Captain. 
REGER: He must not. He's been absorbed. 
KIRK: Absorbed? 
REGER: The Body absorbs its enemies. It only kills when it has to. When the first Archons came, they were free, out of control, opposing the will of Landru. Many were killed, many more were absorbed. When he regains consciousness, Landru will find us through him. And if the others come 
KIRK: What others? 
REGER: Those like you and me, who resist Landru. 
SPOCK: An underground? How are you organised? 
REGER: In threes. Myself, Tamar, who's dead now, and one other. 
KIRK: Who? 
REGER: I don't know. Tamar was my contact. 
MCCOY: Give me a decision, Captain. He's coming out of it. 
REGER: He must not regain consciousness. He'll destroy us all. He's of the Body. 
KIRK: Give him a shot. Keep him asleep. Reger, I want some answers. This underground. If Landru is so powerful, how do you survive? 
REGER: I don't know, Captain. Some of us escape the directives. Not many, but a few. It was that way when the first Archons came. 
KIRK: The Archons. Tell me about them. 
REGER: They had invaded the Body, but they resisted the will of Landru. You see, Landru had pulled them down from the skies. 
KIRK: Pulled them down from the skies? A starship? Mister Spock, those power readings you took, are they? 
SPOCK: Powerful enough to destroy a starship? Affirmative. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise, come in.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain, we're under attack. There are heat beams of some kind coming up from the planet surface. 
KIRK [OC]: Status report. 
SCOTT: Our shields are holding, but they're taking all our power.

[Chamber]

SCOTT [OC]: If we try to warp out or move on impulse, we'll lose our shields and burn up like a cinder. 
KIRK: Orbit condition.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Checking. We're going down, Captain. Unless we can get those beams off us so we can use our engines, we're due to hit atmosphere in less than twelve hours.

[Chamber]

KIRK: Keep your shield up. Do everything you can to maintain orbit. We'll try and locate the source of the beam and stop it here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Impossible to break away. I've tried the emergency bypass circuits but they haven't been effective. 
(The conversation ends in a crackle of static.) 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: What is it? 
SPOCK: Sensor beams, very strong. We're being probed. In this direction. 
REGER: Landru. 
SPOCK: Block them out. 
SPOCK: Too strong, Captain. Can't be blocked. 
REGER: (adopting a prayerful posture) Oh. 
(The image of a tall, elegant man draped in robes appears against a wall.) 
LANDRU: I am Landru. 
SPOCK: Projection, Captain. Unreal. 
KIRK: But beautiful, Mister Spock, with no apparatus at this end. 
LANDRU: You have come as destroyers. You bring an infection. 
KIRK: You are holding my ship. I demand that you release it. 
LANDRU: You have come to a world without hate, without fear, without conflict. No war, no disease, no crime. None of the ancient evils. Landru seeks tranquillity. Peace for all. The universal good. 
KIRK: We mean you no harm. Ours is a mission of peace and good will. 
LANDRU: The good must transcend the evil. It shall be done. So it has been since the beginning. 
SPOCK: He doesn't hear you, Captain. 
LINDSTROM: (drawing his phaser) Maybe he'll hear this. 
KIRK: Put that away. Landru, listen to me. 
LANDRU: You will be absorbed. Your individuality will merge into the unity of the good, and in your submergence into the common being of the Body, you will find contentment and fulfillment. You will experience the absolute good. 
REGER: Oh. 
(A sound permeates the room, and knocks everyone out.)

Captain's log, stardate 3157.4. The Enterprise, still under attack by some sort of heat rays from the surface of Beta Three, is now being commanded by Engineering Officer Scott. The shore party has been taken by the creature called Landru.

[Prison]

(Kirk wakes up in a chamber very like the previous one, constructed of large stone blocks, but without the furniture. A stone door has no handle on the inside. His communicator and phaser are gone.) 
KIRK: Mister Spock. Wake up. Mister Lesley. 
SPOCK: Where's Doctor McCoy? 
KIRK: He was gone when I woke up, along with the other guard and Mister O'Neil. 
SPOCK: I should say they've been here and been removed. 
KIRK: Where is here? 
SPOCK: Evidently a maximum security establishment. Are you armed? 
KIRK: No. All our phasers are gone. I checked. That's locked. 
LINDSTROM: Oh, does my head ache. 
SPOCK: The natural result of being subjected to a hypersonic. 
LINDSTROM: Oh, is that what it was? 
SPOCK: Sound waves. Stronger, they might have killed us. As it was, they merely rendered us unconscious. 
KIRK: Enough analysis. Let's think of a way to get out of here. What about the Lawgivers' inability to cope with the unexpected? 
SPOCK: We shouldn't depend on that happening again, Captain. In a society as well organised as this one seems to be, I cannot conceive of such an oversight going uncorrected. Interesting, however. Their reaction to your defiance was remarkably similar to the reaction of a computer when fed insufficient or contradictory data. 
KIRK: Are you suggesting the Lawgivers are mere computers, that they aren't human? 
SPOCK: Quite human, Captain. It's simply that all the facts are not yet in. There are gaps. 
(The door opens, and a Lawgiver escorts McCoy and O'Neil in, then leaves them again.) 
KIRK: Doc. How? 
MCCOY: Hello, friend. We were told to wait here. 
KIRK: Doc! 
MCCOY: Can I help you, friend? 
KIRK: Don't you know me? 
MCCOY: We all know one another and Landru. 
SPOCK: Like Sulu. 
KIRK: Think, man. The Enterprise. The ship. Remember? 
MCCOY: You speak very strangely, friend. Are you from away? 
KIRK: You do remember! 
MCCOY: Ask Landru. He remembers. He knows and he watches. You are strange. Are you not of the Body? 
(The door opens again, and a Lawgiver points his hollow stave at Kirk.) 
LAWGIVER: Come. 
KIRK: No. 
LAWGIVER: Then you will die. 
SPOCK: You've been corrected, Captain. You'd better go. 
KIRK: All right. Work on Bones. See if you can't 
LAWGIVER: Come. 
(Kirk leaves with the Lawgivers.) 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy, what will happen to him? 
MCCOY: He goes to joy, peace, and tranquillity. He goes to meet Landru. Happiness is to all of us, blessed by Landru.

[Absorption chamber]

(Kirk is secured to the wall by his wrists. A stout bald man comes in and relieves the Lawgiver on duty.) 
MARPLON: I am Marplon. It is your hour. Happy communing. 
LAWGIVER: With thanks. Happy communing. 
(Marplon steps into the control booth.)

[Prison]

(Spock is attempting a mind meld on McCoy.) 
LINDSTROM: Well? 
SPOCK: Impossible. He's under extremely powerful control. 
LINDSTROM: Are we just going to stand here? 
SPOCK: Little else we can do, unless you can think of a way to get through that door. 
LINDSTROM: Well, this is simply ridiculous. A bunch of stone age characters running around in robes. 
SPOCK: And apparently commanding powers far beyond our comprehension. Not simple, not ridiculous. Very, very dangerous. 
(The door opens and this time the stave is pointed at Spock.) 
LAWGIVER: You. Come.

[Absorption Chamber]

(Kirk is released and greets Spock with an inane smile on his face.) 
KIRK: Joy to you, friend. Peace and contentment will fill you. You will know the peace of Landru. 
(Kirk leaves, and Spock is fastened to the wall for his treatment. The lights waver as the Lawgivers leave Marplon to his work.) 
MARPLON: Have no fear, friend. The effect is harmless. My name is Marplon. I was too late to save your first two friends. They have been absorbed. Beware of them. 
(Spock is released.) 
SPOCK: What about the Captain? 
MARPLON: He is unharmed, unchanged. I am the third man in Reger's triad. We have been awaiting your return. 
SPOCK: We are not Archons, Marplon. 
MARPLON: Whatever you may call yourselves, you are in fulfillment of prophecy. We ask your help. 
SPOCK: Where is Reger? 
MARPLON: He will join us. He is immune to absorption. Hurry. We have not much time. 
SPOCK: Who is Landru? 
MARPLON: I cannot answer your questions now. Landru, he will hear. Here are your weapons. You may need them. 
(Lawgivers enter) 
MARPLON: Behave as you saw your Captain behave. It is done. 
SPOCK: Joy be with you. Peace and contentment.

[Prison]

SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Peace and tranquillity to you. (in a whisper) Are you all right? 
SPOCK: Quite all right. Be careful of Doctor McCoy. 
KIRK: I understand. Landru. 
SPOCK: I am formulating a theory, Captain. 
KIRK: And? 
SPOCK: Not here. The doctor. 
MCCOY: You speak in strange whispers. This is not the way of Landru. 
KIRK: Joy be yours, and tranquillity, my friend. 
MCCOY: And peace and harmony. Are you of the Body? 
KIRK: The Body is one. 
MCCOY: Blessed be the Body, and health to all of its parts. 
KIRK: My friends. (guiding Red and Spock away to a quiet corner) What is your theory, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: This is a soulless society, Captain. It has no spirit, no spark. All is indeed peace and tranquillity. The peace of the factory, the tranquillity of the machine. All parts working in unison. 
KIRK: And when something unexplained happens, their routine is disrupted. 
SPOCK: Until new orders are received. The question is, who gives those orders? 
KIRK: Landru. 
SPOCK: There is no Landru, Captain, not in the human sense. 
KIRK: You're thinking the same thing I am. Mister Spock, the plug must be pulled. 
SPOCK: Sir? 
KIRK: Landru must die. 
SPOCK: Captain, our Prime Directive of non-interference. 
KIRK: That refers to a living, growing culture. Do you think this one is? 
(Marplon and Reger enter.) 
MCCOY: Joy to you all, friends. 
MARPLON: It is the gift of Landru. (goes over to Kirk) I've brought your signalling devices. You may need them. 
KIRK: What we need is more information about Landru. (Reger shakes his head) You said you wanted us to help you. 
MARPLON: The prophecy says 
KIRK: Never mind what the prophecy says. If you want to be liberated from Landru, we'll need your help. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
MCCOY: You're not of the Body! 
KIRK: Peace 
MCCOY: You're not! 
KIRK: to you, friend. Joy and tranquillity. 
MCCOY: Lawgivers! 
Peace. 
MCCOY: Lawgivers! (trying to strangle Kirk) Traitor! Traitors! Traitors! 
(Spock deals with O'Neil) 
KIRK: Doc, I don't want to hurt you. 
MCCOY: Traitors! 
(Kirk manages to get a sleeper hold on McCoy, and he passes out) 
KIRK: Spock. 
(More lawgivers enter, and are overpowered. Spock uses a punch to knock his one out.) 
KIRK: Isn't that somewhat old-fashioned? Robes. 
(They undress the lawgivers and put on their robes.) 
KIRK: Where is Landru? 
MARPLON: No, no. 
KIRK: Where do we find him? 
MARPLON: We do not see him. We hear him, in the Hall of Audiences. 
KIRK: In this building? 
MARPLON: (reluctantly) Yes. 
KIRK: You're going to take us there. (the two men are terrified at the prospect) Spock, call the Enterprise. 
MARPLON: No. 
KIRK: Snap out of it! Start acting like men. 
SPOCK: Spock to Enterprise. status report.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, I've been trying to reach you.

[Prison]

SPOCK: Report, Scott.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The orbit's still decaying. I give it six hours, more or less.

[Prison]

SCOTT [OC]: Those heat beams are still on us. You've got to cut them off, Mister Spock, or we'll cook. 
KIRK: Scotty, stand by. We're doing the best we can. How's Mister Sulu? 
SCOTT [OC]: He's peaceful enough, but he worries me. 
KIRK: Put a guard on him.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: On Sulu?

[Prison]

KIRK: That's an order. Watch him. Captain out. 
SPOCK: Captain. (gives him a phaser) 
KIRK; All right. About Landru. 
REGER: There was war. Convulsions. The world was destroying itself. Landru was our leader. He saw the truth. He changed the world. He took us back, back to a simple time. A time of peace and tranquillity. 
KIRK: What happened to him? 
MARPLON: He's still alive. He is here now. He sees. He hears. We have destroyed ourselves. Please, no more. 
KIRK: You said you wanted freedom. It's time you learned that freedom is never a gift. It has to be earned. Come on. We're going to find Landru. 
REGER: No, no, I was wrong! I submit, I bear myself to the will of Landru! 
KIRK: It's too late for that. 
REGER: No! Lawgivers! Help! Help me! 
(Spock neck-pinches him.) 
KIRK: All right, it's up to you. Take us to Landru.

[Hall of Audiences]

(outside the door) 
MARPLON: This is the Hall of Audiences. 
KIRK: Open it. 
MARPLON: But this is Landru. 
KIRK: Open it. 
(Marplon makes a deep bow, and the door opens outwards. They enter the empty room.) 
MARPLON: Landru speaks here. 
(Kirk and Spock remove the robes and leave the staves propped by the open door.) 
KIRK: Landru! Landru. We are the Archons. We are the Archons. We've come to speak. We are the Archons. We want to talk to you. 
(The projection appears on the far wall.) 
MARPLON: Landru! He comes! 
LANDRU: Despite my efforts to save you, you have invaded the Body and you are causing great harm. 
KIRK: We have no intention of causing harm. 
LANDRU: Obliteration is necessary. The infection is strong. For the good of the Body, you must die. It is a great sorrow. 
KIRK: We do not intend to die. 
LANDRU: All who saw you, all who know of your presence here must be excised. The memory of the Body will be cleansed. 
KIRK: Listen to me. 
SPOCK: Useless, Captain. A projection. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. Let's have a look at the projector. 
(They both use their phasers to blast a hole in the wall. As expected, there are nice clean big computer boxes in a room beyond. Lights are flashing and blinking, blinking and flashing.) 
KIRK: Of course. It had to be. Landru. 
SPOCK: A machine. This whole society is a machine's concept of perfection. Peace, harmony. 
KIRK: But no soul. 
LANDRU: I am Landru. You have intruded. 
KIRK: Pull out its plug, Mister Spock. 
(Before they can press the buttons on their phasers, there is a high-pitched sound) 
LANDRU: Your devices have been neutralised. So it shall be with you. I am Landru. 
KIRK: Landru died six thousand years ago. 
LANDRU: I am Landru. I am he. All that he was, I am. His experience, his knowledge. 
KIRK: But not his wisdom. He may have programmed you, but he could not have given you a soul. You are a machine. 
LANDRU: Your statement is irrelevant. You will be obliterated. The good of the Body is the Prime Directive. 
SPOCK: The good of the Body, Captain. That's the key. 
KIRK: Yes. What is the good? 
LANDRU: I am Landru. 
KIRK: Landru is dead. You are a machine. A question has been put to you. Answer it. 
LANDRU: The good is the harmonious continuation of the Body. The good is peace, tranquillity. The good of the Body is the directive. 
KIRK: Then I put it to you that you have disobeyed the Prime Directive. You are harmful to the Body. 
LANDRU: The body is. It exists. It is healthy. 
KIRK: The body is dying. You are destroying it. 
LANDRU: Do you ask a question? 
KIRK: What have you done to do justice to the full potential of every individual of the Body? 
LANDRU: Insufficient data. 
KIRK: Without freedom of choice, there is no creativity. Without creativity, there is no life. The body dies. The fault is yours. 
SPOCK: Are you aiding the body, or are you destroying it? 
LANDRU: (sounding very machine-like, Davros-like) I am not programmed to answer that question. 
LAWGIVER: Landru! Guide us, Landru! 
(Kirk draws his phaser.) 
SPOCK: Not necessary, Captain. They have no guidance. Possibly for the first time in their lives. 
KIRK: Landru, answer the question. 
LANDRU: Peace, order, and tranquillity are maintained. The body lives, but I reserve creativity to me. 
SPOCK: Then the body dies. Creativity is necessary for the health of the Body. 
LANDRU: This is impossible. 
MARPLON: Is this truly Landru? 
SPOCK: What's left of him, after he built and programmed this machine six thousand years ago. 
KIRK: You must create the good. That is the will of Landru, nothing else. 
LANDRU: But there is evil. 
KIRK: Then the evil must be destroyed. That is the Prime Directive. And you are the evil. 
LANDRU: I think. I live. 
KIRK: You are the evil. The evil must be destroyed. Fulfill the Prime Directive. 
(Smoke starts to rise from the base of the main computer bank.) 
KIRK: You 
LANDRU: Landru, help me! 
KIRK: are the evil. Fulfill the Prime Directive. 
LANDRU: Help me! Help me! Help me! Help me! 
(Fire breaks out and things go bang. The machine dies. Now Kirk and Spock step briefly into the computer room.) 
KIRK: Well, Marplon, you're on your own now. I hope you're up to it. (to Lawgivers) And you can get rid of those robes. If I were you, I'd start look for another job. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain, are you all right?

[Hall of Audiences]

KIRK: What about the ship?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The heat rays are gone, Captain, and Mister Sulu's back to normal. 
SULU: Relieving you.

[Hall of Audiences]

KIRK: Excellent, Scotty. Stand by to beam up landing party. Let's go and see how the others are doing. Marplon can finish up here.

Captain's log, stardate 3158.7 The Enterprise is preparing to leave Beta Three in Star system C One Eleven. Sociologist Lindstrom is remaining behind with a party of experts who will help restore the planet's culture to a human form.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Marvellous. 
KIRK: What? 
SPOCK: The late Landru, Captain. A marvellous feat of engineering. A computer capable of directing the lives of millions of human beings. 
KIRK: But only a machine, Mister Spock. The original Landru programmed it with all his knowledge but he couldn't give it his wisdom, his compassion, his understanding, his soul, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Predictably metaphysical. I prefer the concrete, the graspable, the provable. 
KIRK: You'd make a splendid computer, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: That is very kind of you, Captain. 
UHURA: Captain, Mister Lindstrom from the surface. 
KIRK: Yes, Lindstrom. 
LINDSTROM [OC]: I just wanted to say goodbye, Captain. 
KIRK: How's it going? 
LINDSTROM [OC]: Couldn't be better. Already this morning, we've had half a dozen domestic quarrels and two genuine knock-down drag-outs. It may not be paradise, but it's certainly human. 
KIRK: Sounds most promising. Good luck. 
SPOCK: How often mankind has wished for a world as peaceful and secure as the one Landru provided. 
KIRK: Yes. And we never got it. Just lucky, I guess.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.



Court Martial
Stardate: 2947.3
Original Airdate: 2 Feb, 1967

Captain's Log, Stardate 2947.3. We have been through a severe ion storm. One crewman is dead. Ship's damage is considerable. I have ordered a non-scheduled layover on Starbase Eleven for repairs. A full report of damages was made to the commanding officer of Starbase Eleven, Commodore Stone.
[Stone's Office]

(Kirk is not in his usual gold shirt, but a green one with gold braiding.) 
STONE: Maintenance Section Eighteen. The section is working on the Intrepid. Reschedule. The Enterprise is on priority one. That makes three times you've read it, Jim. Is there an error? 
KIRK: No. But the death of the crewman. 
STONE: Regulations, Captain. And the extract from your ship's computer log confirming this sworn deposition? 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge here. Go ahead, Captain. 
KIRK: Where's Mister Spock with that computer log extract?

[Bridge]

UHURA: He should have been there ten minutes ago, sir.

[Stone's Office]

KIRK: Kirk out. 
STONE: It's a great pity. The service can't afford to lose men like Lieutenant Commander Finney. 
KIRK: I agree. I waited until the last possible moment. We were on Red Alert. The storm got worse. I had to jettison the pod. 
(The two man transporter alcove in the corner activates.) 
KIRK: What took you so long, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Captain, I believe I 
STONE: I'll take that. 
(As he puts the data card into his computer, the door opens and a teenage girl dressed in blue enters.) 
KIRK: Jamie. 
JAMIE: There you are. I just wanted one more look at you. The man who killed my father. 
KIRK: That's not so. He was my friend. 
JAMIE: Your friend? You hated him all your life! That's why you killed him, you murderer! You murderer! You murderer! 
(She dissolves into tears.) 
STONE: Mister Spock, would you please? 
SPOCK: Miss Finney, come with me, please. 
(They leave.) 
STONE: Captain Kirk, you say you jettisoned the pod after the Red Alert? 
KIRK: You have my sworn deposition. 
STONE: Then, Captain, I must presume you've committed willful perjury. This extract from your computer log says you jettisoned the pod before going to Red Alert. Consider yourself confined to the base. Official inquiry will determine whether a general court martial is in order.

Captain's Log, Stardate 2948.5. Starship Enterprise remains in orbit around Starbase Eleven. Full repairs in progress. I've been ordered to stand by on Starbase Eleven until the inquiry into the death of Lieutenant Commander Finney can be conducted. I'm confident of the outcome.

[Starbase Club]

(Kirk and McCoy enter, and go to the bar.) 
KIRK: Timothy, I haven't seen you since the Vulcanian expedition. (no reply) Well, I see our graduating class from the Academy is well represented. Corrigan. Teller. How you doing, Mike? 
MIKE: (An older man in a gold shirt) I'll get by, Jim. 
TIMOTHY: (Dark hair, red shirt) I understand you're laying over for repairs. Big job? 
KIRK: Couple of days. 
TIMOTHY: You moving out then? 
KIRK: In a hurry to see me go? 
TIMOTHY: Oh, I just wondered how long it'd take to get a new records officer. 
KIRK: You can talk plainer than that. 
TIMOTHY: I can, but I think the point's been made. Ben was a friend of ours. 
MCCOY: Come on, Jim. Let's go. 
KIRK: Go on. Finish. Ben was a friend of yours, and 
MCCOY: Jim. 
KIRK: Go on. I'm waiting to hear the rest. 
MIKE: Why don't you tell us? 
KIRK: What would be the point? You've already made up your minds. Excuse me, Bones. 
(Leaves, just as a lady in a floaty green dress enters.) 
MCCOY: If you have any doubt, that was indeed Captain James Kirk of the Enterprise. 
SHAW: Yes, I know. Are you a friend of his? 
MCCOY: In these trying times, one of the few. Doctor Leonard McCoy. And you? 
SHAW: Areel Shaw. And I'm a friend, too. An old one. 
MCCOY: All of my old friends look like doctors. All of his look like you. Well, you might as well join me for a drink. With this inquiry coming up, he's going to need all the friends he can get.

[Stone's Office]

COMPUTER: Recording inquiry. Matter. Captain Kirk, James T. Subject. Circumstances of death, Lieutenant Commander Finney, Benjamin. 
STONE: This inquiry, to determine whether a general court-martial should be convened against Captain Kirk on charges of perjury and culpable negligence. 
KIRK: Ready. 
STONE: Let us begin with your relationship with Commander Finney. You knew him for a long time, didn't you? 
KIRK: Yes. He was an instructor at the Academy when I was a midshipman, but that didn't stand in the way of our beginning a close friendship. His daughter Jamie, who was here last night, was named after me. 
STONE: It's common knowledge that something happened to your friendship. 
KIRK: It's no secret. We were assigned to the same ship some years later. I relieved him on watch once and found a circuit open to the atomic matter piles that should've been closed. Another five minutes, it could have blown up the ship. 
COMPUTER: Ship nomenclature. Specify. 
KIRK: United Starship Republic, number 1371. 
STONE: Continue. 
KIRK: I closed the switch and logged the incident. He drew a reprimand and was sent to the bottom of the promotion list. 
STONE: And he blamed you for that? 
KIRK: Yes. He had been at the Academy for an unusually long time as an instructor. As a result, he was late in being assigned to a starship. The delay, he felt, looked bad on his record. My action, he believed, made things worse. 
STONE: Comment. Service record of Lieutenant Commander Finney to be appended this inquiry. 
COMPUTER: Noted. 
STONE: Now let's get into the specifics of the storm, Captain. 
KIRK: Weather scan indicated an ion storm dead ahead. I sent Finney into the pod. 
STONE: Why Finney? 
KIRK: His name was at the top of the duty roster. 
STONE: If he blamed you 
KIRK: He may have blamed me that he never rose to command a ship, but I don't assign jobs on the basis of who blames me. It was Finney's turn, and I assigned him. He had just checked in with me from the pod when we hit the leading edge of the storm. Not too bad at first. I signalled a Yellow Alert. Then we began encountering pressure, variant stress, force seven, the works. I finally signaled a Red Alert. Finney knew he had a matter of seconds. I gave him those seconds and more. But apparently it wasn't enough. 
STONE: Then why, Captain, does the computer log from your ship, made automatically at the time, indicate that you were still on Yellow Alert when you jettisoned and not on Red? 
KIRK: I don't know. There's been a mistake. 
STONE: It would seem so. Could the computer be wrong? 
KIRK: Mister Spock is running a survey right now, but the odds are next to impossible. 
STONE: Stop recording. Now, look, Jim. Not one man in a million could do what you and I have done. Command a starship. A hundred decisions a day, hundreds of lives staked on you making every one of them right. You're played out, Jim. Exhausted. 
KIRK: Is that the way you see it? 
STONE: That's the way my report'll read if you co-operate. 
KIRK: A physical breakdown. Possibly even mental collapse. 
STONE: Possibly. 
KIRK: I'd be admitting a man died because 
STONE: Admit nothing. Say nothing. Let me bury the matter here and now. No starship captain has ever stood trial before, and I don't want you to be the first. KIRK: But if what you suspect is true, then I'm guilty. I should be punished. 
STONE: I'm thinking of the service. I won't have it smeared. 
KIRK: By what, Commodore Stone? 
STONE: All right. By an evident perjurer who's either covering his bad judgment, his cowardice, or 
KIRK: That's as far as you go, sir. I'm telling you I was there on the Bridge. I know what happened. I know what I did. 
STONE: It's in the transcript, and computer transcripts don't lie. I'm telling you, Captain, either you accept a permanent ground assignment, or the whole disciplinary weight of Starfleet command is going to light right on your neck. 
KIRK: So that's the way we do it now? Sweep it under the rug, and me along with it? Not on your life. I intend to fight. 
STONE: Then you draw a general court. 
KIRK: Draw it? I demand it. And right now, Commodore Stone. Right now.

Captain's Log, Stardate 2948.9. The officers who will comprise my court-martial board are proceeding to Starbase Eleven. Meanwhile, repairs on the Enterprise are almost complete.

[Starbase Club]

(Kirk goes to the table of the lady in green, and kisses her hands.) 
KIRK: Areel. Doctor McCoy said you were here. I should have felt it in the air, like static electricity. 
SHAW: Flattery will get you everywhere. 
KIRK; It's been, how long has it been? 
SHAW: Four years, seven months, and an odd number of days. Not that I'm counting. 
KIRK: You look marvellous. You haven't changed a bit. 
SHAW: But things have changed for you, haven't they? 
KIRK: Oh, you've heard about that, have you? 
SHAW: I'm a lawyer in the Judge Advocate's office, remember? 
KIRK: I remember. Let's forget it. We have a lot of lost time to make up for. 
SHAW: You're taking it very lightly. 
KIRK: The confidence of an innocent man. 
SHAW: Are you? That's not what the rumours indicate. 
KIRK: Look, Let's not talk shop. 
SHAW: Jim, this could ruin you. Will you take some advice? 
KIRK: I never could talk you into anything. All right. Fire away. 
SHAW: The prosecution will build its case on the basis of Kirk versus the computer. Now if your attorney tries to defend on that basis, you won't have a chance. 
KIRK: What other choice is there? 
SHAW: That's up to your attorney, and that's why he's got to be a good one. 
KIRK: You, perhaps? 
SHAW: No, I'm busy. 
KIRK: Well, a girl with your ability should be able to handle two cases at once. 
SHAW: Jim, be serious. You're not an ordinary human. You're a Starship Captain, and you've stepped into scandal. If there's any way they can do it, they'll slap you down hard and permanently for the good of the service. 
KIRK: You still haven't made any recommendation. 
SHAW: Samuel T. Cogley, attorney at law. If anyone can save you, he can. He'll be paying you a visit. Jim, I've got to go. 
KIRK: Areel, you still haven't told me how you know so much about what the prosecution's going to do. 
SHAW: Because, Jim Kirk, my dear old love, I am the prosecution, and I have to do my very best to have you slapped down hard. Broken out of the service, in disgrace.

[Kirk's room]

(Kirk is about to pour himself a drink.) 
COGLEY: You Kirk? 
KIRK: Yes. (Notices the piles of books everywhere) What is all this? 
COGLEY: I figure we'll be spending some time together, so I moved in. 
KIRK: I hope I'm not crowding you. 
COGLEY: What's the matter? Don't you like books? 
KIRK: Oh, I like them fine, but a computer takes less space. 
COGLEY: A computer, huh? I got one of these in my office. Contains all the precedents. The synthesis of all the great legal decisions written throughout time. I never use it. 
KIRK: Why not? 
COGLEY: I've got my own system. Books, young man, books. Thousands of them. If time wasn't so important, I'd show you something. My library. Thousands of books. 
KIRK: And what would be the point? 
COGLEY: This is where the law is. Not in that homogenised, pasteurised, synthesiser. Do you want to know the law, the ancient concepts in their own language, Learn the intent of the men who wrote them, from Moses to the tribunal of Alpha 3? Books. 
KIRK: You have to be either an obsessive crackpot who's escaped from his keeper or Samuel T. Cogley, attorney at law. 
COGLEY: Right on both counts. Need a lawyer? 
KIRK: I'm afraid so.

[Courtroom]

(There are four officers in dress uniform on the bench, including Stone.)
STONE: This court is now in session. I have appointed as members of this court Space Command Representative Lindstrom, Starship Captains Krasnovsky and Chandra. Captain Kirk, I direct your attention to the fact that you have a right to ask for substitute officers if you feel that any of these named harbour any prejudiced attitudes to your case. 
KIRK: I have no objections, sir. 
STONE: Do you consent to the service Lieutenant Shaw as prosecuting officer and to myself as president of the court? 
KIRK: I do, sir. 
STONE: All right, clerk. 
COMPUTER: Charge, culpable negligence. Specification in that on Stardate 2945.7, by such negligence, Captain Kirk, James T., did cause loss of life, to wit, the life of Records Officer Lieutenant Commander Finney, Benjamin. To all recorded charges and specifications, what is the plea? 
KIRK: Not guilty. 
STONE: Proceed, Lieutenant. 
SHAW: I call Mister Spock. 
(Spock hands over his data chip, sits down and puts his hand on the lie detector.) 
COMPUTER: Spock, serial number S179-276SP. Service rank, Lieutenant Commander. Position, First officer, science officer. Current assignment, USS Enterprise. Commendations, Vulcanian Scientific Legion of Honour. Awards of valour. Twice decorated by Starfleet command. 
SHAW: Mister Spock, as a First officer, you know a great deal about computers, don't you? 
SPOCK: I know all about them. 
SHAW: It is possible for a computer to malfunction, is it not? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. 
SHAW: Do you know of any malfunction which has caused an inaccuracy in the Enterprise computer? 
SPOCK: Negative. 
SHAW: That answer is based on your mechanical survey of the Enterprise computer ordered by the defendant prior to this trial, is it not? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. 
SHAW: Now the stardate 
SPOCK: But the computer is inaccurate, never the less. 
SHAW: Why do you say that? 
SPOCK: It reports that the jettison button was pressed before the Red Alert. 
SHAW: In other words, it reports that Captain Kirk was reacting to an extreme emergency that did not then exist. 
SPOCK: And that is impossible. 
SHAW: Is it? Were you watching him the exact moment he pressed the jettison button? 
SPOCK: No, I was occupied. The ship was already on Yellow Alert. 
SHAW: Then how can you dispute the finding of the log? 
SPOCK: I do not dispute it. I merely state that it is wrong. 
SHAW: Oh? On what do you base that statement? 
SPOCK: I know the Captain. He is in 
SHAW: Please instruct the witness not to speculate. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant, I am half Vulcanian. Vulcanians do not speculate. I speak from pure logic. If I let go of a hammer on a planet that has a positive gravity, I need not see it fall to know that it has in fact fallen. 
SHAW: I do not see what that has to 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, human beings have characteristics just as inanimate objects do. It is impossible for Captain Kirk to act out of panic or malice. It is not his nature. 
SHAW: In your opinion. 
SPOCK: Yes. In my opinion. 
SHAW: Thank you. Your witness, Mister Cogley. 
COGLEY: No questions. 
STONE: You may step down. 
SHAW: I now call the personnel officer for the Enterprise. 
COMPUTER: Service rank, Ensign. Position, personnel officer. Current assignment, USS Enterprise. 
SHAW: In the course of your duties as personnel officer of the Enterprise, you would be familiar with the service records of all aboard? 
ENSIGN: (A young Asian woman) Yes, ma'am. 
SHAW: With reference to Records Officer Finney, was there in his service record a reported disciplinary action for failure to close a circuit? 
ENSIGN: Yes, ma'am. 
SHAW: Was the charge in that instance based upon a log entry by the officer who relieved him? 
ENSIGN: Yes, ma'am. 
SHAW: And who was that officer? 
ENSIGN: Ensign James T. Kirk. 
SHAW: Louder, please, for the court. 
ENSIGN: Ensign James T. Kirk. 
SHAW: Now the Captain Kirk who sits in this courtroom? 
ENSIGN: Yes, ma'am. 
SHAW: Thank you. Do you wish to cross-examine, Mister Cogley? 
COGLEY: No questions. 
STONE: You may step down. 
SHAW: I now call Doctor McCoy to the stand. 
COMPUTER: Service rank, Lieutenant Commander. Position, Ship's Surgeon. Current assignment, USS Enterprise. Commendations, Legion of Honour. Awards of valour. Decorated by Starfleet surgeons. 
SHAW: Doctor, you are, on the record, an expert in psychology, especially space psychology. Patterns which develop in the close quarters of a ship during long voyages in deep space. 
MCCOY: I know something about it. 
SHAW: You have just heard the testimony of your own personnel officer, that it was an action of the then Ensign Kirk, which placed an unerasable blot on the record of the then Lieutenant Finney. Psychologically, Doctor, is it possible that Lieutenant Finney blamed Kirk for the incident? 
MCCOY: It's possible. 
SHAW: He could have hated Kirk down through the years, blamed him for being passed over for promotion, blamed him for never being given a command of his own, correct? 
MCCOY: He could have. 
SHAW: Now, let us hypothesise, Doctor. Is it normal for a person to return affection for hatred? 
MCCOY: No. 
SHAW: Do we not tend to at first resent and then actively dislike the person who hates us? 
MCCOY: Wait a minute. I don't quite follow you. 
SHAW: Hypothetically. Would not Captain Smith begin to hate Lieutenant Commander Jones once he learned that Lieutenant Commander Jones hated and detested him? 
MCCOY: Well, yes, I suppose it could happen. 
SHAW: Then I ask you, is it not possible that Captain Kirk became aware of Lieutenant Commander Finney's hatred toward him and perhaps, even involuntarily, began to reciprocate? 
MCCOY: Not Captain Kirk. 
SHAW: Any normal human, Doctor. Is it possible? 
MCCOY: But he's not that kind of a man. 
SHAW: Is it theoretically possible, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes. It's possible. 
SHAW: Thank you. Your witness, Mister Cogley. 
COGLEY: No questions. 
STONE: You may step down. Mister Cogley. You've listened to testimony from three witnesses, and in neither instance have you availed yourself of your right to cross-examine. Have you abrogated that right? 
COGLEY: Well, sir, the truth is, I've been holding back till we get this preliminary business out of the way. I'd like to call Captain Kirk to the stand. 
COMPUTER: James T. Kirk, serial number SC937-0176CEC. Service rank, Captain. Position, Starship command. Current assignment, USS Enterprise. Commendations, Palm Leaf Of Axanar Peace Mission, Grankite Order of Tactics, Class of Excellence, Prantares Ribbon of Commendation, Classes first and second 
SHAW: May it please the court. 
STONE: Court recognises counsel for the prosecution. 
SHAW: The prosecution concedes the inestimable record of Captain Kirk. 
STONE: Mister Cogley? 
COGLEY: I wouldn't want to slow the wheels of progress. But then on the other hand, I wouldn't want those wheels to run over my client in their unbridled haste. 
STONE: Continue. 
COMPUTER: Awards of valour, Medal of Honour, Silver Palm with Cluster, Starfleet citation for Conspicuous Gallantry, Karagite Order of Heroism 
COGLEY: Stop. I think that's enough. I wouldn't want to slow things up too much. 
SHAW: Thank you. 
COGLEY: Now, Captain, despite what these machines indicate, was there indeed a Red Alert before you jettisoned the pod? 
KIRK: Yes, sir, there was. 
COGLEY: Please tell us about it. 
KIRK: Firstly, I am at a loss to explain the errors in the extract from the computer log. We were in an ion storm. Everyone here in this court knows the dangers involved. I was in command. The decisions were mine, no one else's. Charges of malice have been raised. There was no malice. Lieutenant Commander Finney was a member of my crew, and that's exactly the way he was treated. It has been suggested that I panicked on the bridge and jettisoned the ion pod prematurely. That is not so. You've heard some of the details of my record. This was not my first crisis. It was one of many. During it, I did what my experience and training required me to do. I took the proper steps in the proper order. I did exactly what had to be done, exactly when it should have been done. 
COGLEY: You did the right thing, but would you do it again? 
KIRK: Given the same circumstances I would do the same thing without hesitation, because the steps I took in the order I took them were absolutely necessary if I were to save my ship. And nothing is more important than my ship. 
COGLEY: Your witness, Miss Shaw. 
SHAW: The prosecution does not wish to dishonour this man, but facts are facts. I must invite the attention of the court and Captain Kirk to this visual extract from the Enterprise computer log. Play back. What you are about to see is precisely what took place on the Enterprise bridge during the ion storm.

[Bridge]

(On the courtroom viewscreen) 
UHURA: Meteorology reports ion storm upcoming, Captain. 
KIRK: We'll need somebody in the pod for readings. 
SPOCK: Mister Finney is top of duty roster, Captain. 
KIRK: Post him. 
SPOCK: Attention, Commander Finney, report to pod for reading on ion plates. 
FINNEY [OC]: Message Received. 
SPOCK: Officer posted, Captain. 
(The ship suddenly judders) 
KIRK: Stand by on alert status, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged. 
HANSON: Approaching ion storm, sir. 
KIRK: Warp factor one, Mister Hanson. 
HANSON: Warp one, sir. 
(There's another sharp jerk, and Kirk presses a button on his chair panel.)

[Courtroom]

SHAW: Reverse. Stop. Go forward with magnification on the panel. Freeze that. Captain Kirk is now signalling a Yellow Alert. Go forward, normal view.

[Bridge]

(On courtroom viewscreen.) 
UHURA: Call from the pod, sir. 
KIRK: Tie in. 
FINNEY [OC]: Finney here, Captain. Ion readings in progress. 
KIRK: Make it fast, Ben. I may have to go to Red Alert. 
FINNEY [OC]: Affirmative. 
KIRK: Hold our course, Mister Hanson. 
HANSON: Aye, aye, sir. Natural vibrations, force two, Captain. Force three. 
KIRK: Engineering, then ion pod. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Engineering. 
KIRK: One third more thrust. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Working. 
FINNEY [OC]: Ion pod. 
KIRK: Stand by to get out of there, Ben. 
FINNEY [OC]: Aye, aye, sir. 
HANSON: Force five, sir. 
KIRK: Steady as she goes, Mister Hanson. 
(And the close up on the Captain's panel shows...)

[Courtroom]

SHAW: Freeze that! If the court will notice, the log plainly shows the defendant's finger pressing the jettison button. The condition signal reads Yellow Alert. Not red alert, but simply Yellow Alert. When the pod containing Lieutenant Commander Finney was jettisoned, the emergency did not as yet exist. 
KIRK: But that's not the way it happened.

Captain's Log, Stardate 2949.9. The evidence presented by the visual playback to my general court-martial was damning. I suspect even my attorney has begun to doubt me.

[Kirk's room]

COGLEY: Computers don't lie. 
KIRK: Are you suggesting that I did? 
COGLEY: I'm suggesting that maybe you did have a lapse. It was possible, you know, with the strain you were under. There's still time to change our plea. I could get you off. 
KIRK: Two days ago, I would've staked anything on my judgment. 
COGLEY: You did. Your professional career. 
KIRK: I spent my whole life training for decisions just like that one. My whole life. Is it possible that when the moment came? No. I know what I did. You can pull out if you want to. 
COGLEY: There's no place to go, except back to court and hear the verdict. 
(Communicator beeps) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK: Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: I've run a complete megalyte survey on the computer.

[Kirk's room]

KIRK: I'll tell you what you found. Nothing, right?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: You sound bitter, Captain.

[Kirk's room]

KIRK: Not bitter enough to forget to thank you for your efforts.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Further instructions?

[Kirk's room]

KIRK: No. It's not all bad, Mister Spock. Who knows. You may be able to beat your next captain at chess. Kirk out.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Chess.

[Kirk's room]

(The door opens) 
KIRK: Jamie. This is Lieutenant Commander Finney's daughter. 
JAMIE: Mister Cogley, we've got to stop this. Make him take a ground assignment. I realise it wasn't his fault. I won't make any trouble. Make him change his plea. 
KIRK: It's too late for that, Jamie, but I'm glad you don't blame me anymore for what happened. 
JAMIE: I was just so upset that night. I'm sorry. 
KIRK: Don't say any more. 
JAMIE: But I have to. I never realised how close you and Dad had been until I read through some papers he wrote, letters to Mother and me. I don't know how I ever could've thought that you. Mister Cogley, ruining Jim won't change what's happened. 
COGLEY: That's very commendable, Miss Finney, but most unusual. After all, Captain Kirk is accused of causing your father's death, and the evidence would indicate his guilt. 
JAMIE: I was just thinking of Jim. 
KIRK: I know, and I thank you. I have to go and change. You ready? 
COGLEY: No, but I may be getting ready.

[Briefing room]

COMPUTER: Bishop, half level right. 
MCCOY: Well, I had to see it to believe it. 
SPOCK: Explain. 
MCCOY: They're about to lop off the captain's professional head, and you're sitting here playing chess with the computer. 
SPOCK: That is true. 
MCCOY: Mister Spock, you're the most cold-blooded man I've ever known. 
SPOCK: Why, thank you, Doctor. I've just won my fourth game. 
MCCOY: That's impossible. 
SPOCK: Observe for yourself. Rook to king's pawn four. 
COMPUTER: Bishop, half level right. 
SPOCK: Now, this is the computer's move. And now mine. (takes the bishop) Checkmate. Mechanically, the computer's flawless. Therefore, logically, its report of the captain's guilt is infallible. I could not accept that, however. 
MCCOY: So you tested the programme bank. 
SPOCK: Exactly. I programmed it myself for chess some months ago. The best I should have been able to attain was a draw. 
MCCOY: Well, why are you just sitting there? 
SPOCK: Transporter room, stand by. We're beaming down.

[Courtroom]

STONE: Court is now in session. The board will entertain motions before delivering its verdict. Counsel for the prosecution? 
SHAW: Sir, the prosecution rests. 
STONE: Counsel for the defence? 
COGLEY: Sir, the defence rests. 
(McCoy and Spock run in and whisper to Kirk and Cogley) 
STONE: Mister Cogley. Mister Cogley! 
COGLEY: Sir, some new evidence has just been brought to my attention. I'd like to ask the court to 
SHAW: Objection! Counsel for the defence has rested his case. 
STONE: Of what nature is this evidence? 
COGLEY: I can't tell you, I'll have to show you. 
SHAW: Mister Cogley is well-known for his theatrics. 
COGLEY: Is saving an innocent man's career a theatric? i
STONE: Counsels will kindly direct their remarks to the bench. 
COGLEY: I'd be delighted to, sir, now that I've got something human to talk about. Rights, sir, human rights. The Bible, the Code of Hammurabi and of Justinian, Magna Carta, the Constitution of the United States, Fundamental Declarations of the Martian colonies, the Statutes of Alpha Three. Gentlemen, these documents all speak of rights. Rights of the accused to a trial by his peers, to be represented by counsel, the rights of cross-examination, but most importantly, the right to be confronted by the witnesses against him, a right to which my client has been denied. 
SHAW: Your Honour, that is ridiculous. We produced the witnesses in court. My learned opponent had the opportunity to see them, cross-examine them. 
COGLEY: All but one. The most devastating witness against my client is not a human being. It's a machine, an information system. The computer log of the Enterprise. Can ask this court adjourn and reconvene aboard that vessel. 
SHAW: I protest, Your Honour. 
COGLEY: And I repeat, I speak of rights. A machine has none. A man must. My client has the right to face his accuser, and if you do not grant him that right, you have brought us down to the level of the machine. Indeed, you have elevated that machine above us. I ask that my motion be granted, and more than that, gentlemen. In the name of humanity, fading in the shadow of the machine, I demand it. I demand it!

Captain's Log, Stardate 2950.1. After due consideration, the general court-martial has reconvened on board the Enterprise.

[Briefing room]

COGLEY: How many games of chess did you win from the computer, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Five in all. 
COGLEY: May that be considered unusual? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. 
COGLEY: Why? 
SPOCK: I personally programmed the computer for chess months ago. I gave the machine an understanding of the game equal to my own. The computer cannot make an error and assuming that I do not either, the best that could normally be hoped for would be stalemate after stalemate, and yet I beat the machine five times. Someone, either accidentally or deliberately, adjusted the programming and therefore the memory banks of that computer. 
COGLEY: Could that have had an effect on the visual playback we saw? 
SHAW: Object! The witness would be making a conclusion. 
STONE: Sustained. 
COGLEY: Hypothetically, Mister Spock. Hypothetically, Miss Shaw. If what you suggest had been done, it would be beyond the capabilities of most men. Is that true? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. 
COGLEY: What man aboard ship would it not be beyond? 
SPOCK: The Captain, myself, and the records officer. 
COGLEY: And at the moment, you have no records officer. 
SPOCK: Affirmative. Until he was lost, our records officer was Lieutenant Commander Finney. 
COGLEY: Captain Kirk, will you tell the steps you took to find Mister Finney after the storm? 
KIRK: I instituted a phase one search. 
COGLEY: Describe a phase one search. 
KIRK: It's a painstaking, thorough attempt in and around the ship to find a man who's presumably injured and unable to respond. 
COGLEY: It presupposes, does it not, that a man wishes to be found? 
KIRK: I beg your pardon? 
COGLEY: If you start a search for a man, you assume, don't you, that he wants to be found? He's not hiding? 
KIRK: Yes. 
COGLEY: On a ship of this size, could a man evade such a search? 
KIRK: Possibly. 
COGLEY: Gentlemen, I submit to you that Lieutenant Commander Ben Finney is not dead.

[Bridge]

STONE: Mister Cogley, we are waiting for proof of the extraordinary statement you made in the briefing room. 
COGLEY: You shall have it, but first I need the co-operation of this court in conducting an experiment. Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, for the purposes of this experiment, it'll be necessary for all personnel, except for members of the court and the command crew, to leave the ship. I am ordering all others to report to the transporter room. 
COGLEY: Including myself, sir. 
STONE: This court is by no means adjourned, Mister Cogley. 
COGLEY: I have an errand ashore of vital importance to the purpose of this court, and I will return. 
STONE: Very well. 
COGLEY: Thank you, sir. 
(Leaves with the spare crew members.) 
STONE: Captain, are you maintaining an engine crew aboard? 
KIRK: Our impulse engines have been shut down. We'll maintain orbit by momentum. 
KRASNOVSKY: And when the orbit decays? 
KIRK: We hope to be finished long before that. 
(A little later) 
KIRK: Ready, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Affirmative, Captain. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, this computer has an auditory sensor. It can, in effect, hear sounds. By installing a booster, we can increase that capability on the order of one to the fourth power. The computer should bring us every sound occurring on the ship. 
CREWMAN [OC]: All personnel have left the ship as ordered, sir. 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy? All right, Mister Spock. 
(A cacophony of heartbeats comes over the bridge speakers.) 
KIRK: Turn it down a little. Gentlemen, that sound is caused by the heartbeats of all the people on board the ship. Doctor McCoy will use this white sound device to mask out each person's heartbeat so that it will be eliminated from the sounds we are hearing. 
MCCOY: First, the Captain. Mister Spock. 
(He goes around the assembled group one at a time) 
MCCOY: And lastly, myself. 
KIRK: That's all of us, except for crewman in the transporter room. Mister Spock, eliminate his heartbeat. That accounts for everyone. 
(But still one heart beats over the speakers.) 
STONE: Finney. 
KIRK; Localise that. 
SPOCK: B deck, in or near Engineering. 
KIRK: Seal off B deck, sections 18Y through 23D. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged. 
STONE: So Finney is alive. 
KIRK: It would seem so. Commodore, this is my problem. I'd appreciate it if no one left the bridge.

[Corridor]

(Armed with a phaser, Kirk makes his way alone.) 
KIRK [OC]: Sam Cogley had gone a shore to bring Jamie Finney on board. We felt Jamie's presence would make Finney easier to handle in the event Finney really were alive. 
KIRK: Ben.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Ben Finney. 
HANSON: Mister Spock, encountering variants. 
SPOCK: Compensate. 
SHAW: What does that mean? 
STONE: The orbit is beginning to decay.

[Engineering]

KIRK: Ben, where are you? 
FINNEY [OC]: Hello, Captain!

[Bridge]

FINNEY [OC]: Nothing to say

[Engineering]

FINNEY [OC]: Captain? 
KIRK: I'm glad you're alive. 
FINNEY [OC]: You mean you're relieved because you think your career is saved. Well, you're wrong. 
KIRK: Ben! Ben, it's not too late. We can help you. 
FINNEY [OC]: Like you helped me all along? Kept me down

[Bridge]

FINNEY [OC]: Robbed me of my own command?

[Engineering]

FINNEY [OC]: I'm a good officer, as good as you. I've watched you for years. The great Captain Kirk. 
(We finally see the man, as he jabs a phaser into Kirk's back) 
FINNEY: They told you to do it to me. You all conspired against me. You ruined me, but you won't do it anymore. 
(He disarms Kirk and throws the weapon away. Kirk turns to face him.) 
KIRK: Put the phaser down, Ben. 
FINNEY: Oh, I wouldn't kill you, Captain. Your own death would mean too little to you, But your ship 
KIRK: What about my ship? 
FINNEY: It's dead. I've killed it. I tapped out your primary energy circuits. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, what's our orbit status?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Decaying, Captain. 
HANSON: Variants at second level

[Engineering]

HANSON [OC]: Depreciating unusually fast. 
FINNEY: You're out of power. I know the ship, too. The Enterprise should've been mine. You kept me from it. 
KIRK: Ben. Why kill innocent people? 
FINNEY: Innocent? Officers and gentlemen, Captains all. Except for Finney and his one mistake. A long time ago, but they don't forget. 
KIRK: I logged the mistake, Ben. Blame me, not them.

[Bridge]

FINNEY [OC]: But they are to blame. All of them.

[Engineering]

FINNEY: I was a good officer. I really was. I loved the service more than any man ever dared.

[Bridge]

HANSON: Mister Spock, we're running out of time. 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, if you'll please hurry to the transporter room 
STONE: Mister Spock, the court has not yet reached a verdict. We will hear this witness out. 
SPOCK: Very well, sir.

[Engineering]

KIRK: It's not too late. You can be helped. But if you kill those people 
FINNEY: Why shouldn't I? They killed me, didn't they? It's a fair trade. 
KIRK: Is Jamie included in that deal? 
FINNEY: What do you mean? 
KIRK: She's on board by now. Yes. She's on board. 
FINNEY: What? Why did you do that? Why did you bring her here? I'll kill you! 
(Kirk takes his opportunity to grapple with the bigger man. There's a fight in which Kirk's shirt gets torn. Finney swings at Kirk with a wrench, but finally has his lights punched out.) 
KIRK [OC]: Beaten and sobbing, Finney told me where he had sabotaged the prime energy circuits.

[Jefferies tube]

KIRK [OC]: The damage he'd caused was considerable, but not irreparable. With luck, I would be able to effect repairs before our orbit decayed completely. 
(For repairs, read pulling cables out of junction boxes.)

[Bridge]

HANSON: Power returning, Mister Spock. Up fourteen points and rising. 
SPOCK: Activate port impulse engines. One third power. 
(Uhura takes navigation) 
HANSON: One third power. 
UHURA: Variants fading. 
HANSON: Orbit stabilising. 
UHURA: All secure, sir. 
STONE: Unless the prosecution has an objection, I rule this court to be dismissed. 
SHAW: Absolutely no objection, sir. 
(Later, Kirk is in a fresh new shirt, and talking quietly to Areel in front of the turbolift doors. Around them it is business as usual.) 
SHAW: How long will it be this time before I see you again? 
KIRK: At the risk of sounding like a mystic, that depends on the stars. 
SHAW: Sam Cogley asked me to give you something special. It's not a first edition, just a book. Sam says that makes it special. 
KIRK: I didn't have much of a chance to thank him. 
SHAW: He's busy on a case. He's defending Ben Finney. He says he'll win. 
KIRK: I wouldn't be a bit surprised. 
SHAW: Do you think it would cause a complete breakdown of discipline if a lowly lieutenant kissed a Starship Captain on the bridge of his ship? 
KIRK: Let's try. (a gentle but lingering kiss) See? No change. Discipline goes on. 
SHAW: And so must the Enterprise. Goodbye, Jim. 
KIRK: Goodbye, Areel. Better luck next time. 
SHAW: I had pretty good luck this time. I lost, didn't l? 
(She leaves, blowing him a final kiss. He pulls himself together, goes to his chair and sits between two stony-faced officers.) 
KIRK: She's a very good lawyer. 
SPOCK: Obviously. 
MCCOY: Indeed she is.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Tomorrow is Yesterday
Stardate: 3113.2
Original Airdate: 26 Jan, 1967

[US Air Force base - radar room]
WEBB: (the radar operator) Captain. 
CAPTAIN: What is it, Webb? 
WEBB: A blip, sir. Just came on the screen. 
CAPTAIN: How do you read it? 
WEBB: Aircraft of some sort. By the size of it and the speed, it's not one of ours, sir. It doesn't even read like anything I've ever seen. 
CAPTAIN: What was the approach? 
WEBB: None, sir. It was just there, like it fell out of the sky or something. 
CAPTAIN: (suddenly interested) Current position? 
WEBB: Directly over the Omaha installation, sir. Holding there. 
CAPTAIN: Watch the scope, Webb. Air Defence will want to send somebody up for a closer look. We may have a real UFO on our hands. 
(The alert sounds, a fighter is scrambled, and we get a shot of the USS Enterprise flying across the blue sky.)

Captain 's log Stardate 3113.2. We were en-route to Starbase 9 for resupply when a black star of high gravitational attraction began to drag us toward it. It required all warp power in reverse to pull us away from the star. But, like snapping a rubber band, the breakaway sent us plunging through space, out of control, to stop here, wherever we are.

[Bridge]

(The crew are picking themselves and their chairs up off the floor) 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Except for secondary systems, everything is out, sir. We're on impulse power only. 
KIRK: Auxiliaries? 
SPOCK: If Mister Scott is still with us, auxiliaries should be on momentarily. (Uhura is just stirring on the floor) Are you all right, Lieutenant? 
(He helps her back to her seat, and the lights come on.) 
SPOCK: Mister Scott is still with us. 
KIRK: This is the Captain. Damage control parties on all decks, check in. All departments tie in with the record computer. Report casualties and operational readiness to the First Officer. Kirk out. Lieutenant Uhura, contact Starfleet Control. I want them alerted to the position of that black star that's in the area of Starbase 9. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain? Casualty reports indicate only minor injuries. Engineering reports warp engines non-operational. Mister Scott overrode the automatic helm setting and is holding us in orbit on impulse power. 
KIRK: Orbit where? 
SPOCK: Earth, Captain. We were on a general course in this direction when we were pulled in by the star. Apparently the breakaway threw us on in the same direction. 
KIRK: Screen on. 
(A full view of north America is on screen, with not a cloud in sight.) 
SPOCK: We are too low in the atmosphere to retain this orbit, Captain. Engineering reports we have sufficient impulse power to achieve escape velocity. 
KIRK: Give us some altitude, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. Helm answering. She's sluggish, sir. 
UHURA: Captain, normal Starfleet channel has nothing but static. I'm getting something on another frequency, but it's not Starfleet. 
KIRK: Put it on audio. 
MAN [OC]: This is the five thirty news summary. Cape Kennedy. The first manned Moon shot is scheduled for Wednesday, six am Eastern Standard Time. All three astronauts who are to make this historic 
(Kirk signals it cut off) 
KIRK: Manned Moon shot? That was in the late 1960s. 
SPOCK: Apparently, Captain, so are we. 
KIRK: What? 
SPOCK: Whiplash propelled us into a time warp, Captain. Backward. Exact chronometer readings in a few moments. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm getting ground to air transmission. 
SPOCK: Verified. Scanners report some type of craft approaching from below us. Under cloud cover and closing.

[Jet fighter]

FLIGHT [OC]: Bluejay 4, this is Blackjack. We're tracking you and the UFO. 
CHRISTOPHER: I have him on my screen. Following.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Sulu, can you gain altitude faster? I want to outdistance him. 
SULU: Picking up, sir, but she's still slow in responding.

[Jet fighter]

CHRISTOPHER: Blackjack, this is Bluejay 4. UFO is picking up speed and climbing. I'm going in closer. 
FLIGHT [OC]: Bluejay 4, you should be close enough for visual contact. 
CHRISTOPHER: I can see it now. Whatever this is, it's big. Two cylindrical projections on top, one below. Purpose undetermined. 
FLIGHT [OC]: We have two flights scrambled and on the way. They should rendezvous in your sector in two minutes. 
CHRISTOPHER: I won't be here. The UFO's climbing away fast.

[Bridge]

FLIGHT [OC]: Bluejay 4, you are ordered to close on the UFO. and attempt to force him to land. We want it brought down or at least disabled until the other planes arrive. 
CHRISTOPHER [OC]: Acknowledged. Closing on target. 
SPOCK: Positive identification, Captain. Aircraft is an interceptor, equipped with missiles, possibly armed with nuclear warheads. If he hits us with one, he might damage us severely, perhaps beyond our capacity to repair under current circumstances. 
KIRK: Scotty, activate tractor beam. Lock onto that aircraft and hold it out there. 
SPOCK: Captain, this type of aircraft might be too fragile to take our tractor beam. 
SCOTT [OC]: Tractor beam on, sir. We have the target. 
(The bright light of the tractor beam forces Captain Christopher to lower his visor) 
SPOCK: Aircraft is breaking up, Captain. 
KIRK; Transporter room. Can you lock onto the cockpit of that aircraft? 
KYLE: Scanning area, sir. 
KIRK: Try and beam that pilot aboard. Take over, Mister Spock.

[Transporter room]

(From his seated position strapped into his fighter, Captain Christopher is beamed aboard standing up.) 
KIRK: Welcome aboard the Enterprise. 
CHRISTOPHER: You speak English. 
KIRK: That's right. You can step off the transporter 
CHRISTOPHER: Captain John Christopher, United States Air Force. Serial number 4857932. 
KIRK: Relax, Captain, you're among friends. I'm Captain James T. Kirk. 
CHRISTOPHER: What's going on here? Where am I? What happened? You people, who are you? 
KIRK: All in good time, Captain. Meanwhile, let me apologise for bringing you aboard the ship so abruptly, but it couldn't be helped. I didn't know that your craft couldn't stand up to our tractor beam. 
CHRISTOPHER: Don't give me any double-talk. Just tell me who you are. 
KIRK: We'll tell you what we decide to tell you in a few moments. In the meantime, relax. You're our guest. I have a feeling you'll find it interesting. 
SPOCK [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. What is it, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK [OC]: The aircraft has completely broken up, Captain. Shall we turn off the tractor beam? 
KIRK: Affirmative. We have the pilot aboard. I'll be right up. Kirk out. Follow me.

[Corridor]

CREWWOMAN: Good morning, Captain. 
KIRK: Morning. (drags Christopher along) Captain. 
CHRISTOPHER: A woman? 
KIRK: Crewman.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Bridge. 
CHRISTOPHER: Must have taken quite a lot to build a ship like this. 
KIRK: There are only twelve like it in the fleet. 
CHRISTOPHER: I see. Did the Navy 
KIRK: We're a combined service, Captain. Our authority is the United Earth Space Probe Agency. 
CHRISTOPHER: United Earth? 
KIRK: This is very difficult to explain. We're from your future. A time warp placed us here. It was an accident. 
CHRISTOPHER: You seem to have a lot of them. However, I can't deny the fact that you're here. With this ship.

[Bridge]

CHRISTOPHER: I never have believed in little green men. 
SPOCK: Neither have I. 
KIRK: Captain Christopher, this is my First Officer, Lieutenant Commander Spock. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Feel free to look around, Captain. Don't touch anything, but I think you'll find it interesting. 
CHRISTOPHER: Interesting is a word and a half for it, Captain. 
SPOCK: We've achieved a stable orbit out of Earth's atmosphere. Our deflectors are operative, enough to prevent our being picked up again as a UFO. And Mister Scott wishes to speak to you about the engines. 
KIRK: Very well, Mister Spock. Anything else on your mind? 
SPOCK: Captain Christopher. 
KIRK: What about him? 
SPOCK: We cannot return him to Earth, Captain. He already knows too much about us and is learning more. I do not specifically refer to Captain Christopher, but suppose an unscrupulous man were to gain certain knowledge of man's future? Such a man could manipulate key industries, stocks, and even nations. and in so doing, change what must be. And if it is changed, Captain, you and I and all that we know might not even exist. 
KIRK: Your logic can be most annoying. 
(Goes over to Christopher, who is talking to Uhura.) 
KIRK: That flight suit must be uncomfortable. (to Spock) Why don't you have the quartermaster issue him something more suitable? Then I want to meet you and him in my quarters. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir.

{Captain's quarters]

KIRK: Computer on. Record. 
COMPUTER: (in a low, breathy voice) Recording. 
KIRK: Come. 
(Spock enters with Christopher, who is now dressed in Command gold) 
KIRK: Captain's log, supplemental. Engineering Officer Scott informs warp engines damaged, but can be made operational and reenergised. 
COMPUTER: Computed and recorded, dear. 
KIRK: Computer, you will not address me in that manner. Compute. 
COMPUTER: Computed, dear. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, I ordered this computer and its interlinking systems repaired. 
SPOCK: I have investigated it, Captain. To correct the fault will require an overhaul of the entire computer system and a minimum of three weeks at a Starbase. 
KIRK: I wouldn't mind so much if it didn't get so affectionate. 
SPOCK: It also has an unfortunate tendency to giggle. 
CHRISTOPHER: I take it that a lady computer is not routine. 
SPOCK: We put in at Cygnet Fourteen for general repair and maintenance. Cygnet Fourteen is a planet dominated by women. They seemed to feel the ship's computer system lacked a personality. They gave it one. Female, of course. 
CHRISTOPHER: Well, you people certainly have interesting problems. I'd love to stay around to see how your girlfriend works out, but 
KIRK: I'm afraid you'll have to. We can't send you back. 
CHRISTOPHER: Can't? Spock here told me that your transporter can beam down an object even from an orbit this high. 
KIRK: It's not the transporter. It's you. You know what the future looks like. If anybody else finds out, they could change the course of it, destroy it. 
CHRISTOPHER: Well then my disappearance would change something, too. 
SPOCK: I have run a computer check on all historical tapes. They show no record of any relevant contribution by John Christopher. 
CHRISTOPHER: Look, Captain, I don't buy all your time accident story. The experts can figure out who you are and what you are. It's my duty to report what I've seen. Well, what would you do? 
KIRK: I'd report, If I could. We can't take the risk. 
CHRISTOPHER: I don't want to know about risks. I have a wife, two children. What about them? 
KIRK: I'm sorry. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engine room to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: What is it, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Progress report, sir. Everything's jury-rigged, but we're coming along with the repairs. We could re-energise in about four hours, but

[Captain's quarters]

KIRK: But what, Scotty?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Well sir, as I say, the engines are being repaired, but we've no place to go in this time. If you, if you see what I mean?

[Captain's quarters]

SCOTT [OC]: Sir? 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty. Carry on. 
CHRISTOPHER: Too bad, Captain. Maybe I can't go home, but neither can you. You're as much a prisoner in time as I am.

Captain's Log Stardate 3113.7. Our engines are being repaired, but we are still locked in time, and we have aboard a passenger whom we do not want, and we cannot return.

[Captain's quarters]

COMPUTER: Recommendation for his disposition, dear? 
KIRK: Maintenance note. My recording computer has a serious malfunction. Recommend it either be corrected or scrapped. Compute. 
COMPUTER: (petulant) Computed. 
SPOCK [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Have some new information regarding Captain Christopher. Important I see you both immediately. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. Report to my quarters. I'll contact Captain Christopher. 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes, sir. Bridge out. 
KIRK: Captain Christopher. Captain Christopher? Security, this is the Captain. 
CHIEF [OC]: Security Chief here, sir. 
Kirk; All decks alert. Captain Christopher is not in his assigned quarters. He may be trying to escape the ship. I want a man outside the transporter room immediately. I'm heading there myself.

[Corridor]

(Christopher gets the jump on a hapless red-shirt and takes his phaser, then steps into)

[Transporter room]

CHRISTOPHER: All right. Nice and easy. Now I'm going to step into that thing, and you're going to transport me back to Earth. 
(He hears a noise behind him, and turns to have Kirk disarm him and knock him out)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Well, Jim, with the exception of a slight bruise or two, our Captain is as healthy as a proverbial horse. He'll be coming out of it in a minute or two. 
KIRK: He tried to escape. I know how he feels, but I can't send him back with what he knows. 
MCCOY: Jim, what if we can't go back? What do we do, sit up here and wait for our supplies to run out, our power to die? It has to eventually, you know. We certainly can't go back to Earth. It would be worse than the Captain being returned. There are four hundred and thirty of us, and that means four hundred and thirty chances of altering the future. 
KIRK: Yes. But we're not in that position yet. 
MCCOY: I'm glad to hear it. 
KIRK: And if we do get back to where we belong, then he won't belong. We're roughly about the same age, but in our society he'd be useless. Archaic. 
MCCOY: Maybe he could be retrained, reeducated. 
KIRK: Now you're sounding like Spock. 
MCCOY: If you're going to get nasty, I'm going to leave. 
KIRK: Could he be retrained to forget his family? His children? 
CHRISTOPHER: The answer to that is no. 
KIRK: You all right? 
CHRISTOPHER: Yeah. I see physical training is required in your service, too. 
SPOCK: Crude methods, but effective. 
CHRISTOPHER: What does he mean by that? 
MCCOY: It's just a joke, Captain. 
KIRK: You said you had some additional information, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I made an error in my computations. 
MCCOY: Oh? This could be an historic occasion. 
SPOCK: I find that we must return Captain Christopher to Earth after all. 
CHRISTOPHER: Why? You said I made no relative contribution. 
SPOCK: Poor choice of words on my part. I neglected, in my initial run-through, to correlate the possible contributions by offspring. I find, after running a crosscheck on that factor, that your son Colonel Shaun Geoffrey Christopher headed, or will head, the first successful Earth-Saturn probe, which is a rather significant 
CHRISTOPHER: Wait a minute. I don't have a son. 
MCCOY: You mean yet. 
SPOCK: The doctor is correct. Unless we return Captain Christopher to Earth, There will be no Colonel Shaun Geoffrey Christopher to go to Saturn. 
KIRK: Well, that's it, isn't it? We'll have to find some way of 
CHRISTOPHER: A boy. I'm going to have a son.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Acknowledging that we must return Captain Christopher, there are several problems, prime of which is the explanation of his return. We tracked his plane wreckage down after our tractor beam crushed it. It crashed in an open section of southern Nebraska. 
KIRK: That means those search parties will be crawling all over that wreckage. 
SPOCK: And Captain Christopher himself complicated the matter. 
CHRISTOPHER: When I made visual contact, I turned on my wing cameras. I got close enough to take some pretty clear pictures of you. Air Defence Command will be processing that film fast. And ADC Control was probably recording my radio transmissions. 
KIRK: If I remember my history, these things were being dismissed as weather balloons, sun dogs, explainable things. At least publicly. 
SPOCK: Captain, our tractor beam caught and crushed an Air Force plane. It'll be impossible to explain this as anything other than a genuine UFO. Possibly alien, definitely destructive. 
KIRK: What about our problem, Mister Spock? Any ideas on how to get us back to our own time? 
SPOCK: A theory. A reverse application of what happened to us. Logically, it could work. Also, logically, there are a hundred variables, any one of which could put us in a worse position than we're in now. 
KIRK: We're going to have to go back and get those reports and photos. If the Captain feels duty bound to report what he saw, there won't be any evidence to support him. 
CHRISTOPHER: That makes me out to be either a liar or a fool. 
KIRK: Perhaps. 
SPOCK: Not at all. You'll simply be one of the thousands who thought he saw a UFO. 
CHRISTOPHER: Captain, I know that base. I was stationed there a year ago. I'd like to 
KIRK: No, Captain. Thank you, but if anything should go wrong, you might get hurt. We couldn't risk that. Neither could you or your son. 
CHRISTOPHER: Well, I'd like to help. I could sketch a layout of the place for you. Show you where the record section and the photo lab are. 
(Kirk hands him a PADD)

[498 Airbase Group Air Defence Command]

(It's nighttime, and a guard is patrolling the corridors when Kirk and Sulu beam in. They smile at the quaint notice board and trophy cupboard before breaking into the Statistical Services Division by means of a sort of sonic screwdriver. Kirk's torch lights up a bank of magnetic tapes)
KIRK: Primitive computer. I've seen them demonstrated in museums. 
SULU: Me, too. If this one's like those, it'll make the devil's noise if you start it. 
KIRK: I don't intend to start it.

[Transporter room]

MCCOY: How long have they been down there now? 
SPOCK: Fifteen minutes, twenty eight seconds. 
MCCOY: Well, shouldn't they be coming up? 
SPOCK: It is a fact, Doctor, that prowling by stealth is more time-consuming than a direct approach. In our case 
MCCOY: Shouldn't you be working on your time warp calculations, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I am.

[ADC Statistical Services]

(They've just taken the magnetic tape when the lights go on and an armed guard confronts them) 
SERGEANT: Hold it. Get your hands up. Now, one at a time, hand me those belts. 
(They hand over the belts with the phasers attached to them) 
SERGEANT: And the bag.

[Transporter room]

MCCOY: It's been too long. Jim should have at least signaled by now. 
SPOCK: You may be correct, Doctor. Open communicator channel.

[ADC Statistical Services]

(There's a beeping sound) 
SERGEANT: What was that? 
KIRK: What was what? 
SERGEANT: That noise. 
SULU: I didn't hear anything. 
SERGEANT: That noise. It's coming from one of these things. 
(He has a communicator in his hand, so he puts down the bag and belts and opens it.) 
SULU: The emergency signal. 
SERGEANT: Stay right where you are.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: One emergency signal, sir. 
SPOCK: Beam up immediately. 
MCCOY: Only one signal. What happened? 
SPOCK: We'll know in a moment, Doctor. 
(The Sergeant is beamed aboard.) 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SPOCK: Spock here. Are you all right, Captain?

[ADC Statistical Services]

KIRK: Yes, I'm all right, but as you can see, we have another problem.

Captain 's Log, Stardate 3113.9. First Officer Spock recording. Due to an unfortunate accident, we have taken aboard another unwanted passenger.

[ADC Statistical Services]

KIRK: Your surprise package is an Air Police sergeant from the base.

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: I want you to keep him in the transporter room. No sense in letting him see more of the ship than is necessary. 
SPOCK: I don't believe there'll be trouble in that respect, Captain. 
(The Sergeant still hasn't hardly moved a muscle when McCoy gently takes the gun and communicator out of his hands.) 
SPOCK: Our guest seems quite satisfied to remain where he is.

[ADC Statistical Services]

KIRK: Kirk out. (returns to the magnetic tapes) What was the chronometer reading when we first sighted Christopher's jet? 
SULU: Five thirty in that time zone, maybe a little after. 
KIRK: Put it at the end of these tapes, will you? Get them all. 
(They leave the room and head off down the corridor to the photo section)

[Photo lab]

KIRK: We'll try the darkroom.

[Guard room]

(On the monitor board, a light flashes on the board, indicating someone has entered the Photo Section) 
FELLINI: Photo lab.

[Dark room]

(Kirk is checking reels of film) 
KIRK: Yes, that's it. That's all of them. Signal Mister Spock that we're almost ready to beam up. I'll make a check of the files just in case. 
SULU: Yes, sir.

[Photo lab]

(Kirk walks out into the main lab just as security walk in. He shuts the door behind him and fights the three men, making lots of noise so Sulu can hear what is going on. He's eventually restrained, and the Colonel takes a look in the dark room. It's empty.) 
FELLINI: All right. Where's the other one? 
KIRK: What other one? 
FELLINI: Your partner. I saw you looking that was and I saw somebody move in there. 
KIRK: No, no, no. Just me. Besides, could anyone get out of here without your seeing them? 
FELLINI: No. Nobody should have been able to.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Your decision to beam up was quite correct, Mister Sulu. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engine room to Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Spock here. 
SCOTT [OC]: We've completed re-energising the warp engines, sir. We can re-fire them anytime. 
SPOCK: Do so now, engineer. We'll need all power to test our theory. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. Engine room out. 
SPOCK: (examining a roll of film) Poor photography. 
MCCOY: Blast your theories and observations, Mister Spock. What about Jim? He's down there alone, probably under arrest. He doesn't have a communicator, and we can't locate him or beam him back aboard without one. 
SPOCK: I am aware of that, Doctor. This is the first officer. Captain Christopher to the briefing room.

[Guard room]

FELLINI: Now, look, Mister. You and I had better start communicating. I want to know how you got in here. That's a simple question. Give me a simple answer. Nobody saw you. You got all the way inside without tripping any alarm. How did you do it? 
KIRK: Believe me, Colonel, you wouldn't believe me. 
FELLINI: Don't try to be funny. How did you get in? 
KIRK: I popped in out of thin air. 
FELLINI: You seem to think this is some kind of a game. 
KIRK: No, Colonel. I know it's no game. 
FELLINI: All right. What did you say your name was? 
KIRK: For the fourth time, my name is James T. Kirk. 
FELLINI: And how did you get inside a top security installation, James T. Kirk? 
KIRK: I told you, you wouldn't believe me. 
(The Colonel picks up the communicator) 
KIRK: Colonel, would you mind being careful with that? 
FELLINI: That worries you a little bit, huh? What is that, a radio? Transmitter of some kind? 
KIRK: Of some kind. 
FELLINI: You can be more specific than that, Kirk. I don't like mysteries. 
KIRK: If you don't stop being careless with that, you'll have one. A big one. 
FELLINI: I'll have it disassembled and examined. We are not dummies, mister. We know how to find out things we want to know. (tosses it to the guard standing nearby) What is that? Is that a uniform of some kind? 
KIRK: This little thing? Just something I slipped on. 
FELLINI: Kirk, maybe you don't realise how serious this is. Sabotage of a government installation 
KIRK: Did I sabotage something? 
FELLINI: No. We stopped you in time. But what would you have done if we hadn't found you? 
KIRK: Believe me, Colonel, nothing at all. 
FELLINI: Is that what you're here for? Nothing at all? 
KIRK: That's what would have happened if you hadn't interfered. 
FELLINI: All right, Kirk. Maybe this will make you laugh. Sabotage, espionage, unauthorised entry, burglary. How are those for starters? And I can think up lots more if you don't start talking. 
KIRK: All right, Colonel. The truth is, I'm a little green man from Alpha Centauri. A beautiful place. You ought to see it. 
FELLINI: I am going to lock you up for two hundred years. 
KIRK: That ought to be just about right.

[Briefing room]

CHRISTOPHER: He's probably being held in security section. Even if they've notified the authorities, it'll take a little time for someone to get there. 
SPOCK: Quite logical, Captain. Can you give us the co-ordinates to beam down a landing party near those interrogation rooms? 
CHRISTOPHER: Yes, but you're not going to get them unless you take me with you. 
SPOCK: I can't do that, Captain. 
MCCOY: If something went wrong 
CHRISTOPHER: Something's already gone wrong. Of course, you could beam down anywhere inside that base, but it would take time to find him. 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, you and Captain Christopher will beam down with me. The captain will provide the co-ordinates for the transporter chief. 
SULU: Shall I issue phasers? 
SPOCK: One for you, one for me. Set them on heavy stun force. 
SULU: Yes, sir. (leaves) 
CHRISTOPHER: You don't trust me, Spock. 
SPOCK: In fact, I do. But only to a certain point.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Energise. 
(The party are beamed down) 
SERGEANT: Do they do that all the time? 
KYLE: Are you hungry? 
SERGEANT: Uh-huh. 
KYLE: What would you like? 
SERGEANT: Maybe some chicken soup. 
(Kyle puts a card in the slot and the hatch slides up to reveal a bowl on a tray. The Sergeant dips his finger in to taste it.) SERGEANT: It is.

[Air Base - Corridor]

(Captain Christopher walks past the guard on duty) 
GUARD: Just a minute, sir. Hold it. 
(Sulu karate-chops him into unconsciousness)

[Guard room]

(There's a knock at the door) 
FELLINI: See what that is, airman. 
(It's Spock, who neck-pinches the hapless airman. Kirk punches Lt. Colonel Fellini's lights out.) SPOCK: Don't you find that painful, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes, I do. What's he doing here? 
SPOCK: He knew the exact beam down co-ordinates for this section of the base. It was necessary to bring him along. 
KIRK: I see. No harm done. Mister Sulu, did you check out those tapes? 
SULU: Mister Spock ran them through. They were the right ones. We got them all. 
(Spock goes into the Colonel's office) 
CHRISTOPHER: They know you've been here. 
KIRK: All they have is a mystery and no answers. Mister Sulu, signal the Transporter Chief. Four to beam up. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
CHRISTOPHER: (holding the security guard's gun) Uh-uh. Not me. 
KIRK: Don't be a fool. You know what's at stake. 
CHRISTOPHER: You bet I do. My family. A son that isn't born yet. You don't have to return me now, Captain. Spock, come out of there. 
KIRK: You can't explain your presence on the base. 
CHRISTOPHER: I told you it's my duty to report everything I've seen. That's explanation enough. Spock! 
KIRK: You'll go home, Christopher but you'll do it our way. 
(Spock appears in the doorway behind Christopher) 
CHRISTOPHER: Over my dead body. 
(So he gets neck-pinched into unconsciousness) 
SPOCK: I suspected he might not wish to return with us. 
KIRK: Four to beam up, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir.

Captain's Log, Stardate 3114.1. We must make an attempt to break free of this time, or we and our reluctant passengers will remain its prisoners. All we have is a theory and a few facts.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Mister Scott and I both agree that the only possible solution is the slingshot effect, like the one that put us here. My computations indicate that if we fly toward the sun, seek out its magnetic attraction, then pull away at full power, the whiplash will propel us into another time warp. 
CHRISTOPHER: Slingshot effects are fine for you people. How do you propose to return the Sergeant and me? 
SPOCK: Logically, as we move faster and faster toward the sun, we'll begin to move backward in time. We'll actually go back beyond yesterday, beyond the point when we first appeared in the sky. Then, breaking free will shoot us forward in time, and we'll transport you back before any of this happened. 
KIRK: You won't have anything to remember, because it never would have happened. 
CHRISTOPHER: What if you can't pull free of the sun? 
SCOTT: Oh, we'll do that all right, Captain. We'll not be getting so close that my engines couldn't pull us out. What I am worried about, sir, that we may not have much control when we're thrown forward again. 
KIRK: Helm control? 
SCOTT: Braking control, sir. If I can't stop us soon enough, we may overshoot our time, and if I stop the engines suddenly the strain may tear us apart. Anyway we do it, it's a mighty rough ride. 
KIRK: Well, gentlemen, we all have to take a chance. Especially if one is all you have. Assume your stations.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise leaves orbit, and we watch the pretty blue and white globe receding on the viewscreen.) 
KIRK: Ahead warp factor three, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Warp factor three, sir. 
CHRISTOPHER: I never thought I'd make it into space. I was in line to be chosen for the space programme but I didn't qualify. 
KIRK: Take a good look around, Captain. You made it here ahead of all of them. 
SULU: Sir, our speed is increasing. We're travelling at over warp eight. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Since we've passed Mercury, the sun's pull on us has increased greatly. From here, we'll move even faster. And Captain, notice the chronometers. They've started backward. Minute by minute, the speed of time passage will now increase. 
KIRK: Get your gear. Report to the transporter room. And Captain Christopher, you only have about fifteen years, so you'd better hurry. 
(Christopher leaves, and time passes.) 
SPOCK: Approaching breakaway point. On the countdown. Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. 
KIRK: Now, Mister Sulu. (the ship lurches sideways) More power, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: It's maximum now, sir. She's fighting it. 
(Then everyone's thrown forward) 
SPOCK: We've broken free and heading back. 
SULU: Gaining speed now, Captain. We're now at warp four, warp seven. Eight. Off the dial, sir. 
SPOCK: Chronometers moving forward again, Captain. 
KIRK: Do you have the chronometer reading and the co-ordinates to return Captain Christopher and the guard? 
SPOCK: Computed. 
KIRK: Bridge to transporter room. Captain Christopher.

{Transporter room]

CHRISTOPHER: This is Christopher.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We're coming up on Earth fast, Captain. Are you ready? 
CHRISTOPHER [OC]: Everything A-OK.

[Transporter room]

CHRISTOPHER: Captain, thanks for the look ahead.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Our pleasure, Captain. Bridge out. 
(The blue planet grows larger on the viewscreen) 
SPOCK: Twenty minutes, sir. It'll be close. 
KIRK: Bridge to transporter room. Prepare to energise. 
SPOCK: Ten minutes. Nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. 
KIRK: Energise.

[Jet Fighter]

FLIGHT: You should be close enough for a visual contact. 
(Captain Christopher is beamed into himself. He has a look around, but Enterprise has vanished.) 
FLIGHT: Bluejay Four. Can you see it? What is it? Bluejay 4. Come in. We've lost the image. 
CHRISTOPHER: Blackjack, this is Bluejay Four. I could have sworn there was some kind of ship, but nothing could have moved that fast. 
FLIGHT: We don't track mirages.

[Bridge]

CHRISTOPHER [OC]: Mark it down as another UFO. Bluejay Four returning to base. Out. 
SPOCK: Approaching second beaming, Captain. 
KIRK: Bridge to transporter room, prepare to energise. 
SPOCK: Now. 
KIRK: Energise. 
(The sergeant is beamed into himself as he is about to look through the glass door of the Statistical Services Division. There's no one there, so he continues on his round.) 
SULU: Past Pluto, sir. 
KIRK: What's our reading, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Approaching our century, Captain. Braking should begin now. 
KIRK: Bridge to engineering. Begin full braking power.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Pulling away from the sun weakened them, sir. They may blow apart if I reverse.

[Bridge]

KIRK: No choice, Mister Scott.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Fifty years to go. 
SULU: Engines cutting back, sir. No decrease in speed. 
SPOCK: Forty, thirty. 
KIRK: Never mind, Mister Spock. 
(Once again, everyone gets thrown around) 
SULU: The engines!

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Engine room to Bridge. Engines are on full reverse. They're buckling! Bridge!

[Bridge]

(Things return to normal) 
KIRK: Mister Scott is still with us. 
UHURA: Captain. 
STARFLEET [OC]: Starfleet Control calling Enterprise. Come in, Enterprise. 
KIRK: Open a channel, Uhura. 
UHURA: Frequency open, sir. 
KIRK: Starfleet Control, this is the Enterprise. Captain Kirk speaking. 
COMPUTER: Record ship arrival, dear. 
STARFLEET [OC]: Enterprise, this is Starfleet Control. Come in, please. 
KIRK: Starfleet Control, repeating message. The Enterprise is home. Kirk out.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Arena
Stardate: 3045.6
Original Airdate: 19 Jan, 1967

[Transporter room]
(Enterprise is in orbit of a planet) 
KIRK: You'll enjoy Commodore Travers. He sets a good table. 
MCCOY: I wonder if he brought his personal chef along with him to Cestus Three.
KIRK: Probably. Rank hath its privileges.
MCCOY: How well we both know that. 
(Intercom whistles) 
KIRK: Scotty. Kirk here.
TRAVERS [OC]: Travers, Jim. We're waiting.
KIRK: Good, Commodore. We're on our way.
TRAVERS [OC]: Be sure to bring along your tactical people. I've got an interesting problem for them.
KIRK: We'll beam down immediately, Commodore. Kirk out.
SPOCK: Captain. I wonder why he's insistent that our tactical aides come down.
KIRK: This colony is isolated, exposed, out on the edge of now here. He probably wants additional advice.
SPOCK: Perhaps, Captain, but nevertheless 
MCCOY: Spock, isn't it enough the commodore is famous for his hospitality? I, for one, could use a good non-reconstituted meal.
SPOCK: Doctor, you are a sensualist.
MCCOY: You bet your pointed ears I am. Ready whenever you are, Captain.
(Six men, including one red shirt, get on the transporter platform) 
KIRK: Energise.

[Planet surface]

(There is no one waiting to meet them. Instead, just razed ground and the smoke of a few fires) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Red alert.
SULU [OC]: What is it, Captain?
KIRK: Cestus Three has been destroyed.
(They take cover) 
KIRK: Full alert. Tricorder readings, Mister Spock. Life detection.
SPOCK: Those messages we got, Captain, the one directing us here yesterday. 
KIRK: Faked. All this happened several days ago. (to a man in a yellow shirt) Lang, over there. Look for survivors. Kelowitz, (blue shirt) that way. (to the red shirt) O'Herlihy, stick with me.
SPOCK: Captain, impulses that direction. Very weak, possibly a survivor.
KIRK: Come on, Bones.

Captain's log, Stardate 3045.6 The Enterprise has responded to a call from Earth observation outpost on Cestus Three. On landing, we have discovered that the outpost has been destroyed.

[Ruins]

MCCOY: Captain, over there. 
(They run to a lone survivor amongst a tangle of wreckage) 
Careful, careful. Shock, radiation burns, internal injuries for certain.
MCCOY: Careful, careful. Shock, radiation burns, internal injuries for certain. He's in a bad way, Captain.
KIRK: Keep him alive, Bones. I want to know what's been happening here.
SPOCK: Getting another life reading, Captain.
KIRK: Survivors?
SPOCK: Not survivors. Not warm-blooded. Living creatures, but not human.
KIRK: Where?
SPOCK: Azimuth ninety three degrees, range one five seven zero yards.
KIRK: O'Herlihy.
(Kirk sends his security guard off to look, but he hasn't gone far before he stands up and says) 
O'HERLIHY: Captain, I see something.
(And promptly gets hit by a beam and vanishes. There's also an incoming whistle and an explosion.) 
KIRK: Cover! Kirk to Enterprise, lock on transporters. Beam us up.

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, we're coming under attack. Unidentified ship quartering in.

[Ruins]

SULU [OC]: We can't beam you up. I've just rigged up defensive screens.
KIRK: Keep those screens up. Fire all phasers.

[Bridge]

SULU: Firing phasers, Captain. The alien has screens up, too.

[Ruins]

KIRK: Take all action necessary to protect the ship. We'll hold out here.

[Bridge]

SULU: Are you under attack, Captain?

[Ruins]

SULU [OC]: We could drop screens.
KIRK: Keep those screens up. Worry about us when the ship is safe.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Kirk out.

[Ruins]

(More bombs rain down around them) 
KIRK: If they lower those screens to beam us up, they'll be open to phaser attack.
SPOCK: We're hopelessly outnumbered here, Captain. It's those disruptors versus our hand phasers. 
KIRK: We're stuck with it, Mister Spock. We'll have to make do with what we've got. 
(Carrying the survivor, the away team heads into better shelter - Life Support Ramp 3 Level K according to the sign) 
KIRK: Kelowitz, Lang, flank out. Lay down fire on co-ordinates Mister Spock gave you. Even if you don't see them. Keep your heads down.
(Lang and Kelowitz leave) 
KIRK: We're helpless down here. And the Enterprise 
SPOCK: Sulu is an experienced combat officer.
KIRK: It's my ship, Mister Spock. I should be there. We can't even get at them.
SPOCK: Nor can they at us at the moment. Not unless they moved their original position. That intervening high ground. 
KIRK: Can you remember the layout of this place? The arsenal? 
SPOCK: About one hundred yards in that direction. But after an attack as thorough as this one
KIRK: I'll risk it.
(He does an heroic zigzag run amongst the incoming explosions, takes shelter behind an oil drum and calls Enterprise) 
KIRK: Kirk here. Report.

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, are you all right?

[Ruins]

KIRK: Never mind about me. What about the ship?

[Bridge]

SULU: We returned fire with all phaser banks. Negative against its deflector screen.

[Ruins]

KIRK: Arm your photon torpedoes.

[Bridge]

SULU: Aye, aye, sir. Arm photon torpedoes. Stand by.

[Ruins]

KIRK: Any identification on the attacking vessel? 
SULU [OC]: No, sir. Doesn't correspond with any configuration we're familiar with.

[Bridge]

SULU: We can't get visual contact. She's too far away.
DEPAUL: Mister Sulu, photon torpedoes locked on.
SULU: Photon torpedoes locked on, Captain.

[Ruins]

KIRK; Fire all banks.

[Bridge]

SULU: All banks fired, sir.

[Ruins]

KIRK: Sulu. Sulu, our communications are being interfered with. (An explosion makes him run further on into an old bomb crater) Now get this straight.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: You do anything you think necessary to protect the ship. Leave orbit, maximum warp, anything. Clear? 
SULU: Clear, Captain, but you

[Ruins]

KIRK: Never mind about me. Protect my ship!

[Bridge]

SULU: Yes, sir. Photon torpedoes negative, Captain. I'm warping out of orbit.

[Ruins]

KIRK: Good. Contact me when you can. Kirk out. 
(Kirk ducks into a building. Meanwhile, back over at Ramp 3) 
SPOCK: How is he, Doctor? 
MCCOY: He'll be dead in half an hour if we don't get him some decent care.
SPOCK: They're moving. I've got to get to the Captain. 
(He joins Kirk in the bomb crater, where a grenade launcher is being set up) 
SPOCK: Locked on to the enemy, Captain. They're moving toward the high ground. (fizzing sound and smoke) They've locked on to my tricorder. 
(He throws it away and it goes bang) 
SPOCK: Very ingenious. They fed back my own impulses and built up an overload.
KIRK: We'll see how ingenious they are. Here, give me a hand with this grenade launcher. Lang! 
SPOCK: Any word from the Enterprise?
KIRK: Sulu's taken her out of orbit.
KELOWITZ: They got Lang, sir.
KIRK: Did you see them?
KELOWITZ: No, sir.
KIRK: An evaluation, Mister Kelowitz. Where do you think they are?
KELOWITZ: If I were them, I'd go to the high ground on the right. I make it twelve hundred yards, azimuth eighty seven. It's pretty close for one of these little jewels, Captain. 
KIRK: It'll be a lot closer to them. Stand clear. 
(He drops a blue ball into the launcher, it zooms off and there is a blinding flash and bang. Silence reigns until Kirk's communicator beeps.) 
KIRK: Kirk here.
SULU [OC]: Captain, the alien's withdrawing. She's at extreme range, but our sensors indicate she just activated her transporters.
KIRK: Lock on to the alien, Mister Sulu. I don't want to lose her.

[Bridge]

SULU: Aye, aye, sir. Our screens are down. We can beam you up now, sir.

[Ruins]

KIRK: I want a search party of thirty medical personnel beamed down immediately to search for survivors. Notify the transporter room. Lock onto us. We're beaming up.

[Bridge]

SULU: Aye, aye, sir.

Captain's log, supplement. We have beamed back to the Enterprise and immediately set out in pursuit of the alien vessel. It appears to be headed toward a largely unexplored section of the galaxy.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Can you tell me what happened?
MAN: Scanners reported a ship approaching. We get them now and then. They're all welcome to use our facilities. You know that. 
KIRK: Yes, I know.
MAN: They came in space normal speed, using our regular approach route, but they knocked out our phaser batteries with their first salvo. From then on we were helpless. We weren't expecting anything! Why should we? We didn't have anything anyone would want.
KIRK: Easy. Easy.
MAN: They poured it on, like, like phasers, only worse, whatever they were using. I tried to signal them. We called up. Tried to surrender. We had women and children. I told them that! I begged them! They wouldn't listen. They didn't let up for a moment.
KIRK: Lieutenant, the Enterprise received two messages, ostensibly from Cestus Three. One for the Enterprise to go there, and the other for myself and my tactical crew to beam down to the surface.
MAN: They hit us a full day before you got there, Captain. No messages came from us, Captain. Why did they do it? Why? Why did they do it? There has to be a reason. There has to be a reason!

[Captain's quarters]

KIRK: It was a trap. Getting the Enterprise to come to Cestus Three, getting us and our whole crew to come ashore. 
SPOCK: Very clever. As to the reason? 
KIRK: The reason is crystal clear. The Enterprise is the only protection in this section of the Federation. Destroy the Enterprise, and everything is wide open.
SPOCK: You allude to invasion, Captain, yet positive proof 
KIRK: I have all the proof I need on Cestus Three.
SPOCK: Not necessarily, sir. Several possible explanations 
KIRK: How can you explain a massacre like that? No, Mister Spock. The threat is clear and immediate. Invasion.
SPOCK: Very well, then. If that's the case, you must make certain that the alien vessel never reaches its home base.
KIRK: I intend to. If we can keep them in the dark as to our strength, they'll never dare move against us. Captain to helmsman. 
SULU [OC]: Sulu here, sir.
KIRK: Is the alien still making warp five? 
SULU [OC]: Affirmative, sir.
KIRK: Initiate warp six. 
SULU [OC]: Affirmative, sir.
KIRK: Overtake. Phaser banks, lock on to the enemy vessel. Stand by for firing orders. All hands, this is the Captain. We are going into battle. All hands, battle stations. Red alert. I repeat, red alert. This is no drill. This is no drill.

Captain's log, Stardate 3046.2. We are in hot pursuit of the alien vessel which destroyed the Earth outpost on Cestus Three.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister DePaul. 
DEPAUL: Yes, sir.
KIRK: Position.
DEPAUL: Twenty two point three parsecs beyond latest chart limit, sir. 
KIRK: All scanners lock into computer banks. I want a complete record of this. Mister Spock, what do we have on this general area?
SPOCK: Virtually nothing, Captain. No records of any explorations. There are rumours of certain strange signals on subspace channels. However, none has ever been recorded.
KIRK: Anything on intelligent life forms?
SPOCK: Nothing specific, Captain. Unscientific rumours only. More like space legends.
KIRK: Mister Sulu, status, alien vessel.
SULU: They must be aware we're after them, sir. They've gone to warp six also.
KIRK: Warp factor seven.
SULU: Aye, aye, sir.
KIRK: Something the matter, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: A sustained warp seven speed will be dangerous, Captain.
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. I mean to catch them. 
SCOTT: We'll either catch them or blow up, Captain. They may be faster than we are.
KIRK: They'll have to prove it. Yes, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: You mean to destroy the alien ship, Captain? 
KIRK: Of course.
SPOCK: I thought perhaps the hot pursuit alone might be sufficient. Destruction might be unnecessary.
KIRK: Colony Cestus Three has been obliterated, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: The destruction of the alien vessel will not help that colony, Jim.
KIRK: If the aliens go unpunished, they'll be back, attacking other Federation installations.
SPOCK: I merely suggested that a regard for sentient life 
KIRK: There's no time for that. It's a matter of policy. Out here, we're the only policemen around. And a crime has been committed. Do I make myself clear?
SPOCK: Very clear, Captain.
KIRK: I'm delighted, Mister Spock. Report, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Alien ship maintaining interval, Captain. Now at warp seven.
KIRK: Warp factor eight. 
(Everyone looks surprised. Scotty is aghast.)
SULU: Aye, aye, sir.
KIRK: Captain to phaser banks. All components at battle ready. All banks primed.
CREWMAN [OC]: Aft phaser to Bridge. Alert status. All weapons at operational ready.
(Later, the ship has not blown up, and Sulu has a grin on his face) 
SULU: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Closing on target, sir.
KIRK: Good. Mister DePaul. 
DEPAUL: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Our position.
DEPAUL: Two two seven nine pl, sir. Uncharted solar system at two four six six pm.
KIRK: Is it on the alien's course?
DEPAUL: No, sir. He's headed away from it.
UHURA: Captain, sensors report we're being scanned.
KIRK: By the alien ship?
UHURA: No, sir. It's from that solar system ahead.
KIRK: Any interference? Resistance?
UHURA: No, sir, Just scanning beams. It's on an unusual wave length.
KIRK: Mister Spock?
SPOCK: It would appear someone is curious about us.
KIRK: Mister Sulu, is the alien still heading away from that solar system?
SULU: Yes, sir. We're closing, sir.
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, anything further on those scanning beams?
UHURA: There's no hostility, sir. They're not tractors or weapons of any sort, Just increasing in intensity. Steady. Regular. It's growing stronger, sir.
SULU: Captain!
KIRK: Yes, what is it?
SULU: The alien. It's slowing down. Warp five, four, two. It's going sublight, sir. Sir? It's stopped dead in space.
KIRK: He may be turning to fight.
SULU: No, sir. They're just dead out there.
KIRK: Are you sure? 
SULU: Yes, sir. Unmoving.
KIRK: Then we've got them. Go to Red Alert. Prepare to fire phaser banks. Sensors, lock on. Mister Sulu, continue closing. Mister Spock, lock phasers into computer. Computers will control attack.
SPOCK: Computer lock ready, Captain. All systems standing by.
SULU: Range is one eight one zero. One seven six zero. Range is one seven zero zero. One six four zero. Range is one five nine zero. One five five zero and closing, sir. 
(Suddenly, the ship decelerates, and everyone hangs on to something as the lights dim.) SULU: Warp six, warp five, four, warp three, warp one. Sublight, Captain. We're stuck, Captain. It's impossible, but. It's impossible.
KIRK: From warp eight? Have you lost your mind? 
SPOCK: Same as the alien, Captain.
KIRK: Mister Scott, report. 
SCOTT: We're dead, Captain. Locked up. Frozen tight. All propulsion systems read zero.
KIRK; Life systems?
SCOTT: They're all normal, sir. Atmosphere, heat, light. No variance.
KIRK: Phaser banks. Report.
CREWMAN [OC]: We're all inoperative here, Captain. No power at all. No faulty circuits I can find. Just no power.
KIRK: Damage Control, report.
SPOCK: All systems report normal, Captain. No ascertainable damage.
KIRK; Then what is it?
SCOTT: I don't know, sir, but whatever it is, we canna move.
SPOCK: We're being held in place, Captain, apparently from that solar system.
KIRK; This far out? That's impossible.
SPOCK: We are being held.
KIRK: Tractor beam?
SPOCK: No, sir. An unidentifiable power. 
(The lights flicker and the viewscreen goes psychedelic.) 
METRON [OC]: We are the Metrons. You are one of two crafts which have come into our space on a mission of violence. This is not permissible. Yet we have analysed you and have learned that your violent tendencies are inherent. So be it. We will control them. We will resolve your conflict in the way most suited to your limited mentalities. Captain James Kirk.
KIRK: This is Kirk.
METRON [OC]: We have prepared a planet with a suitable atmosphere. You will be taken there, as will the Captain of the Gorn ship which you have been pursuing. There you will settle your dispute.
KIRK: I don't understand.
METRON [OC]:You will be provided with a recording-translating device, in hopes that a chronicle of this contest will serve to dissuade others of your kind from entering our system, but you will not be permitted to communicate with your ship. You will each be totally alone.
KIRK: What makes you think you can interfere with 
METRON [OC]: It is you who are interfering. We are simply putting a stop to it. The place we have prepared for you contains sufficient elements for either of you to construct weapons lethal enough to destroy the other, which seems to be your intention. The winner of the contest will be permitted to go his way unharmed. The loser, along with his ship, shall be destroyed in the interests of peace. The contest will be one of ingenuity against ingenuity, brute strength against brute strength. The results will be final. 
KIRK: Just a minute 
METRON [OC]: There will be no discussion. It is done. 
(Kirk vanishes, and Uhura screams) 
SULU: He's gone.

[Planet surface]

(A dinosaur- like being with multifaceted eyes and a multicoloured tunic greets us with a roar. Kirk is now wearing a belt with the recorder/translator on it) 
KIRK [OC]: The Enterprise is dead in space, stopped cold during her pursuit of an alien raider by mysterious forces, and I have been somehow whisked off the bridge and placed on the surface of an asteroid, facing the Captain of the alien ship. Weaponless, I face the creature the Metrons called a Gorn. Large, reptilian. Like most humans, I seem to have an instinctive revulsion to reptiles. I must fight to remember that this is an intelligent, highly advanced individual, the Captain of a starship, like myself, undoubtedly a dangerously clever opponent. 
(The Gorn breaks a branch of a tree with great ease. Kirk struggles to break off a twig. Their first physical engagement is uneven. Kirk is more agile than the reptile but nowhere near as strong. He boxes the Gorn's ears to get out of a bear-hug and runs up into the rocks looking for weapons. He throws a heavy rock at the Gorn, but it just bounces off his chest. When a boulder gets flung at him in return, Kirk retreats. Quickly.)

[Bridge]

(Spock goes over to the Engineering Station) 
SPOCK: Have you tried overload?
SCOTT: Aye, sir. It does no good.
SPOCK: How about bypassing the transformer banks? Feed the impulse engines directly. 
SCOTT: I tried that, sir. Nothing.
SPOCK: Lieutenant Uhura, have sensors learned anything about the nature of the force which holds us here?
UHURA: No, sir. They report they definitely emanate from that solar system ahead. 
SPOCK: No indication of its composition? Gravimetric? Magnetic? Electronic? 
UHURA: Nothing, sir.

[Planet surface]

(Standing on rocks, silhouetted against a clear blue sky, Kirk makes an entry on his recorder for posterity.) 
KIRK: This is Captain James Kirk of the Starship Enterprise. Who ever finds this please get it to Starfleet Command. I'm engaged in personal combat with a creature apparently called a Gorn. 
(We see that the recording is also being transmitted and translated by the Gorn's device too) 
KIRK [OC]: He's immensely strong. Already he has withstood attacks from me that would have killed a human being. Fortunately, though strong, he is not agile. The agility and, I hope, the cleverness, is mine. 
(Back on the rock) 
KIRK: The Metrons, the creatures that sent us both here, said that the surface of the planet provides the raw material to construct weapons. There's very little here. Scrub brush, rocks, an abundance of mineral deposits, but no weapons in the conventional sense. Still, I need to find one. Bare-handed against the Gorn, I have no chance.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Leave channel one open, Lieutenant, just in case.
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir.
MCCOY: What are you going to do, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: I'm going to wait, Doctor. There's little else I can do.
MCCOY: What about the Captain?
SPOCK: If I could help him, I would. I cannot.
MCCOY: Now, you're the one that's always talking about logic. What about some logic now? Where's the Captain, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: He's out there, Doctor. Out there somewhere in a thousand cubic parsecs of space, and there's absolutely nothing we can do to help him.

[Planet surface]

(Running up a slope, Kirk comes across a clump of mature bamboo. Good, solid, hollow stems, but he doesn't regard them as suitable clubs. He carries on gaining height. Meanwhile, the Gorn is using trailing vines to construct something. Kirk comes across an outcrop of minerals, and decides to tell us what they are.) 
KIRK: A large deposit of diamonds on the surface. Perhaps the hardest substance known in the universe. Beautifully crystallized and pointed, but too small to be useful as a weapon. An incredible fortune in stones yet I would trade them all for a hand phaser, or a good solid club. Yet the Metrons said there would be weapons, if I could find them. Where? What kind? 
(From his vantage point on the ridge, Kirk watches the Gorn at work, then spots a lone rock neatly balanced on a pinnacle above his adversary. He pushes it over, the Gorn looks up, then we get the cloud of dust and a view of the reptile under the rock, lying still. Confident, Kirk comes down to check on his kill, just in time to see the Gorn move, grasp his stone dagger, and get up again. The rock continues on its way down the slope. The mammal runs away, straight into reptiles trap of vines and rocks. Now Kirk is pinned under a boulder, and at his enemy's mercy. 
But the Gorn has to move the boulder to be able to stab him, so once again Kirk is able to dodge away, albeit with a limp.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: This is the U.S.S. Enterprise calling the Metrons. Our channels are open. Come in, please. We urgently desire a conference. Please answer.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk hobbles up to a rock face with bright yellow powder spread across it, and takes a rest. We keep cutting to the Gorn, who can hear everything he says, remember.) 
KIRK: This may be my last entry. I am almost exhausted. Unless I find the weapon the Metron mentioned I have very little time left. Native sulphur, diamonds. This place is a mineralogist's dream. Yet there is something about sulphur. Something very old. Something? If only I could remember. 
(The Gorn's roar comes closer, and he moves on)

[Bridge]

MCCOY: The ship, our engines, our weapons. It's just inconceivable that we are immobilised.
SPOCK: But it has happened, Doctor.
(Dimmed lights and swirly viewscreen again) 
METRON [OC]: We are the Metrons. Your Captain is losing his battle. We would suggest you make whatever memorial arrangements, if any, which are customary in your culture. We believe you have very little time left.
MCCOY: We appeal to you in the name of civilisation. Put a stop to this.
METRON [OC]: Your violent intent and actions demonstrate that you are not civilised. However, we are not without compassion. It is possible you may have feelings toward your Captain. So that you will be able to prepare yourself, we will allow you to see and hear what is now transpiring.
(There on the viewscreen is their first sight of a Gorn, then Kirk and yet another mineral deposit.) 
MCCOY: If there were only some way we could contact him.
SPOCK: Yes, indeed, Doctor, if only there were. Notice the substance encrusting that rock. Yes. Unless I'm mistaken, it's potassium nitrate. 
MCCOY: So?
SPOCK: Perhaps nothing, Doctor. (Kirk tastes the mineral and spits it out) Perhaps everything. 
(The bridge crew watch as enlightenment dawns and Kirk goes off in search of his other mineral discoveries.) GORN [OC]: Earthling! Captain!
KIRK [on viewscreen]: Who is this, the Metron?
GORN [OC]: This is your opponent, Earthling. I have heard every word you have said.
KIRK [on viewscreen]: All right. What do you want? 
GORN [on viewscreen]: I'm weary of the chase. Wait for me. I shall be merciful and quick.
KIRK [on viewscreen]: Like you were at Cestus Three?
GORN [OC]: You were intruding! You established an outpost in our space.
KIRK [on viewscreen]: You butchered helpless human beings
GORN [OC]: We destroyed invaders, as I shall destroy you!
MCCOY: Can that be true? Was Cestus Three an intrusion on their space?
SPOCK: It may well be possible, Doctor. We know very little about that section of the galaxy.
MCCOY: Then we could be in the wrong.
SPOCK: Perhaps. That is something best decided by diplomats.
MCCOY: The Gorn simply might have been trying to protect themselves.
SPOCK: Yes. 
(They watch as Kirk returns to the bamboo clump and picks out a short, wide stem.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. Good. Good. (Kirk cuts vines to length against a rock) He knows, Doctor. He has reasoned it out.
(Potassium nitrate gets shoveled into the bamboo) 
SPOCK: Yes. Yes.
MCCOY: What is it, Spock?
SPOCK; An invention, Doctor. First potassium nitrate, and now if he can find some sulphur and a charcoal deposit or ordinary coal. 
(Kirk is at the outcrop of sharp diamonds, and putting them into the bamboo too.) 
MCCOY: What's he doing?
SPOCK; Diamonds. The hardest known substance. Impelled by sufficient force, they would make formidable projectiles.
MCCOY: What force?
SPOCK: Recall your basic chemistry, Doctor. Gunpowder. 
GORN [OC]: Captain, let us be reasonable. 
GORN [on viewscreen]: You have lost. Admit it to yourself. Stop running. 
(Now the sulphur goes into the cannon, and finally he finds a vein on coal.) 
SPOCK; Coal. 
(Now Kirk settles down to empty the bamboo, crush the coal, make a hole in the bamboo for a fuse and then mix his ingredients a little more precisely.) 
MCCOY: Can he do it?
SPOCK: If he has the time, Doctor. If he has the time.
(The cannon is strengthened with the vine tied around it, and the gunpowder gets rammed home with a small branch. Finally the diamonds go in, and a piece of torn trouser will serve as a fuse, once he can raise a spark from a stone and the translating device. Fire is created as the Gorn approaches him from behind. Seeing the danger, he braces the cannon and fires it. The explosion blows the bamboo apart, and also incapacitates his opponent. Kirk picks up his fallen stone dagger and puts the point to the Gorn's windpipe, but cannot administer the coup de grace.) 
KIRK: No. No, I won't kill you. Maybe you thought you were protecting yourself when you attacked the outpost. 
(He throws the dagger away, stands up and shouts to the sky) 
KIRK: No, I won't kill him! Do you hear? You'll have to get your entertainment someplace else!
(The Gorn disappears, and a young blond boy in a white shift appears instead.) 
KIRK: You're a Metron?
METRON: Does my appearance surprise you, Captain?
KIRK: You seem more like a boy.
METRON: I am approximately fifteen hundred of your Earth years old. You surprise me, Captain.
KIRK: How?
METRON: By sparing your helpless enemy who surely would have destroyed you, you demonstrated the advanced trait of mercy, something we hardly expected. We feel there may be hope for your kind. Therefore, you will not be destroyed. It would not be civilised.
KIRK: What happened to the Gorn?
GORN: I sent him back to his ship. If you like, I shall destroy him for you.
KIRK: No. That won't be necessary. We can talk. Maybe reach an agreement.
METRON: Very good, Captain. There is hope for you. Perhaps in several thousand years, your people and mine shall meet to reach an agreement. You are still half savage, but there is hope. We will contact you when we are ready.

[Bridge]

(Kirk suddenly appears in front of the crew, who all leap to their feet.) 
UHURA: Captain! Are you all right?
KIRK: I don't know. I don't know. All right, everybody. Back to your posts. Let's get out of here.
(He takes his seat.) 
SULU: Captain.
KIRK: Mister Sulu.
SULU: It's impossible, but there's Sirius over there when it should be here. And Canopus. And Arcanis. We're. All of a sudden, we're clear across the galaxy, five hundred parsecs from where we are I mean, were. I mean
KIRK: Don't try and figure it out, Mister Sulu. Just plot a course for us back to Cestus Three.
SULU: Aye, aye, sir.
(McCoy leaves) 
SPOCK: After you touched off your primitive cannon, Captain, we lost the picture the Metron was sending us.
KIRK; You saw what happened down there? 
SPOCK: Most of it. I would be interested in knowing what finally happened.
KIRK: We're a most promising species, Mister Spock, as predators go. Did you know that?
SPOCK: I've frequently had my doubts.
KIRK: I don't. Not anymore. And maybe in a thousand years or so, we'll be able to prove it. Never mind, Mister Spock. It doesn't make much sense to me either. Take us back to where we're supposed to be, Mister Sulu. Warp factor one.
SULU: Warp factor one.
SPOCK: A thousand years, Captain?
Well, that gives us a little time.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Squire of Gothos
Stardate: 2124.5
Original Airdate: 12 Jan, 1967

[Bridge]
(A Yeoman is distributing coffees when McCoy enters) 
DESALLE: All clear ahead, Captain. The sensors indicate zero register. 
KIRK: Forward readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Gravimetric readings, no significant change, zero space density. 
KIRK: Ahead warp factor three, Mister Sulu. Colony Beta Six wants their supplies. Let's get across this void in a hurry. 
MCCOY: Void, star desert. The word conjures up pictures of dunes, oases, mirages. 
KIRK: Sunlight, palm trees. We're nine hundred light years from that kind of desert, Bones. 
SPOCK: The precise meaning of the word desert is a waterless, barren wasteland. I fail to understand your romantic nostalgia for such a place. 
MCCOY: That doesn't surprise me, Mister Spock. I can't imagine a mirage ever disturbing those mathematically perfect brain waves of yours. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Doctor McCoy. Moving on schedule into quadrant nine oh four. Beta Six is eight days distant. 
KIRK: Something, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Unusual, Captain. I'm now getting a sizable space-displacement reading. 
KIRK: Can you verify that, Navigator? 
DESALLE: No, sir. Forward sweeps are negative. Wait. Verified, sir. We must be in some sort of light warp or we'd have picked it up earlier. 
KIRK: Put it on visual. 
(A purple globe appears on the viewscreen) 
DESALLE: Iron-silica body, planet sized, magnitude one E. We'll be passing close. 
SPOCK: Inconceivable this body has gone unnoted on all our records. 
KIRK: And yet, here it is. No time to investigate. Science stations, gather data for computer banks. Uhura, notify the discovery on subspace radio. 
UHURA: Strong interference on subspace, Captain. The planet must be a natural radio source. 
KIRK: Let's get out of its range. Veer forty degrees to starboard, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Forty degrees. 
(He reaches for the switch, and sways as if dizzy, then stands up and vanishes) 
KIRK: Sulu! 
(He dashes to Sulu's station, then suddenly stops and disappears too) 
DESALLE: Mister Spock, they're gone! 
SPOCK: Emergency! Full reverse power!

Ship's log Stardate 2124.5. First Officer Spock reporting for Captain James Kirk. We are orbiting the lone unrecorded planet in the star desert. For four hours, we have made every possible instrument sweep, but Captain Kirk and Helmsman Sulu remain unaccounted for. I have placed the ship on red alert.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise is now orbiting a red planet with white whispy clouds) 
SCOTT: We've searched again from stem to stern. If they're not down on that planet, they're nowhere. 
DESALLE: No sign of human life on the surface, sir. Unless the instruments aren't functioning. 
SPOCK: Function is normal. Continuous sensor sweeps. Lieutenant Uhura, have you checked all wave bands? 
UHURA: All of them, Mister Spock. No response. 
DESALLE: With due respect, sir. Request permission to transport to the surface immediately and carry out a search. 
MCCOY: I second DeSalle's request. What are we waiting for? 
SPOCK: The decision will be mine, Doctor. I have the responsibility for your safety. (to Sulu's replacement) Mister Jaeger, describe your geophysical findings for the surface below. 
JAEGER: No detectable soil or vegetation. Extremely hot, toxic atmosphere swept by tornadic storm. Continuous volcanic eruptions. Deadly to any lifeforms such as we know it without oxygen and life-support systems. 
SPOCK: Estimate survival time of two unprotected individuals down there. 
JAEGER: Not very long. 
UHURA: Mister Spock. Look. 
(Words are appearing on the monitor above her head, in gothic script. Spock reads them out loud) 
SPOCK: Greetings and felicitations. Hmm. Send this, Lieutenant. USS Enterprise to signaler on planet surface. Identify self. 
(The reply comes up on the monitor) 
SPOCK: Hip hip hoorah? And I believe it's pronounced tally ho. 
DESALLE: Some kind of a joke, sir? 
SPOCK: I'll entertain any theories, Mister DeSalle. Any at all. 
MCCOY: One thing is certain. Obviously there's life on that planet. 
SPOCK: You're quite correct, Doctor. Prepare transporter room. 
SCOTT: Request assignment to the search party, sir. 
SPOCK: No, Mister Scott. Neither you nor I can be spared here. Mister DeSalle, equip the landing party with full communications, armament, and life-support gear. Mister Jaeger, your geophysical knowledge may be crucial down there. Doctor McCoy will accompany. If those peculiar signals are coming from Captain Kirk or Lieutenant Sulu, their rationality is in question. Dismissed.

[Transporter room]

UHURA [OC]: No more messages from below, sir, but I've locked onto their original source. 
SPOCK: Very good. Transmit coordinates to Mister Scott. Once on the planet's surface, you'll establish contact with us immediately. Use the laser beacon if necessary. Ready, Scott? 
SCOTT: Ready, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Activate.

[Planet surface]

(The landing party arrive on grass, amidst trees and shrubs. Jaeger starts scanning immediately.) 
MCCOY: Where are your storms, Jaeger? 
JAEGER: Atmosphere exactly the same as ours. 
(He takes of his oxygen mask, sniffs, and signals that the other two can do the same.) 
DESALLE: DeSalle to Enterprise. DeSalle to Enterprise. It doesn't function. We're cut off. 
MCCOY: (trying his own communicator) No response. 
DESALLE: (to Jaeger) Keep trying with yours. Something's blocking the beacon. I've got to find open ground. 
(He wanders off through the shrubs) 
DESALLE: Mister Jaeger! McCoy! 
(They join him to see a stone building in the gothic style, with an iron-bound oak door. They approach cautiously, and enter)

[Drawing Room]

(The place is stuffed full of things. A bust of Napoleon on a stand, a suit of armour, a globe, tapestry and swords and shields on the walls, an open fire, a harpsichord and a large mirror) 
MCCOY: In the name of heaven, where are we? 
(They head down steps into the room, past the Salt Monster in an alcove) 
DESALLE: Look. 
(Sulu and Kirk are displayed in a mini-minstrel's gallery. McCoy scans them.) 
MCCOY: There's no reading. They're like waxworks figures. 
(The main door slams shut, and there's a man in an embroidered coat playing the harpsichord) 
TRELANE: I must say, they make a perfectly exquisite display pair, but I suppose you want them back now. 
(He waves his hand and the two men come back to life) 
SULU: Where are we? 
TRELANE: Welcome to an island of peace on my stormy little planet of Gothos. 
KIRK: What happened? Fill me in. 
MCCOY: You disappeared from the bridge after Sulu. We've been looking for you for four hours. 
TRELANE: You must excuse my whimsical way of fetching you here, but when I saw you passing by I simply could not resist. 
KIRK: I'm Captain James Kirk of the United Starship Enterprise. 
TRELANE: Ah, so you're the Captain of these brave lads. My greetings and felicitations, Captain. So good of you and your officers to drop in. Absolutely smashing. 
KIRK: Who are you? Where do you come from? 
General Trelane, retired. At your service, sirs. My home is your home. 
(He goes back to his playing) 
DESALLE: We've lost contact with the ship, Captain. We're trapped here. 
TRELANE: I can't tell you how delighted I am to have visitors from the very planet that I've made my hobby. Yes, but according to my observations, I didn't think you capable of such voyages. 
JAEGER: Notice the period, Captain. Nine hundred light years from Earth. It's what might be seen through a viewing scope if it were powerful enough. 
TRELANE: Ah, yes. I've been looking in on the doings on your lively little Earth. 
KIRK: Then you've been looking in on the doings nine hundred years past. 
TRELANE: Oh, really? Have I made an error in time? How fallible of me. Oh, I did so want to make you feel at home. I'm quite proud of the detail. 
KIRK: General Trelane. 
TRELANE: Retired, sir. Just Squire Trelane now. And you may call me Squire. Yes, I rather fancy that. 
KIRK: For what purpose have you imprisoned us here? 
TRELANE: Imprisoned? Nonsense. You're my guests. You see, I just finished my studies of your curious and fascinating society. You came by at the most propitious moment. I want to know all about your campaigns, your battles, your missions of conquest. 
KIRK: Our missions are peaceful, not for conquest. When we do battle, it is only because we have no choice. 
TRELANE: Ah, but that's the official story, eh? 
KIRK: I must ask you to let us go back to our ship. 
TRELANE: I wouldn't hear of it. You shall join me in a repast. I want to learn all about your feelings on war and killing and conquest. That sort of thing. Do you know that you're one of the few predator species that preys even on itself? 
(Kirk returns to the main group, where DeSalle has his hand on his phaser) 
KIRK: Not yet. Put it on stun, not to kill, DeSalle. 
TRELANE: DeSalle, did you say? Un vrai Francais? 
DESALLE: My ancestry is French, yes. 
TRELANE: Ah, monsieur. Vive la gloire. Vive Napoleon. You know, I admire your Napoleon very much. 
KIRK: This is Mister DeSalle, our navigator. Doctor McCoy, our medical officer. Mister Sulu, our helmsman, and Carl Jaeger, meteorologist. 
TRELANE: Welcome, good physicianer and honourable sir. (bows low) 
SULU: Is he kidding? 
TRELANE: Und Offizier Jaeger, und der deutsche Soldat, nein? (gives a little Prussian salute then marches around) Eins, zwei, drei, vier. Gehen vir mit dem Schiessgewehr. 
JAEGER: I'm a scientist, not a military man. 
TRELANE: Oh come now. We're all military men under the skin. And how we do love our uniforms. 
(Trelane is admiring himself in his mirror when he spots DeSalle raising his weapon, and with a wave of the hand, stops him)
TRELANE: What an interesting weapon you've got there. Do let me see it. 
(He takes it out of DeSalle's hand, and he can move again) 
TRELANE:: Yes. Now let me see. How does this work? Ah, yes. This won't kill, and this will. 
(He fires it at the Salt Monster, who is disintegrated) 
TRELANE: Oh, how marvellous! (destroys another exhibit) Devastating! Why, this could kill millions. 
(Kirk takes it off him) 
KIRK: Who will you start with, my crew? Are we your next targets? 
TRELANE: Oh, how absolutely typical of your species. You don't understand something, so you become fearful. Now, do let me anticipate your next question. You want to know how I've managed all of this. 
KIRK: That's correct. 
TRELANE: We, meaning I and others, have, to state the matter briefly, perfected a system by which matter can be transferred to energy and back to matter again. 
KIRK: Like the transporter system aboard the Enterprise. 
TRELANE: Oh, a crude example of an infinitely more sophisticated process. You see, we not only transport matter from place to place, but we can alter its shape at will. 
KIRK: This drawing room, did you create it by rearranging matter on this planet? 
TRELANE: Quite. 
KIRK: I see. How did you manage 
TRELANE: Dear Captain, your inquiries are becoming tiresome. I want you to be happy. Free yourself of care. Let's enjoy ourselves in the spirit of martial good fellowship. 
KIRK: Come on, let's go. We're getting out of here. 
TRELANE: Tut, tut, tut. You're being quite rude. You can't go. Apparently, you need another demonstration of my authority. Yes, quite. 
(Kirk vanishes from the room and is in the natural atmosphere of the planet, choking on the fumes. Everyone in the room can hear him. Trelane brings him back) Now, that's a sample of the atmosphere of this planet outside my kindly influence. Now, you will behave yourself hereafter, won't you? Or I shall be very, very angry.

Captain's Log Stardate 2125.7. Science Officer Spock reporting for Captain Kirk. We have completed fourteenth orbit of this planet without establishing contact with our missing officers or the parties sent to find them. Subspace communications remain blocked. However, by diverting impulse power to our sensors, we have made them operable, and we have detected one small area on the surface which seems relatively stable.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, it's there, Mister Spock. Peaceful as Earth, but how do you explain it? 
SPOCK: I don't, Mister Scott. It simply exists. Artificial perhaps, or a freak of nature. The fact remains that life can exist in that area. 
SCOTT: Aye, it could, but it couldn't move around much. 
SPOCK: Apply a fine tuning on our sensors. Locate any life forms in that stable area. 
SCOTT: If we find any, it doesn't follow that it would be our people. 
SPOCK: Affirmative. But if the Captain is down there and alive, that's where he'll have to be. We'll attempt to transport up any living beings our sensors detect. 
SCOTT: Shooting in the dark, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Or stand by and do nothing, Mister Scott.

[Drawing Room]

(Trelane is showing off his decor) 
And this, of course, is an array of your battle flags and pennants dating back to the Crusades, to Hannibal's invaders, the Grecian war galleys, and the hordes of Persia. Can't you imagine it, Captain? The thousands of men marching off to their deaths, singing beneath these banners. Doesn't it make your blood run swiftly? 
(Then he goes back to his music) 
SULU: Captain, where could he possibly come from? Who is this maniac? 
MCCOY: Better say, what is he? I monitored him, and what I found was unbelievable. 
KIRK: Not alive? 
MCCOY: Not in the way we define life. No trace. Zero. 
SULU: You mean, it shows he's dead? 
MCCOY: It doesn't even show that he exists at all, alive or dead. 
JAEGER: Notice the wood fire, Captain? Burning steadily, ember bed glowing, and it doesn't give off any heat at all. 
KIRK: Fire without heat, mistaking all this for present day Earth without taking into account the time differential. Whatever we're dealing with, he certainly isn't all knowledgeable. He makes mistakes. 
TRELANE: Discussing deep laid plans, I'll wager. I cannot wait to see them evolve. 
KIRK: Trelane, we haven't planned 
TRELANE: Tut tut. Do not think that I deplore your martial virtue of deception and stratagem. Quite the contrary. I have nothing but admiration for your whole species. 
KIRK: If your admiration is genuine, you must have respect for our sense of duty too. Our ship has need of us. We have tasks to perform. 
TRELANE: Oh, I can't let you go now. I was getting a bit bored until you came. You must stay. I insist. 
KIRK: For how long? 
TRELANE: Until this is over, of course. 
KIRK: Until what is over? 
TRELANE: Dear Captain, so many questions. Make the most of an uncertain future. Enjoy yourself today. Tomorrow may never come at all. 
KIRK: Trelane, even if we wanted to stay, our companions are missing us. 
TRELANE: Yes, I must experience your sense of concern, your grief at the separation. 
KIRK: There are four hundred men and women aboard that ship. 
TRELANE: Women? Do you mean that you actually have members of the fairer sex among your crew? Oh, how charming. And they must be all very beautiful. And I shall be so very gallant to them. Here, let me fetch them down at once. 
KIRK: (grabbing his arm) No. 
TRELANE: No? 
KIRK: This game has gone on long enough. Those are crucial operating personnel. You can't 
TRELANE: I can do anything I want. I should think you would have realised that by now. 
MCCOY: Captain, receiving a transporter signal. 
TRELANE: Transporter signal? What does he mean? You must tell me! 
KIRK: It means, Trelane, the party's over, thanks to Mister Spock. 
TRELANE: (as the group is beamed away) Wait! I won't have this! I haven't dismissed you yet. Stop! I won't have this!

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Everyone to stations. Report, Mister Spock. How were our scanners able to penetrate that radiation field? 
SPOCK: They didn't, Captain. Not clearly. We merely beamed up all life forms in a given area. 
MCCOY: Which means Trelane is not a life form as we know it, or he'd be beaming through now. 
KIRK: Prepare to warp out of here at once. Maximum speed.

[Bridge]

ROSS: (a blonde yeoman) Oh, Captain, I was so worried. 
KIRK: Scotty, we're going to need every ounce of your engines. We're going to put a hundred million miles between us and that madman. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye aye, sir. 
MCCOY: I'm quaking, but I don't know if it's from laughter or terror. 
UHURA: Doctor, what was it? What was down there? 
MCCOY: Well, it was a. Oh, forget it. 
ROSS: Look. 
(Trelane has appeared on the Bridge) 
TRELANE: Where are all your weapons, Captain? Don't you display your weapons? 
KIRK: Trelane. 
TRELANE: Don't fret, Captain. I'm only a bit upset with you, but this Mister Spock you mentioned, the one responsible for that unseemly, impudent act of taking you from me, which is he? 
SPOCK: I am Spock. 
TRELANE: Surely not an officer. He isn't quite human, is he? 
SPOCK: My father is from the planet Vulcan. 
TRELANE: And are its natives predatory? 
SPOCK: Not generally. But there have been exceptions. 
TRELANE: Really? You will see to his punishment? 
KIRK: On the contrary. I commend his action. 
TRELANE: But I don't like him. 
KIRK: Get off my ship. 
TRELANE: Oh, rot! You're all going back with me. 
KIRK: We're not going anywhere. 
TRELANE: Nonsense. I have an absolutely enchanting sojourn on Gothos planned for all of you, and you shan't spoil it for me. Anyway, the decor of my drawing room is much more appropriate

[Drawing Room]

(A lot of the clutter in the middle of the room has been replaced by a fully furnished dining table and six high-backed chairs. Sulu and DeSalle are already seated)
TRELANE: And tasteful. Don't you agree? 
SULU: No. 
TRELANE: But so much more fitting, honourable sir. 
DESALLE: (getting up) You 
KIRK: DeSalle. 
(Trelane 'stops' him) 
TRELANE: Oh, what primitive fury. Why, he's the very soul of sublime savagery. 
KIRK: Trelane, let him go. 
(he does, and Sulu grabs DeSalle) 
SULU: We haven't even got our phasers. 
TRELANE: Yes, of course. I forget that I shouldn't frighten you too much. But I warn you, you can't provoke me again. Come, everyone. Let's forget your bad manners. Let's be full of merry talk and sallies of wit. We have victuals to delight the palate and brave company to delight the mind. Come, Doctor, do partake. Ah, you've been quite derelict in your social duties, Captain. You haven't introduced me to the charming contingent of your crew. 
KIRK: This is General Trelane. 
TRELANE: Retired. But if you prefer, you may address me as the lonely Squire of Gothos, dear ladies. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura of communications. 
TRELANE: Ah a Nubian prize. (he kisses her hand) Taken on one of your raids of conquest, no doubt, Captain. 
KIRK: No doubt. 
TRELANE: She has the melting eyes of the queen of Sheba. The same lovely colouring. And this. Is this the face that launched a thousand ships and burnt the topless towers of Ilium? Fair Helen, make me immortal with a kiss. 
KIRK: (holding Trelane back) Yeoman Teresa Ross. I believe you have met our science officer Mister Spock. 
TRELANE: You do realise, don't you, that it's in deference to the Captain that I brought you here? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. 
TRELANE: I don't know if I like your tone. It's most challenging. That's what you're doing, challenging me? 
SPOCK: I object to you. I object to intellect without discipline. I object to power without constructive purpose. 
TRELANE: Oh, Mister Spock, you do have one saving grace after all. You're ill-mannered. The human half of you, no doubt. (to Ross) Ah, come, my little wood nymph. Won't you dance with your swain? (to Uhura) Give us some sprightly music, my dear girl. 
UHURA: I don't know how to play this. 
TRELANE: Of course you do. 
(And she does, as Trelane dances with Ross) 
SULU: Captain, how far do we go along with this charade? 
KIRK: Until we can think our way out. Meanwhile, we accept his hospitality. 
MCCOY: You should taste his food. Straw would taste better than his meat, and water a hundred times better than his brandy. Nothing has any taste at all. 
SPOCK: It may be unappetizing, Doctor, but it is very logical. 
MCCOY: There's that magic word again. Does your logic find this fascinating, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Fascinating is a word I use for the unexpected. In this case, I should think interesting would suffice. 
KIRK: You don't find this unexpected, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: That his food has no taste, his wine no flavour? No. It simply means that Trelane knows all of the Earth forms, but none of the substance. 
KIRK: And if he's fallible, he can't be all powerful. Which means he has something helping him. 
SPOCK: Evidently. 
KIRK: A machine? A device? Something which does these things for him. 
TRELANE: Ah, my dear, don't we make a graceful pair? Except for one small detail. That dress hardly matches this charming scene. 
(Suddenly she's wearing an empire line dress with feathers in her hair. Idealised Jane Austen) 
TRELANE: Ah, yes, that's more what we want. The dashing warrior and his elegant lady. 
KIRK: That mirror. It's part of his audience, his ego. He never wanders from it. 
SPOCK: Is it ego, or something else? 
KIRK: Explain. 
SPOCK: The mirror. 
KIRK: What about it? 
SPOCK: You noted yourself he never gets very far from it. I suppose it could be vanity. 
KIRK: No, no, Mister Spock, that's not the reason. What kind of a machine could do these things? 
SPOCK: A machine with the ability to turn energy into matter guided by thought waves. It would have a very complex memory bank, and would be extremely sophisticated. 
KIRK; Like a computer, only much more. Could the machine that maintains the environment in this immediate area be kept in this house? 
SPOCK: I think not. A device capable of keeping out this planet's natural atmosphere would be immense. 
KIRK: Good. I agree. That leaves me free 
. SPOCK: Free, Captain? 
KIRK: If I'm not mistaken, Mister Spock, I think I can turn his lights off at the source. (raises his voice) Don't be too upset by what you see, gentlemen. After all, his actions are those of an immature, unbalanced mind. 
TRELANE: I overheard that remark, Captain. I'm afraid I'll have to dispense with you. 
KIRK: You only heard part of it. I just started. 
TRELANE: Oh? 
KIRK: Yes. I want you to leave my crewmen alone. I want you to leave my crewwomen alone too. (to Ross) You're not to dance with him. I don't like it. 
TRELANE: Does it actually make you angry, Captain? 
KIRK: (removing one of her long gloves) I don't want you accepting his gifts, either. 
ROSS: Captain, please don't do this. 
TRELANE: Well, I do believe the dear Captain is jealous of me. 
KIRK: I don't care what you believe, just keep your hands off her! 
TRELANE: Oh, how curiously human. How wonderfully barbaric. 
KIRK: I've had enough of your insulting attentions to her. 
TRELANE: Of course you have. After all, that's the root of the matter, isn't it? You fight for the attention, the admiration, the possession of women. 
KIRK: If it's fighting that you want, (slaps Trelane) you may have it. 
TRELANE: Are you challenging me to a duel? 
KIRK: If you have the courage. 
TRELANE: Oh, this is better than I'd planned. I shall not shirk an affair of honour. 
(He gets a box from the mantle-shelf. It contains a pair of duelling pistols) 
TRELANE: A matched set. Just like the pair that slew your heroic Alexander Hamilton. And Captain, I never miss.

Captain's Log, stardate 2126.1. Delayed report. The whole bridge crew are the unwilling guests of the creature who calls himself Trelane. We are weaponless, powerless, and our only hope of escape with the Enterprise lies in playing his games. I've decided to make my move with the field of honour game, and everything depends on my one chance with the ancient duelling pistol.

[Drawing room]

TRELANE: Oh, how fascinating. I'm party to an actual human duel. 
KIRK: Are you ready? 
TRELANE: Quite ready, sir. We shall test each other's courage and then, and then we shall see. 
KIRK: Enough talk. Let's get on with it. 
TRELANE: As you will, sir. Honour will be served, eh? Oh, wait! As the one challenged, I claim the first shot. 
KIRK: We shoot together. 
TRELANE: It's my game and my rules, but if you need to be persuaded. (aims at Spock) 
KIRK: All right. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
(Trelane takes aim, then fires his pistol at the ceiling instead) 
TRELANE: And now, Captain, how do you have the expression? My fate is in your hands. 
(So Kirk shoots the mirror and everything goes hay-wire in the room) 
TRELANE: You've ruined everything! 
SPOCK: The machine. 
DESALLE: Captain, subspace interference is clearing. 
KIRK: Try to contact the ship. 
TRELANE: Oh, the remarkable treachery of the species. 
KIRK: Go on, Trelane. Look at it. It's over. Your power is blanked out. You're finished. 
TRELANE: You've earned my wrath. Go back. Go back to your ship, all of you, and prepare. You're all dead men. You especially, Captain. 
(He goes to his mirror, and vanishes) 
KIRK: Trelane! Everyone, we're getting out of here. Now. This is the Captain. Commence beaming up. Maximum speed.

[Bridge]

(The men are already at their posts when the women arrive, and Yeoman Ross hasn't even got changed yet) 
KIRK: Set course for Colony Beta Six. 
SULU: Laid in, sir. 
KIRK: Full power acceleration from orbit, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: Full power, sir. 
KIRK: Emergency warp at the earliest possible moment, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Standing by to warp, sir. 
UHURA: Shall I make a full report to Spacefleet Command, sir? 
KIRK: Not yet. They may trace our beam. Wait until we're well out of range. 
SPOCK: Can we know his range is, Captain? 
KIRK: We can take an educated guess. At the point we entered their solar system. 
UHURA: Still no sign of pursuit. Instruments clear, sir. 
KIRK: Good. 
ROSS: May I take a moment to change? 
KIRK: Yes, I think you might. Turn in your glass slippers. The ball is over. 
ROSS: Gladly, Captain. 
KIRK: Hard to believe it ever happened. 
SULU: Captain, we're about to warp. 
DESALLE: Large body ahead. 
(The planet swims back onto the viewscreen) 
SPOCK: Collision course. 
KIRK: Hard to port, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: That was the planet Gothos, Captain. 
KIRK: Gothos? Mister Sulu, have we been going in circles? 
SULU: No, sir. All instruments show on course. 
SPOCK: Gothos again, Captain. 
KIRK: Hard over, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: Cat and mouse game. 
KIRK: With us as the mouse. 
DESALLE: There it is again. Dead ahead. 
KIRK: Ninety degrees to starboard, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Turning, Captain. Nut not veering off from it. 
KIRK: Ninety degrees sub-port, Mister Sulu. Adjust. 
SULU: Turn completed, and still accelerating toward the planet. 
SPOCK: Or it toward us. 
KIRK: Decelerate into orbit. Prepare transporter room. 
MCCOY: Captain, you're not beaming down. 
KIRK: Yes, I am, Doctor McCoy. I am going to see our playful Mister Trelane and whatever it takes to make him give up our ship. Stand by communications. Mister Spock. If you don't receive a message from me within the hour, leave the vicinity at once. No turning back.

[Courtroom]

(The bright drawing-room is now an austere courtroom, with Trelane as the gowned and be-wigged judge) 
TRELANE: The prisoner may approach the bench. 
KIRK: Trelane. 
TRELANE: Any attempt at demonstrations will weigh against you with the court, and this time my instrumentality is unbreakable. 
(A silhouette of a noose appears on the wall behind Kirk) 
KIRK: I've had enough of your games. 
TRELANE: Oh, the absurdity of these inferior beings. (reading from the charge sheet) And now, Captain James Kirk, you stand accused of the high crime of treason against a superior authority, conspiracy, and the attempt to foment insurrection. How do you plead? 
KIRK: I haven't come to plead in your court, Trelane. 
TRELANE: I warn you. Anything you might say has already been taken down in evidence against you. 
KIRK: I've come for one purpose. To get back my ship. 
TRELANE: Irrelevant. 
KIRK: We've made you angry with our will to survive, haven't we? 
TRELANE: Uncalled for. 
KIRK: Then vent your anger on me alone. I was the one who led the others. I was the one who shot out your mirror machine. 
TRELANE: And did you really think that was the only medium of instrumentality at my command? 
KIRK: I took that chance. I'm willing to pay the price for chancing wrong. 
TRELANE: Oh, then you do admit to the charge? 
KIRK: Yes, anything! Just allow the Enterprise to continue its journey. You pompous 
TRELANE: Immaterial! 
(Kirk leaves the dock and goes nose to nose with Trelane) 
KIRK: Those people have done you no harm. 
TRELANE: Inadmissible! 
KIRK: We're living beings, not playthings for your amusement. 
TRELANE: Silence! This trial is over. You are guilty. On all counts, you are guilty. And according to your own laws, this court has no choice in fixing punishment. You will hang by the neck, Captain, until you are dead, dead, dead!

Captain's Log, Stardate 2126.3. First Officer Spock reporting. Still no word from Captain Kirk on the surface below us. Waiting time is almost up. I will soon be forced to attempt departure as per instructions.

[Courtroom]

TRELANE: Until a moment ago, I didn't think it possible, but it was. (takes off his robes and wig) I did it. I was angry. I actually experienced genuine rage. This experiment has been successful. 
KIRK: I'm glad you weren't disappointed. 
TRELANE: Why, Captain, you're still angry. Would that I could have sustained that moment. Ah, no matter. Do you have a last request? 
KIRK: Trelane, if you think I'm going to cheerfully and obediently stick my head in that noose 
TRELANE: You still haven't learned. You have no choice. Oh, this is becoming quite tiresome. It's all so very easy. 
KIRK: That's your problem, Trelane. Everything is easy. It's given you a bad habit. You're not aware of it, but you have it. You don't think, Trelane. That's your problem. You miss opportunities, like your anger before and mine right now. Oh, you enjoy it, but you couldn't have accomplished it without me, and you know why? Because you're a bumbling, inept fool. 
TRELANE: Take care, now. 
KIRK: Here you have an opportunity to experience something really unique, and you're wasting it. You want to commit murder? Go ahead, but where's the sport in a simple hanging? 
TRELANE: The sport? 
KIRK: Yes. The terror of murder. The suspense. The fun. 
TRELANE: Oh, I'm intrigued. Go ahead, Captain. What do you suggest? 
KIRK: A personal conflict between us. Not like the duel before, but the real thing. The stakes, a human life. Mine. 
TRELANE: (waving a sword around) Yes! Yes! 
KIRK: That's the idea. 
TRELANE: Oh, then you approve? 
KIRK: Yes, but you can do better than that. There's still not enough sport in just killing me with a sword. 
TRELANE: I know. That will be dull. We'll have to have something more fanciful. Let me see. A hunt. A royal hunt. Predator against predator. Now, you may go hide in the forest anywhere you like and I shall seek. How does that strike you, Captain? 
KIRK: It strikes me very well. But you'll have to make it worth my while, Trelane. Why not up the stakes? 
TRELANE: The stakes? 
KIRK: Yes. While we're playing our game, free my ship. Let it continue on its way. In return, I'll give you a contest you'll remember. 
TRELANE: Always back to your ship. Oh well. If it will add spice to the pursuit, I accept your terms, Captain.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk is outside the building) 
TRELANE [OC]: Remember, you must try not to let me find you too quickly. 
KIRK: Let me notify the Enterprise that it can go. 
TRELANE [OC]: At your convenience. 
KIRK; Enterprise. Enterprise, this is Kirk. Can you hear me? (static) Get the ship away as fast as you can. I'll try and give you the time you need. Can you hear me? 
(Trelane appears out of thin air) 
TRELANE: Ah-ha! 
(Kirk dodges him and runs into the shrubs) 
KIRK; Enterprise. 
TRELANE: Ah ha! Captain Kirk. You must try harder, Captain. This is too easy. 
(They keep dodging amongst the shrubs) 
KIRK: Enterprise. Enterprise, can you hear me? 
(Kirk takes an opportunity to get Trelane's sword off him, but when he takes a swing at his foe he just disappears and reappears again) 
TRELANE: Touche, Captain. Touche. I must confess you scored first. But after all, I never played this game before. 
(A sword appears in his hand) 
TRELANE: And now let's have at it again! 
(Kirk fences Trelane with a branch, but it breaks and he has to run off, leaving Trelane laughing)

[Outside the building]

(The door will not open) 
KIRK: Enterprise. Enterprise. 
TRELANE: Ah-ha! Tallyho! (iron grids pen Kirk in) You made a noble fight of it, Captain. 
KIRK: Remember, Trelane. You promised to let my ship go. 
TRELANE: Yes, but this is such sport. I must fetch all the others back to play. So this is victory. It has a sweet taste. Down, Captain. On your knees! 
KIRK: You haven't won, Trelane. 
TRELANE: I have. I could run you through! 
KIRK: But you haven't won anything. 
TRELANE: On your knees, Captain! 
KIRK: No! Does it still taste as sweet? 
TRELANE: I order you. You've been beaten. 
KIRK: But I'm not defeated. 
TRELANE: I order you! I order you! (Kirk disarms him and snaps the sword across his knee) You broke it! You broke my sword! 
KIRK: You've got a lot to learn about winning, Trelane. 
TRELANE: You dare to defy me! 
KIRK: In fact, you've got a lot to learn about everything, haven't you? 
(Kirk slaps his face) 
TRELANE: I'll fix you for that! You cheated! You haven't played the game right. I'll show you! 
MOTHER: Trelane. 
(Two green flashing lights appear, and Trelane steps into their spotlight) 
TRELANE: No! No. You said I could have this planet. 
FATHER: This has gone far enough. 
TRELANE: You always stop me when I'm having fun. 
FATHER: You're disobedient and cruel. We've told you before. 
MOTHER: Time to come in now, Trelane. 
TRELANE: But I don't want to come in, and I won't. I'm a general, and I won't listen to you. 
FATHER: Enough, Trelane. Come along. 
TRELANE: But why? I didn't do anything wrong. I was just playing. 
FATHER: We said, come along. 
TRELANE: But I haven't finished studying my predators yet. 
FATHER: This is not studying them. 
MOTHER: If you cannot take proper care of your pets, you cannot have them at all. 
TRELANE: Oh, but I was winning. I was winning. 
FATHER: They're beings, Trelane. They have spirit. They're superior. 
TRELANE: No, no. You saw. 
MOTHER: You'll grow up, Trelane. You'll understand. Now come along. 
TRELANE: Oh, but you said I could. You promised. I never have any fun. 
FATHER: Stop that nonsense at once, or you'll not be permitted to make any more planets. 
TRELANE: Oh, but you saw. I was winning. I would have won. Honest. 
FATHER: No, Trelane. 
MOTHER: No, Trelane. 
(The spotlight contracts, and Trelane gradually vanishes) 
TRELANE: I would have. I would have. I would have. I would. I would. I would. I would. 
FATHER: Captain, we regret that the life paths of yourself and your companions have been disturbed. 
KIRK: Who are you? Who is Trelane? 
MOTHER: You must forgive our child. The fault is ours for indulging him too much. He will be punished. 
FATHER: We would not have let him intercept you had we realised your vulnerability. 
MOTHER: Forgive us, Captain. We will maintain your life-support conditions while you return to your ship. Please accept our apologies. 
(The lights disappear) 
KIRK: Captain to Enterprise. Captain to Enterprise. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain, we're receiving you. 
KIRK: Beam me up, Mister Spock. We're free to go.

[Bridge]

SULU: Warping down, Captain. Our warp factor four. 
DESALLE: Approach channels clear, Captain. 
UHURA: Colony Beta Six clears us for normal approach, sir. 
KIRK: Normal orbit approach procedures, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. Still thinking about Trelane, is that it? 
SPOCK: For the record, how do we describe him? Pure mentality? Force of intellect? Embodied energy? Superbeing? He must be classified, sir. 
KIRK: God of war, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: I hardly find that fitting. 
KIRK: Then a small boy, and a very naughty one at that. 
SPOCK: It will make a strange entry in the library banks. 
KIRK: Then he was a very strange small boy. One the other hand, he was probably doing things comparable to the same mischievous pranks you played when you were a boy. 
SPOCK: Mischievous pranks, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes. Dipping little girls' curls in inkwells. Stealing apples from the neighbours' trees. Tying cans on 
(He's stopped by the look of horrified incredulity on Spock's face.) 
KIRK: Forgive me, Mister Spock. I should have known better. 
SPOCK: I shall be delighted, Captain.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Galileo Seven
Stardate: 2821.5
Original Airdate: 5 Jan, 1967

Captain's Log, stardate 2821.5. On route to Makus Three with a cargo of medical supplies. Our course leads us past Murasaki 312, a quasar-like formation, vague, undefined. A priceless opportunity for scientific investigation. On board is Galactic High Commissioner Ferris, overseeing the deliver of the medicines to Makus Three.
[Bridge]

KIRK: Captain to shuttlecraft Galileo. Stand by, Mister Spock. 
FERRIS: I remind you, Captain, I'm entirely opposed to this delay. Your mission is to get those emergency medical supplies to Makus Three in time for their transfer to the New Paris colonies. 
KIRK: No problem, Commissioner. And may I remind you that I have standing orders to investigate all quasars and quasar-like phenomena wherever they may be encountered. Besides, it's three days to Makus. And the rendezvous doesn't take place for five. 
FERRIS: I don't like to take chances. The plague is out of control on New Paris. We must get those drugs there on time. 
KIRK: No problem. Captain to Galileo. All systems cleared for take off.

[Shuttlecraft]

(The NCC1701/7 is in the hangar bay preparing to launch.) 
SPOCK: Power up. All instruments activated. All readings normal. All go.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Launch shuttlecraft. 
(The curved doors at the stern of the engineering deck open, and the little vessel heads out into space)

[Shuttlecraft]

MEARS: Readings normal. Acceleration normal. Phase one separation normal. 
SPOCK: Position? 
LATIMER: Three point seven. Sir, I 
SPOCK: Make up your mind please, Mister Latimer. 
LATIMER: Sir, this indicator's gone crazy. 
BOMA: That's to be expected, Mister Spock. Quasars are extremely disruptive. Just how much, we don't know. 
SPOCK: Considerably, Mister Boma. 
MEARS: Mister Spock, radiation is increasing. 
SPOCK: Stop forward momentum, Mister Latimer. 
LATIMER: I can't, sir. Nothing happens. 
SPOCK: Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise. Come in, please. 
BOMA: Ionic interference, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: We're being drawn right into it. 
SPOCK: Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise. We are out of control, being pulled directly into the heart of Murasaki three one two. Being hit by violent radiation on outer hull. Course three point two five

[Bridge]

KIRK: Anything at all? 
UHURA: Nothing clear, Captain. Just a few words about being pulled off course. 
KIRK: Try and get me a fix on the Galileo. 
SULU: Scanners are blank, Captain. We're getting a mass of readings I've never seen. Nothing makes sense. 
(Kirk switches on Spock's science computer) 
COMPUTER: Negative ionic concentration one point six four times ten to the ninth power metres, Radiation wave length three hundred seventy angstroms. Harmonics upward along entire spectrum. 
FERRIS: What is it, Captain? 
KIRK: That thing out there has ionized this complete sector. None of our instruments work. At least four complete solar systems in the immediate vicinity. And out there somewhere, a twenty four foot shuttlecraft, off course, out of control. Finding a needle in a haystack would be child's play.

Captain's Log, stardate 2821.7. The electromagnetic phenomenon known as Murasaki Three Twelve whirls like some angry blight in space, a depressive reminder that seven shipmates still have not been heard from. Equally bad, the effect has rendered our normal searching systems useless. Without them, we are blind and almost helpless.

[Bridge]

(A Yeoman is delivering cups of coffee) 
FERRIS: I was opposed to this from the very beginning. Our flight to Makus Three is of the very highest priority. 
KIRK: I'm aware of that, Commissioner. At the same time I have certain scientific duties I must perform, and investigating the Murasaki effect is one. 
FERRIS: Yes, but you've lost your crew. 
KIRK: We have two days to find them. 
FERRIS: Two days? ln all that? Two days? 
KIRK: What would you have me do, turn around and leave them there? 
FERRIS: You shouldn't have sent them out in the first place. 
UHURA: Captain, there's one planet in this solar system capable of sustaining human life. It's type M, oxygen, nitrogen, and it's listed as Taurus Two. It's unexplored. As far as we can determine with our equipment malfunction, it's just about dead-centre of the Murasaki effect. 
KIRK: Thank you, Lieutenant. Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Set course for Taurus Two. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir.

[Shuttlecraft]

(Shuttlecraft Galileo appears to have landed in one piece in a rocky landscape. It's contents have been rather shaken about and many are holding their heads.) 
MCCOY: You all right? 
GAETANO: (Holding his right wrist) Yes. 
MCCOY: Scotty? Boma? 
BOMA: Now that's what I call a ride. 
MCCOY: Yeoman? 
MEARS: Yes. I just got a little bump on the head. 
MCCOY: (helping her back into her seat) Upsy-daisy. 
MEARS: Thank you. 
MCCOY: What happened? 
BOMA: I can't be sure, but I'd say that, the magnetic potential of the effect was (McCoy gives him a tissue for his nose bleed) Thank you. Was such that, as we gathered speed, it was multiplied geometrically. And we were simply shot into the centre of the effect. Like a projectile. 
SPOCK: I'd say your evaluation is reasonable, Mister Boma. 
SCOTT: What a mess. 
SPOCK: Picturesque descriptions will not mend broken circuits, Mister Scott. I think you'll find your work is cut out for you. Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise. Come in, please. 
SCOTT: You don't really expect to get an answer, do you? 
SPOCK: I expect nothing, Mister Scott. It is merely logical to try all the alternatives. Doctor McCoy, a reading on the atmosphere, please. 
MCCOY: Partial pressure of oxygen, seventy millimetres of mercury. Nitrogen one forty. Breathable, if you're not running in competition. 
SPOCK: Just the facts, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Traces of argon, neon, krypton, all in acceptable quantities. However, I wouldn't recommend this place as a summer resort. 
SPOCK: Thank you for your opinion. It will be duly noted. You're recording this, Yeoman? 
MEARS: Of course, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Mister Scott, if you'll make a survey of the damage, please. 
SCOTT: Logical. 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, I think we should move outside, make room for Mister Scott to do his work. Mister Latimer, Mister Gaetano, you'll arm yourselves and scout out the area, keeping in visual contact with the ship. 
LATIMER: Aye, aye, sir. 
(The two men go outside, and the doors close behind them) 
MCCOY: What do you think our chances are of contacting the Enterprise? 
SPOCK: Under present conditions, extremely poor. 
MCCOY: But they'll be looking for us. 
SPOCK: If the ionisation effect is as widespread as I believe it is, Doctor, they'll be searching for us without instrumentation, by visual contact only. On those terms, this is a very large planet. 
MCCOY: Then you don't think they'll find us. 
SPOCK: Not as long as we're grounded. We may be here for a very long time, Doctor.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise is orbiting a sickly green swirled planet, and Commissioner Ferris is lounging by the door, watching Uhura working.) 
UHURA: Nothing, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: Anything on your scanners? 
SULU: Totally inoperative, sir. No readings at all. 
KIRK: Have you tried tying in to the auxiliary power? 
SULU: Yes, sir. No change. 
KIRK: Transport room, this is the captain speaking. Are the transporters beaming up yet? 
CHIEF [OC]: Not one hundred percent, Captain. We beamed down some inert material, but it came back in a disassociated condition. We wouldn't dare try with people. 
KIRK: Thank you. This is the captain speaking. Flight deck, prepare Columbus for immediate exit, for a search of the planet surface. Correlate co-ordinates with Mister Sulu. Thank you. Anything, Uhura? 
UHURA: All wavelengths dominated by ionisation effects, sir. Transmission is blocked, reception impossible. 
FERRIS: Well, Captain? 
KIRK: We have until 2823.8 to continue the search, Commissioner. 
FERRIS: You don't really think you'll have any luck, do you? 
KIRK: Look, these people are my friends and my shipmates. I intend to continue the ship's search for them until the last possible moment. 
FERRIS: Very well, Captain, but not one second beyond that moment. Is that clear? If it isn't, I suggest you look at book nineteen, section four thirty three, paragraph twelve. 
KIRK: I'm familiar with the regulations, Commissioner. I know all about your authority. Launch shuttlecraft Columbus.

[Outside the shuttlecraft]

(Spock is scanning one of it's small nacelles when McCoy comes out to join him.) 
MCCOY: Well, I can't say much for the circumstances, but at least it's your big chance. 
SPOCK: My big chance? For what, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Command. Oh, I know you, Mister Spock. You've never voiced it, but you've always thought that logic was the best basis on which to build command. Am I right? 
SPOCK: I am a logical man, Doctor. 
MCCOY: It'll take more than logic to get us out of this. 
SPOCK: Perhaps, Doctor, but I know of no better way to begin. I realise command does have its fascinations, even under circumstances such as these. But I neither enjoy the idea of command, nor am I frightened of it. It simply exists. And I will do whatever logically needs to be done. Excuse me. 
(he heads back inside)

[Shuttlecraft]

SCOTT: Very bad, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: In what way? 
SCOTT: We've lost a great deal of fuel. We have no chance at all to reach escape velocity. And if we ever hope to make orbit, we'll have to lighten our load by at least five hundred pounds. 
SPOCK: The weight of three grown men. 
SCOTT: Aye, you could put it that way. 
MCCOY: Or the equivalent weight in equipment. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy, with very few exceptions we use virtually every piece of equipment aboard this craft in attaining orbit. There's very little excess weight, except among the passengers. 
BOMA: You mean three of us must stay behind. 
SPOCK: Unless the situation changes radically, yes. 
BOMA: And who's to choose? 
SPOCK: As commanding officer, the choice will be mine. 
BOMA: You wouldn't be interested in drawing lots? 
SPOCK: A very quaint idea, Mister Boma, but I do believe I'm better qualified to make the selection than any random drawing of lots. 
BOMA: All right, Mister Spock. Who? 
SPOCK: My choice will be a logical one, arrived at through logical means. 
MCCOY: Mister Spock, life and death are seldom logical. 
SPOCK: But attaining a desired goal always is, Doctor. Now gentlemen, I suggest we move outside to make a further examination of the hull in the event we've overlooked any minor damage. 
(Spock leaves) 
BOMA: If any minor damage was overlooked, it was when they put his head together. 
MCCOY: Not his head, Mister Boma, his heart. His heart.

[Rocky ledge]

(Latimer and Gaetano are investigating a strange scraping sound, but the mist is obscuring their vision.) 
LATIMER: What is it? 
GAETANO: II don't know. It's from up there. 
LATIMER: No, it's from back there. 
GAETANO: It's everywhere. It's all around us! 
LATIMER: Let's get out of here. 
(They go to the top of the ridge, and Latimer stands up. Someone throws a large flint-tipped spear into his back, and he falls. The scream is heard back at the shuttlecraft)

[Outside shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Come on, Boma.

[Bottom of the ledge]

(Gaetano fires his phaser at several different enemies. The spear in Latimer's back is taller than a man) 
SPOCK: What was it? 
GAETANO: It was something huge, terrible. Up there. I think I hit it. 
BOMA: Did you see what it was? 
GAETANO: Vaguely. It was like a giant ape. 
BOMA: Poor Latimer. 
GAETANO: At least it was quick for him. 
BOMA: We'll get off all right. 
SPOCK: (returns from investigating) Nothing there. 
GAETANO: I tell you there was. 
SPOCK: I don't doubt your word. 
GAETANO: But there must be something. I swear I hit it. 
SPOCK: (pulling the bloody spear from Latimer's body and examining it) Folsom Point. 
BOMA: Sir? 
SPOCK: There's a remarkable resemblance to the Folsom Point discovered in 1925, old world calendar, New Mexico, North America. A bit more crude about the shaft, I believe. Not very efficient. 
BOMA: Not very efficient? Is that all you have to say? 
SPOCK: Am I in error, Mister Boma? 
BOMA: You? Error? Impossible. 
SPOCK: Then what, Mister Boma? 
BOMA: There's a man lying there dead, and you talk about stone spears. What about Latimer? 
SPOCK: My concern for the dead will not bring him back to life, Mister Boma. 
GAETANO: Mister Spock. In the interest of efficiency, I don't think we should leave his body here. 
SPOCK: Bringing him back to the ship should not interfere with our repair efforts. If you need assistance, I 
GAETANO: We'll do it. Give me a hand with Latimer, will you?

Captain's Log, stardate 2822.3. We continue to search, but I find it more difficult each moment to ward off a sense of utter futility and great loss.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, the Columbus has returned from searching quadrant seven seven nine X by five three four M. Results negative. 
KIRK: Have them proceed to the next quadrant. Any word from engineering on our sensors? 
UHURA: They're working on them, sir. Still inoperable. 
KIRK: What about the transporters? 
UHURA: They're still reported unsafe. 
KIRK: Thank you, Lieutenant. 
FERRIS: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Commissioner? 
FERRIS: I don't relish the thought of abandoning your crewmen out there, however I must remind you 
KIRK: I haven't forgotten, Commissioner. 
FERRIS: You're running out of time. 
KIRK: I haven't forgotten that, Commissioner. This is the captain. Try using overload power on the transporters. We've got to get them working. 
CHIEF [OC]: Aye, aye, Captain. 
KIRK: Uhura, order the Columbus to open its course two degrees on every lap from now on. 
SULU: But Captain, two degrees means they'll be overlooking more than a dozen terrestrial miles on each search loop. 
KIRK: It also means we have a fighting chance to cover the majority of the planet's surface. Mind your helm, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
FERRIS: (stepping into the turbolift) Twenty four more hours, Captain.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Perhaps if you were to channel the second auxiliary tank through the primary intake valve. 
SCOTT: It's too delicate. It may not be able to take the pressure as it is. 
MCCOY: (coming in from rear compartment) This should save us at least fifty pounds, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Excellent, Doctor. 
MEARS: We should be able to scrape up another hundred pounds. 
SPOCK: Which would still leave us at least one hundred and fifty pounds overweight. 
MCCOY: I can't believe you're serious about leaving someone behind. Now whatever it is that's out there 
SPOCK: It is more rational to sacrifice one life than six, Doctor. 
MCCOY: I'm not talking about rationality. 
SPOCK: You might be wise to start. 
BOMA: (looking in from outside) Mister Spock. we're ready. 
SPOCK: For what? 
BOMA: The services for Latimer. 
SPOCK: Mister Boma, we're working against time. 
BOMA: The man's dead. He deserves a decent burial. You're the captain. A few words. 
SPOCK: Doctor, perhaps you know the correct words for such an occasion. 
MCCOY: Mister Spock, that's your place. 
SPOCK: My place is here. If you please, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Now look. We may all die here. At least let us die like men, not machines. 
SPOCK: By dealing with first things first, I hope to increase our chances of staying alive. Well, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: If you'll give me a hand with this conduit. 
(Boma closes the door and leaves them to it) 
(later) 
SCOTT: Pressure's dropping. We're losing everything. 
SPOCK: What happened? 
SCOTT: One of the lines gave. The strain of coming through the atmosphere and the added load when we tried to bypass. Yes, that's done it. We have no fuel. 
SPOCK: That would seem to solve the problem of who to leave behind. Consider the alternatives, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: We have no fuel! What alternatives? 
SPOCK: Mister Scott, there are always alternatives. 
MCCOY: Mister Spock! Something's happening outside.

[Outside the shuttlecraft]

(They crouch down behind a rock while Spock stands and listens to that scraping sound) 
MCCOY: What do those supersensitive ears make of that, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Wood rubbing on some kind of leather. 
GAETANO: They're getting ready. They'll attack. 
BOMA: Not necessarily. It could be a simple tribal rite, assuming a tribal culture. 
SPOCK: Not a tribal culture. Their artefacts are too primitive. More likely a loose association of some sort. 
MEARS: If we knew more about them 
BOMA: We know enough. If they're tribal, they'll have a sense of unity. We can use that. 
SPOCK: How, Mister Boma? 
BOMA: By hitting them hard. Give them a bloody nose. Make them think twice about attacking us. 
GAETANO: Yes, I agree. If we stand by and do nothing, we're just giving them an invitation to come down and slaughter us. 
SPOCK: I'm frequently appalled by the low regard you Earthmen have for life. 
GAETANO: Well, we're practical about it. I say we hit them before they hit us. 
SPOCK: Mister Boma? 
BOMA: Absolutely. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy? 
MCCOY: Seems logical to me. 
SPOCK: It does, indeed. It seems logical to me, also. But to take life indiscriminately, 
GAETANO: The majority. 
SPOCK: I am not interested in the opinion of the majority, Mister Gaetano. Components must be weighed. Our danger to ourselves as well as our duties to other life forms, friendly or not. There's a third course. 
GAETANO: That could get us killed. 
SPOCK: I think not. Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Yes. 
SPOCK: You and Yeoman Mears return to the ship. Assist Mister Scott in any way possible. We'll be back shortly. 
MCCOY: Right. 
(Mears and McCoy leave) 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, you'll follow my orders to the letter, firing only when so instructed, and at my designated targets. 
GAETANO: Now you're talking. 
SPOCK: We'll fire to frighten, Mister Gaetano, not to kill. 
GAETANO: Oh, for the. You saw what they did to Latimer! 
SPOCK: I am in command, Mister Gaetano. The orders and the responsibility will be mine. Follow me.

[Rocks]

(The trio are paddling through dry ice when a giant spear is thrown across their path. Spock fires at one assailant, who throws his shield at them too. They move on a little way.) 
BOMA: The mists. I can't see them. 
SPOCK: I hear them. They're directly ahead of us. Several, I believe. Direct your phasers to two o'clock and to ten o'clock. 
GAETANO: I say we hit them dead on. 
SPOCK: Yes, I know. But fortunately, I'm giving the orders. Take aim please, and fire when I give a signal. 
(He climbs partway up a rock, for a better view.) 
SPOCK: Fire. (several seconds of sustained phaser beam) Cease fire. (It's gone quiet) They should think twice before bothering us again. 
GAETANO: I still say we should have killed them. 
SPOCK: It was not necessary. Fear will do for us what needs to be done. Mister Boma, you will return with me to the Galileo. Mister Gaetano, you remain on guard here. Keep in contact with the ship. 
(Boma says a silent goodbye to his colleague, and the noise starts up again)

[Shuttlecraft]

MEARS: Did you find them? 
SPOCK: Yes, we found them. They won't bother us again. 
MCCOY: I hope not. Scotty has an idea. 
SCOTT: It's dangerous, but it might work. 
SPOCK: Go, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: I can adjust the main reactor to function with a substitute fuel supply. 
SPOCK: That's all very well, but we don't have a substitute supply. 
SCOTT: Aye, we do. Our phasers. I can adapt them and use their energy. It'll take time, but it's possible. 
MCCOY: Trouble is, they happen to be our only defence. 
SPOCK: They would also seem to be our only hope. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
SPOCK: (after brief thought) Yeoman, your phaser. 
MEARS: But what if the creatures attack again? 
SPOCK: They won't attack for at least several hours. By then, with luck, we'll be gone. 
SCOTT: If I can get a full load, we should be able to achieve orbit with all hands. Not that we can maintain it long. 
SPOCK: We don't have to maintain it very long, Mister Scott. In less than twenty four hours, the Enterprise will be forced to abandon its search in order to make a rendezvous. If we can't maintain orbit after that time, it won't make any difference. If we burn up in a decaying orbit or die here on the planet's surface, we shall surely die. Doctor, your phaser. Go to work, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

(A bunch of boxes is beamed aboard) 
CHIEF: They came back all right, sir. In my opinion, the transporters are now safe for human transport. 
KIRK: Good. This is the captain. Landing parties one, two, and three, report to transporter room for immediate beaming down to surface of the planet. Ordinance condition One A. 
CHIEF: Captain, it's a big planet. It'll be sheer luck if our landing parties find anything. 
KIRK: I'm depending on luck, Lieutenant. It's almost the only tool we have that'll work.

[Rocks]

(Gaetano has worked himself up into a panic when a rock knocks his phaser out of his hand. Then a spear is thrown, and finally the giant creature comes for the helpless man)
(Spock, Boma and McCoy arrive on the scene a little later, and examine the marks in the ground. Spock picks up the dropped phaser) 
SPOCK: Take this back to Mister Scott for conversion, please Doctor. 
BOMA: Nobody knows what's happened to Gaetano, and you hand over his phaser like nothing's happened at all. 
SPOCK: (handing over his own phaser) And give this to Mister Scott in the event I don't return. 
MCCOY: Just where are you going? 
SPOCK: I have a certain scientific curiosity about what's become of Mister Gaetano. Return to the ship, please. 
(Spock leaves) 
MCCOY: I don't know. He'll risk his neck locating Gaetano and if he finds him, he's just as liable to order him to stay behind. You tell me. 
BOMA: Do you really think the ship will ever leave? 
MCCOY: Well, it won't unless we get these phasers back. 
(Further on, Spock finds Gaetano's body draped over a rock. He picks him up in a fireman's lift and heads back to the shuttlecraft with him. Spears are thrown. McCoy and Boma help him get the body inside.)

[Shuttlecraft]

(Scott is still lying in the middle of the floor, working) 
MCCOY: Well, Mister Spock, they didn't stay frightened very long, did they? 
SPOCK: Most illogical reaction. We demonstrated our superior weapons. They should have fled. 
MCCOY: You mean they should have respected us? 
SPOCK: Of course. 
MCCOY: Mister Spock, respect is a rational process. Did it ever occur to you they might react emotionally, with anger? 
SPOCK: Doctor, I am not responsible for their unpredictability. 
MCCOY: They were perfectly predictable to anyone with feeling. You might as well admit it, Mister Spock, your precious logic brought them down on us. 
MEARS: Why haven't they done anything? 
SPOCK: They're studying us, for the moment. 
BOMA: Another prediction, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: My opinion, Mister Boma. 
(The shuttlecraft shakes as one of the locals starts battering it with a rock) 
SPOCK: Seal the windows! 
MCCOY: Studying us, Mister Spock? They seem to learn rather quickly. 
BOMA: All right, Spock, you have all the answers. What now? 
SPOCK: Mister Boma, your tone is increasingly hostile. 
BOMA: My tone isn't the only thing that's hostile, Mister Spock! 
SPOCK: Curious. Most illogical. 
BOMA: I'm sick and tired of your logic! 
MEARS: We could use a little inspiration. 
SPOCK: Strange. Step by step, I have made the correct and logical decisions. And yet two men have died. 
MCCOY: And you've brought our furry friends down on us. 
SPOCK: I do seem to have miscalculated regarding them, and inculcated resentment on your parts. The sum of the parts cannot be greater than the whole. 
MCCOY A little less analysis and more action. That's what we need, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: How much longer, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Another hour, maybe two. 
MCCOY: That won't be long enough. 
SCOTT: Doctor, a phaser can only drain so fast. 
BOMA: How long do you think those plates will hold out under this? We've got to do something! 
SCOTT: You've got your hands full.

Captain's Log, stardate 2823.1. Our landing parties are on the surface of Taurus Two. We continue to hope. Instruments are slowly returning to an operable condition as the ion storm slowly disperses. On the ship, we can only wait helplessly.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What word from the sensor section? 
UHURA: At last report they were getting some readings 
KIRK: I'm not interested in the last report. I want to know now. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
FERRIS: You have two hours and forty three minutes, Captain. 
KIRK: I'm perfectly aware of how much time I have left. 
FERRIS: I'm delighted. However I shall continue to remind you. 
KIRK: You do that. 
UHURA: Sir, sensor section reporting. Static interference still creating false images. Estimates eighty percent undependable. 
KIRK: What about radio communication? 
UHURA: Clearing slowly. Still incapable of transmission or reception. 
FERRIS: What do you intend to do? 
KIRK: Do? I intend to continue the search. Foot by foot, inch by inch, by candlelight if necessary, until the last possible moment. And if you'd keep your nose off my bridge, I'd be thankful. 
FERRIS: I'm sure the authorities will be pleased by your diligence, Captain. I'm not sure they'll appreciate the way you address a High Commissioner. 
KIRK: I'm in command here, Mister Ferris. 
FERRIS: You are, Captain. For another two hours and forty two minutes.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, how much power do we have left in the ship's batteries? 
SCOTT: They're in good shape, but they won't lift us off, if that's what you're getting at. 
SPOCK: Will they electrify the exterior of this ship? 
SCOTT: That they will, Mister Spock! 
(He dashes to the rear compartment and puts on big rubber gloves) 
SPOCK: Get to the centre of the ship. Don't touch the plates. Be sure you're insulated. Stand by. Are you ready, Scott? 
SCOTT: Ready, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: All right. Go. (Scott uses a spanner or something to short out the battery connections) Again! Again! 
(It goes quiet and still outside) 
SCOTT: I daren't use any more. Not and be sure of ignition. 
SPOCK: I believe we've used enough. Mister Scott. I suggest you continue draining the phasers. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
MCCOY: It must've worked. 
SPOCK: For the moment. 
BOMA: For the moment? 
SPOCK: The moment they discover they're not seriously hurt, they'll be back. Meanwhile, please check the aft compartment. See if there's anything you can unload to lighten the ship. 
BOMA: Mister Gaetano's body's back there. 
SPOCK: It will of course have to be left behind. 
BOMA: Not without a burial. 
SPOCK: I wouldn't recommend it. The creatures won't be far away. 
BOMA: Not without a burial, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: It would expose members of this crew to unnecessary peril. 
BOMA: I'll take that chance. You see, Mister Spock, I would insist upon a decent burial even if your body was back there. 
MCCOY: Mister Boma. 
BOMA: I'm sick and tired of this machine! 
SCOTT: That's enough! 
SPOCK: Gentlemen. All right, Mister Boma, you'll have your burial, provided the creatures will permit it.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain Kirk, landing party number two has been beamed back aboard ship. They have casualties. One dead, two injured. 
KIRK: (going to Spock's station) Put Lieutenant Kelowitz on visual. 
KELOWITZ [on monitor]: Kelowitz, Captain. 
(His uniform is dirty and he sounds tired) 
KIRK: Report. 
KELOWITZ [on monitor]: We were attacked, Captain. Huge, furry creatures. I checked with astral anthropology, and they're order 480G, anthropoid. Similar to life forms discovered on Hansen's Planet, but much larger. Ten, twelve feet in height. 
KIRK: There are casualties? 
KELOWITZ [on monitor]: Ensign O'Neal got a spear through the body before we even knew they were around. Lieutenant lmmamura has a dislocated shoulder and severe lacerations, but he'll make it all right. Captain, the creatures are all over the place. If the Galileo is down on that planet, I 
KIRK: Thank you, Lieutenant. You'd better report to Sickbay yourself. 
KELOWITZ [on monitor]: Aye, aye, Captain. 
(Commissioner Ferris enters) 
FERRIS: Captain Kirk, check your chronometer. You'll see that it is 2823.8. Your time is up. 
KIRK: But they're still out there. 
FERRIS: So are the plague victims on New Paris. I'm sorry, Captain. I now assume authority granted me under Title fifteen, Galactic Emergency Procedures, and I order you to abandon search. 
KIRK: The Columbus hasn't returned yet. I still have two search parties out. 
FERRIS: You're procrastinating, Captain. You have your orders. Recall your search parties and proceed to Makus Three immediately. 
KIRK: Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Order the transporter room to immediately beam up the two search parties from the surface. Attempt to contact the Columbus. 
UHURA: I'm in partial contact with them now, sir. 
KIRK: Then have them return immediately. Mister Sulu, prepare to abandon search. Set course for Makus Three.

Captain's log, supplement. The search parties have returned to the ship, and the Columbus is on its way back. I have been compelled to abandon the search.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, the sensor section says the beams are working again. 
KIRK: What about the other systems? 
UHURA: No, sir. Too much interference. 
SULU: Captain, course set for Makus Three. 
KIRK: Stand ready, Mister Sulu. How long before the Columbus comes on board? 
UHURA: Twenty three minutes, sir. 
KIRK: Twenty three minutes.

[Shuttlecraft]

MEARS: Enterprise, this is Galileo. Come in, please. Enterprise. Nothing, sir. Just ionic interference. 
SCOTT: That's it. 
SPOCK: How about weight? 
SCOTT: If we shed every ounce, we might be able to achieve orbit. 
SPOCK: And how long can we hold it? 
SCOTT: A few hours, no longer. But if we time it right, we can cut out of orbit and save enough fuel for a controlled re=entry. 
SPOCK: To land here again? Not a very attractive possibility. 
SCOTT: We have very few alternatives, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy. Mister Boma. When can we lift off, Scott? 
SCOTT: Maybe eight minutes if the weight's right. 
(McCoy appears from the aft compartment) 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, The ship will lift off in exactly ten minutes. You have that long to bury Mister Gaetano. Now, it appears to be clear outside, at least for the moment. I'll assist you. Hurry.

[Bridge]

UHURA: The Columbus is aboard, sir. The flight hatch is closed. Transporter room reports last of the landing parties have beamed safely up. All systems report secured for warp factors. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, proceed on course for Makus Three, at space normal speed. 
SULU: Space normal, sir? 
KIRK: Those are my orders. Lieutenant Uhura, order all sensor sections to direct beams aft. Full function, continuous operation until further orders. 
UHURA: Yes, sir.

{Shuttlecraft]

(From our viewpoint inside, we see the three men standing by two mounds of soil when giant spears start landing near them) 
SPOCK: Get into the ship! Immediate lift off! 
(He throws a spear back, then gets pinned against a rock outcrop by a thrown boulder) 
SPOCK: No! Go back! Lift off! Go back! No! 
(But Boma and McCoy ignore his orders and free him) 
SPOCK: All right, All right! Go! Go! Go! Go! 
(They all get safely into the shuttlecraft) 
SPOCK: Go, Scott! 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: I told you to lift off! 
MCCOY: Don't be a fool, Mister Spock. We couldn't leave you out there. 
SPOCK: Get us off, Scott! 
SCOTT: We should be moving, but we're not. 
SPOCK: Quite right, Mister Scott. There's somebody holding us down. All systems are go, but we're not moving. 
(Throws switches on the pilot's panel) 
SCOTT: What are you doing? 
SPOCK: Our boosters. 
SCOTT: We'll never be able to hold orbit. 
SPOCK: Would you rather stay here? 
SCOTT: No, Mister Spock. 
(They swap seats) 
MEARS: We're moving! 
BOMA: They let go! 
MCCOY: We got off! 
SPOCK: May I remind you we have yet to achieve orbit, nor can we maintain it long. An hour from now we may be right back where we started from. 
(The Galileo leaves the sickly yellow and green atmosphere of the planet) 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, by coming after me, you may well have destroyed what slim chance you had for survival. The logical thing for you to have done was to have left me behind. 
MCCOY: Mister Spock, remind me to tell you that I'm sick and tired of your logic. 
SPOCK: That is a most illogical attitude. Orbit in one minute, Mister Scott. Fuel status? 
SCOTT: Fifteen pounds psi. Approximately enough for one orbit, sir. 
MCCOY: After that? 
SCOTT: Tapping our boosters ended our last chance for a soft landing. 
BOMA: You mean a burn-up? 
SPOCK: It is the usual end of a decaying orbit. 
MEARS: I don't want to die up here. 
SPOCK: Infinitely preferable to the kind of death we'd be granted on the planet's surface, I should think. 
BOMA: I admire your ability to make so measured a choice. 
SCOTT: Mister Spock, you said a while ago that there were always alternatives. 
SPOCK: Did l? I may have been mistaken. 
MCCOY: Well, at least I lived long enough to hear that. Is there anything we can do? 
SPOCK: The Enterprise is surely on course for Makus Three by now. I for one do not believe in angels. 
MCCOY: Well, Mister Spock, so ends your first command. 
SPOCK: Yes. My first command. 
SCOTT: Orbit attitude, Mister Spock. With our present fuel, that gives us about forty five minutes. 
SPOCK: Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise, come in, please. Galileo to Enterprise. Come in, please. 
(He ponders for a moment, then flicks the Fuel Jettison button) 
SCOTT: Mister Spock! 
(There's a jolt as two long plumes of flame streak out from the nacelles) 
MEARS: What happened? 
SCOTT: He jettisoned the fuel and ignited it. 
BOMA: We need that fuel to maintain orbit. Are you out of your mind? 
SPOCK: Perhaps, Mister Boma. 
MCCOY: How long have we got now, Scotty? 
SCOTT: The orbit'll start decaying as soon as the fuel's exhausted. Say six minutes.

[Bridge]

(The air is full of pointless status reports over the comm. when suddenly) 
SULU: Captain, there's something there on screen, at Taurus Two. 
(On the viewscreen, a long trail of yellow crosses the green of the planet) 
KIRK: Sensors, a meteorite? 
SULU: No. It's holding a lateral line. There it is again. Holding steady, Captain. 
KIRK: A hundred and eighty degrees about, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant Uhura, contact transporter room. All beams ready. Full normal speed.

[Shuttlecraft]

SCOTT: A distress signal? It's like sending up a flare. Mister Spock, that was a good gamble. Perhaps it was worth it. 
SPOCK: No one out there to see it. 
(The plume of flame fades out) 
SCOTT: Orbit decaying, Mister Spock. Ten seconds to atmosphere. 
MCCOY: It may be the last action you'll ever take, Mister Spock, but it was all human. 
SPOCK: Totally illogical. There was no chance. 
MCCOY: That's exactly what I mean. 
(The front of the little craft starts to glow red, and instrumentation begins to smoke and crackle.) 
MEARS: It's getting hot.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Transporters locked in, sir. 
KIRK: Activate beams. 
(Our last view inside Galileo is of lots of smoke, then transporter beams) 
SULU: Whatever it was, Captain, it just burned up in the atmosphere. 
UHURA: Captain, transporter room just beamed up five persons. Alive and well. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, proceed on course to Makus Three. Ahead warp factor one. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. Warp factor one. 
(later, everyone is back on duty) 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: There's really something I don't understand about all of this. Maybe you can explain it to me. Logically, of course. When you jettisoned the fuel and ignited it, you knew there was virtually no chance of it being seen, yet you did it anyhow. That would seem to me to be an act of desperation. 
SPOCK: Quite correct, Captain. 
KIRK: Now we all know, and I'm sure the doctor will agree with me, that desperation is a highly emotional state of mind. How does your well-known logic explain that? 
SPOCK: Quite simply, Captain. I examined the problem from all angles, and it was plainly hopeless. Logic informed me that under the circumstances, the only possible action would have to be one of desperation. Logical decision, logically arrived at. 
KIRK: I see. You mean you reasoned that it was time for an emotional outburst. 
SPOCK: Well, I wouldn't put it in exactly those terms, Captain, but those are essentially the facts. 
KIRK: You're not going to admit that for the first time in your life, you committed a purely human emotional act? 
SPOCK: No, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, you're a stubborn man. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Shore Leave
Stardate: 3025.3
Original Airdate: 29 Dec, 1966

[Bridge]
(Enterprise is orbiting a very green planet, and a young female Yeoman is getting a signature from the Captain.) 
KIRK: Anything from the landing party? 
SPOCK: They should be sending up a report momentarily, Captain. (Kirk stretches and groans) Something wrong?
KIRK: A kink in my back. (behind his back the Yeoman starts to massage it) That's it. A little higher, please. Push. Push hard. Dig it in there, Mister 
(Spock steps forward and Kirk realises who is massaging his lower back) 
KIRK: Thank you, Yeoman. That's sufficient.
TONIA: You need sleep, Captain. If it's not out of line
KIRK: I have enough of that from Doctor McCoy, Yeoman. Thank you.
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy is correct, Captain. After what this ship has been through in the last three months, there is not a crewman aboard who is not in need of rest. Myself excepted, of course.
KIRK: Have Doctor McCoy's report channeled to my quarters, Lieutenant.
UHURA: Aye, aye, Captain.

[Planet surface - Glade]

SULU: Beautiful, beautiful. No animals, no people, no worries. Just what the doctor ordered. Right, Doctor?
MCCOY: I couldn't have prescribed better. We are one weary ship.
SULU: Do you think the Captain will authorise shore leave here?
MCCOY: Depending upon my report and that of the other scouting parties. You know, you have to see this place to believe it. It's like something out of Alice in Wonderland. The Captain has to come down.
SULU: He'd like it.
MCCOY: He needs it. You've got your problems, I've got mine. He's got ours, plus his, plus four hundred and thirty other people's. Where are you going?
SULU: To get some cell-structure records. A blade of grass, a bush, a tree, a flower petal. With these, we can tell the whole planet's biology.
(As Sulu crouches down behind some pampas grass, McCoy turns and looks straight at a white rabbit in a check jacket, yellow waistcoat, and looking at a gold pocket-watch.)
RABBIT: Oh, my paws and whiskers! I'll be late. 
(It heads off down a hole. Then a young girl comes running up, wearing a blue dress with a white apron.)
ALICE: Excuse me, sir. Have you seen a rather large white rabbit with a yellow waistcoat and white gloves here about?
(Wordlessly, McCoy points in the direction the rabbit went. The girl curtseys nicely) 
ALICE: Thank you very much. 
(She runs off after the rabbit) 
MCCOY: Sulu!
SULU: What is it? What's the matter?
MCCOY: Did you see them?
SULU: See what? I don't see anything. What is it, Doc?

[Kirk's quarters]

(The Captain is dictating his log in the presence of Yeoman Tonia Barrows) 
KIRK: Captain's log. Stardate 3025 er, point 3. We are orbiting an uninhabited planet in the Omicron Delta region. A planet remarkably like Earth, or how we remember Earth to be. Park-like, beautiful, green, flowers, trees, green lawn, quiet and restful. Almost too good to be true. 
TONIA: Sir, I don't see your name in any of the shore parties.
KIRK: I may be tired, Yeoman, but I'm not falling apart. Dismissed.
TONIA: Aye, aye, sir.
(She leaves, and Spock enters) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, we're beaming down the starboard section first. Which section would you like to go with?
SPOCK: Not necessary in my case, Captain. On my planet, to rest is to rest, to cease using energy. To me, it is quite illogical to run up and down on green grass using energy instead of saving it.
(Intercom whistles) 
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: Doctor McCoy calling from the planet, Captain.
KIRK: Yes. Open a channel, Uhura.
UHURA [OC]: Aye, aye, sir.

[Glade]

MCCOY: Captain, are you beaming down?

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: I hadn't planned to, Bones. Why?

[Glade]

MCCOY: Well, either our scouting probes and detectors are malfunctioning, and all us scouts careless and beauty-intoxicated, or I must report myself unfit for duty.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Explain.

[Glade]

MCCOY: On this supposedly uninhabited planet, I just saw a large rabbit

[Kirk's quarters]

MCCOY [OC]: Pull a gold watch from his vest and claim that he was late. 
KIRK: That's pretty good. I got one for you. The rabbit was followed by a little blonde girl, right?

[Glade]

MCCOY: As a matter of fact, yes.

[Kirk's quarters]

MCCOY [OC]: And they disappeared through a hole in a hedge.
KIRK: All right, Doctor, I'll take your report under consideration. Captain out. That's a McCoy pill, with a little mystery sugar-coating. He wants to get me down there. I'm afraid I won't swallow it.
SPOCK: Very well, Captain. Something I did come to discuss.
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock, what is it?
SPOCK: I picked this up from Doctor McCoy's log. We have a crewmember aboard who's showing signs of stress and fatigue. Reaction time down nine to twelve percent, associational reading norm minus three.
KIRK: That's much too low a rating. 
SPOCK: He's becoming irritable and quarrelsome, yet he refuses to take rest and rehabilitation. Now, He has that right, but we've found 
KIRK: A crewman's right ends where the safety of the ship begins. That man will go a shore on my orders. What's his name?
SPOCK: James Kirk. Enjoy yourself, Captain. It's an interesting planet. You'll find it quite pleasant. Very much like your Earth.

[Planet surface]

(An establishing shot of a landscape) 
SPOCK [OC]: Scouts have detected no animals, artefacts, or force fields of any kind. Only peace, sunshine, and good air. You'll have no problems.
(But as these words are spoken, a rock raises itself to reveal a classic western-style six shooter gun.) 
(Elsewhere, a man and a woman are taking scans of the vegetation) 
TELLER: (the woman) Does it always have to be work with you? There's so much loveliness. 
RODRIGUEZ: You won't find all this so lovely if our report for the Captain isn't ready when he asks for it, which shouldn't be long.
(Kirk and Barrows beam down) 
KIRK: Rodriguez, Teller, everything all right?
RODRIGUEZ: Yes, sir. We've completed the specimen survey.
KIRK: Good. That should be sufficient. Beam it up to Mister Spock when you're ready, and start enjoying yourselves.
RODRIGUEZ: Thank you, sir. And sir, I think you'll find Doctor McCoy and Mister Sulu that way.
KIRK: Thank you.
(Walking along) 
KIRK: Restful. After what we've been through, it's hard to believe a place this beautiful exists. 
TONIA: It is beautiful. So lovely, and restful. I mean, affirmative, Captain. 
KIRK: McCoy! McCoy! 
MCCOY: Over here. Over here.
(They meet up by the lake) 
KIRK: Bones, know any good rabbit jokes lately?
MCCOY: As a matter of fact, I do, but this is not one of them. Look at this. (a pair of large tracks in the soil) I saw what I saw, or maybe I hallucinated it, but I want you to take a look and tell me what you think about it. 
KIRK: Footprints. Could be a rabbit. It would have to be an unusual creature to make this size tracks. What about Mister Sulu? Will he confirm what you saw?
MCCOY: Negative. He was examining the flora at the time.
KIRK: Bridge, this is the Captain.
TONIA: Where is Mister Sulu?
MCCOY: Collecting specimens.
UHURA [OC]: Bridge.
KIRK: Has the first shore party beamed down yet?
UHURA: Negative, Captain. They're just about to start.
KIRK: Get this message to all shore parties. Stand by. No one is to leave the ship.
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir.
MCCOY: You're cancelling the shore leave on account of this, Jim? 
KIRK: You're the doctor, Doctor. Can you explain this?
MCCOY: Well, no. 
KIRK: Neither can I. I admit it looks harmless. It probably is harmless. But before I bring my people down here, I want proof it's harmless.
(They hear a gunshot. Kirk draws his phaser and they head off in the direction of the shot. More are fired.)

[Woodland path]

(They find Sulu target practising) 
KIRK: What do you think you're doing?
SULU: Target shooting, Captain. Isn't it a beauty? Haven't got anything like this in my collection.
KIRK: Where did you get it, Mister Sulu?
SULU: I found it. I know it's a crazy coincidence, but I've always wanted one like this. Found it lying right over there. An old-time police special, and in beautiful condition. Hasn't been one like this made in a couple of centuries.
KIRK: (holding out his hand for the offending weapon) Mister Sulu.
SULU: (handing it over) It fires lead pellets propelled by expanding gases from a chemical explosion.
KIRK: I'll hang on to it. The fresh air seems to have made you trigger-happy.
TONIA: Doctor McCoy's rabbit, sir. He must have gone through here.
KIRK: Are you sure our instruments didn't show any animal life on this planet?
MCCOY: Absolutely. No birds, no mammals, no insects, nothing. I'm certain our readings weren't off.
KIRK: I'd like to believe this is an elaborate gag, but. Yeoman Barrows, you accompany Mister Sulu. Find out where those tracks came from. Doctor, you come with me back to the glade. I'd like another look at that area. 
(As they head back, an aerial comes up in front of our point of view and follows them.) 
KIRK: This is turning out to be one very unusual shore leave.
MCCOY: Well, it could have been worse.
KIRK: How?
MCCOY: You could have seen the rabbit.
KIRK: What's the matter, Bones, you getting a persecution complex?
MCCOY: Well, yeah, I'm beginning to feel a little bit picked on, if that's what you mean. 
KIRK: I know the feeling very well. I had it at the Academy. An upper classman there. One practical joke after another, and always on me. My own personal devil. A guy by the name of Finnegan.
MCCOY: And you being the very serious young 
KIRK: Serious? I'll make a confession, Bones. I was absolutely grim, which delighted Finnegan no end. He's the kind of guy to put a bowl of cold soup in your bed or a bucket of water propped on a half-open door. You never knew where he'd strike next. More tracks. Looks like your rabbit came from over there.
MCCOY: A girl's footprints. The young blonde girl I saw chasing it.
KIRK: Yes. You follow the rabbit. I'll backtrack the girl. I'll meet you around the other side of the hill.
MCCOY: Good. I've got a personal grudge against that rabbit, Jim. 
(They split up, and then suddenly there's a young man leaning against a tree trunk) 
FINNEGAN: (in a dreadful cod-Irish accent) Jim.
KIRK: Finnegan? I can't believe it. 
FINNEGAN: You never know when I'm going to strike, huh, Jim? (hits him on the jaw) How's this? Come on, come on. It's me, Finnegan. All right, Jimmy boy. (maniacal laughter) Go ahead, lay one on me. That's what you always wanted, isn't it? Come on. Come on. 
KIRK: All right, let's try that one again. Go! 
(He just lays hands on Finnegan for a good fight, when they hear screams. Kirk runs off to investigate) 
FINNEGAN: Go! Any excuse, Jim baby. Run away! Run away! Run away! 
(Along the path, he meets McCoy) 
MCCOY: What was it?
KIRK: Yeoman Barrows. 
(They arrive on the scene to find Tonia disheveled, her uniform torn, hugging a tree) 
KIRK: What happened?
TONIA: I don't know. I mean I do know. I was following the tracks, and there he was.
KIRK: Who was?
TONIA: Him.
KIRK: Barrows, give me a report.
TONIA: He had a cloak, sir, and a dagger with jewels on it.
KIRK: Are you sure you're not imagining all this?
TONIA: Captain, I know it sounds incredible, but I did not imagine it any more than I imagined he did this.
MCCOY: Sounds like Don Juan.
TONIA: Yes. Yes. It was so sort of story book walking around here, and I was thinking, all a girl needs is Don Juan. Just day dreaming, the way you would about someone you'd like to meet.
KIRK: Mister Sulu was with you. Where is he now?
TONIA: He ran after him.
KIRK: Stay with her, Doctor.
(He heads off in the direction she indicates) 
KIRK: Mister Sulu! Sulu! 
(An aerial comes up from a rock and monitors him as he runs along the path) 
KIRK: Mister Sulu! Sulu!

[Rocky outcrop]

(The Captain runs across a barren piece of ground towards a rocky outcrop, which suddenly gains palms and banana plants when he gets there.)
KIRK: Sulu!
(He picks an orange flower, and becomes wistful. And there she is, blonde and lovely, her dress half white, half black and roses.) 
KIRK: Ruth? Ruth.
RUTH: Jim, darling, it is me. It is Ruth. 
(She kisses him)

Captain's log. Stardate 3025.8. Investigation of this increasingly unusual planet continues, and we are seeing things that cannot possibly exist, yet they are undeniably real.

[Rocky outcrop]

KIRK: (into communicator) McCoy, do you read me? Ruth. Ruth, how can it be you? How could you possibly be here? You haven't aged. It's been fifteen years.
RUTH: It doesn't matter. None of that matters.
(His communicator beeps) 
KIRK: Kirk here.
MCCOY [OC]: Did you find Mister Sulu, Captain?
KIRK: What?
MCCOY [OC]: Did you find Mister Sulu?
KIRK: No, but I'm sure he's all right.
MCCOY [OC]: Sir? Are you all right?
KIRK: Yes, I'm fine.
RODRIQUEZ [OC]: Rodriguez to Captain Kirk.
KIRK: Yes, Mister Rodriguez.
RODRIQUEZ [OC]: Captain, a while ago, I saw well, birds, a whole flock of them.
KIRK: Don't you like birds, Mister Rodriguez?
RODRIQUEZ [OC]: I like them fine, sir, but all our surveys showed
KIRK; Then offhand I'd say our instruments are defective. There are indeed life-forms on this planet.
RODRIQUEZ [OC]: Sir, our surveys couldn't have been that wrong.
KIRK: Mister Rodriguez, have the search parties rendezvous at the glade. I'd like some answers to all this.
RODRIQUEZ [OC]: Aye, aye, sir. 
RUTH: You have to go?
KIRK: I don't want to.
RUTH: You'll see me again if you want to.
KIRK: You haven't told me. You haven't told me 
RUTH: Do what you have to do, and I'll be waiting.
KIRK: Ruth. 
(communicator beeps) 
KIRK: Kirk here.
SPOCK [OC]: Captain.
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: I'm getting strange readings from the planet surface, Captain. Some sort of power field down there.

[Rocky outcrop]

KIRK: Specify. 
SPOCK [OC]: A highly sophisticated type of energy draining our power and increasing, beginning to affect our communications.
KIRK: Can you pinpoint the source?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Could be coming from beneath the planet's surface. Patterns indicate some sort of industrial activity.

[Rocky outcrop]

KIRK: Keep me posted, Mister Spock. We'll continue our investigation down here. Captain out. 
(He walks off)

[Woodland path]

(Meanwhile, back at the tree where Tonia met Don Juan, something is monitoring them. The couple go walking arm in arm through the tropical plants.) 
MCCOY: Feeling better?
TONIA: A little, but I wouldn't want to be alone here.
MCCOY: It's a beautiful place. A little strange, I'll admit.
TONIA: That's just it. It's almost too beautiful. I was thinking, even before my tunic was torn, that in a place like this a girl should be, oh let's see now, a girl should be dressed like a fairy-tale princess, with lots of floaty stuff and a tall hat with a veil.
MCCOY: I see what you mean, but then you'd have whole armies of Don Juans to fight off. And me, too.
TONIA: Is that a promise, Doctor? 
(He takes her hands in his, and they gaze into each others eyes for a long second. Then she spots her dream clothing hanging on some shrubs) 
TONIA: Oh, Doctor, they're lovely. Look at me, Doctor. A lady to be protected and fought for. A princess of the blood royale.
MCCOY: You are all of those things and many more. They'll look even lovelier with you wearing them.
TONIA: Doctor, I'm afraid.
MCCOY: Now, look, I don't know how or why, but the dress is here. I'd like to see you in it. Why don't you put it on?
TONIA: All right, but you stay right there. Don't peek.
MCCOY: My dear girl, I am a doctor. When I peek, it's in the line of duty.
(he turns his back on her, and his communicator beeps) 
RODRIGUEZ [OC]: Calling Doctor McCoy.
MCCOY: McCoy here. I can't read you very well. Is this Rodriguez?
RODRIGUEZ [OC]: This is all the volume I can get on this thing. Can't read you well, either. Captain's orders. Rendezvous at that glade where he first found you.
MCCOY: Right. What the devil's wrong with communications? Esteban. Esteban.
(But Esteban and Teller have problems of their own - a tiger has them trapped) 
RODRIQUEZ: Doctor. Doctor. Doctor McCoy! 
(The tiger gets bored and leaves. Tonia emerges from her changing room looking lovely, and happy in her Disney fantasy creation.)

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: You're the science officer, Mister Spock. I want some answers.

[Rocky outcrop]

KIRK: First there was McCoy's Alice in Wonderland where there was supposedly no animal life. And Sulu's gun where there's no refined metal detected. Rodriguez' birds. And then my, well, the two people I saw.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Any chance these could be hallucinations?

[Rocky outcrop]

KIRK: One hallucination flattened me with a clout on the jaw.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: The other. 
SPOCK: That sounds like a painful reality.

[Rocky outcrop]

KIRK: Yes.
SPOCK [OC]: There must be some logical explanation.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Your signal is very weak. Can you turn up your gain?
KIRK [OC]: I'm already on maximum.
SPOCK: Captain, shall I beam down an armed party?

[Rocky outcrop]

KIRK: Negative. Our people here are armed with phasers. Besides, there's yet to be any real danger. (he sees geese flying overhead) Captain out.

[Cliff face]

(Sulu walks along by a cliff face, a hatch opens in the ground and out comes a Samurai to attack him. Sulu's phaser doesn't work and he is forced to dodge the long, sharp sword)

[Rocky outcrop]

KIRK: McCoy. McCoy, do you read me? Kirk to McCoy. Come in. 
(Sulu comes running over the rocks towards him) 
SULU: Captain, take cover! There's a Samurai after me. 
KIRK: A what? 
SULU: I mean, there was. (no one is chasing him now) Captain, you've got to believe me.
KIRK: I do. I've met some interesting personalities myself. Have you seen any of the others while I've been gone?
SULU: Got a call a few minutes ago. Rodriguez. Said you were rendezvousing back at the glade.
KIRK: I hope he got through to everybody. Communications are almost out.
SULU: That's not all. So's my phaser. 
(Kirk checks his own weapon - nothing) KIRK: Yeah. We'd better get to the glade.
SULU: Yes, sir. (sound of a transporter beam) Look. Someone beaming down from the bridge.
KIRK: Trying to. Something's obstructing it. (finally the familiar shape fully materialises) Mister Spock, my orders were no one was to leave the ship. 
SPOCK: Necessary, Captain. Unable to contact you by communicator, and the transporter is useless to us now. As I told you before, there's an unusual power field down here. It's soaking up all the energy at the source. I calculated the rate of its growth, and reasoned that I just might be able to transport one more person.
KIRK: Good. We can use your help.
SULU: We're stranded down here, Captain?
KIRK: Until we can find out what this is all about.

[Glade]

TONIA: There's no one here.
MCCOY: This is where the Captain said to rendezvous. (makes Tonia stand with her back to a tree) I swear I heard someone moving around.
TONIA: Don't talk like that. 
MCCOY: A princess shouldn't be afraid, not with a brave knight to protect her.

[Rocky outcrop]

(The trio hear the snarl of a big cat) 
KIRK: That way. Spread out. Let's find it.

[Glade]

(A knight in armour on a black horse has appeared, and is coming towards them.) 
MCCOY: These things cannot be real. Hallucinations can't harm us. Go back to where you were. 
(Kirk and Spock arrive on the scene. The knight lowers his lance, charges, and runs McCoy through. Tonia screams. Spock draws his phaser, and Kirk the gun he confiscated from Sulu. He shoots the knight from his horse, then they run to McCoy.) 
TONIA: He's dead.

Captain's log, supplemental. All contact with the Enterprise has been lost. We're trapped here. Our ship's surgeon, my personal friend, is dead. We're certain now that whatever we're facing is terribly real.

[Glade]

TONIA: It's my fault. It never would have happened. It's my fault. 
KIRK: No. 
TONIA: It is, it is. I'm to blame.
KIRK: Yeoman! We're in trouble. I need every crewman alert and thinking.
TONIA: Aye, aye, sir.
SULU: (at the knight's body) Captain! Captain!
(Kirk goes over) 
SULU: You'd better have a look at this, sir. (the knight is a plastic dummy) I don't understand.
KIRK: Neither do I, Mister Sulu, but before we leave this planet, I will.
SULU: It's like a dummy, Captain. It couldn't be alive.
KIRK: Tricorder?
SULU: Still operating, sir.
KIRK: Mister Spock. (Spock and Sulu swap places, handing over the tricorder) What do you make of that?
SPOCK: This is not human skin tissue, Captain. It more closely resembles the cellular casting we use for wound repairs. Much finer, of course.
KIRK: I want an exact judgment, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: This is definitely a mechanical contrivance. It has the same basic cell structure as the plants here, even the trees, the grass.
KIRK: Are you saying this is a plant, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: I'm saying that these are all multicellular castings. The plants, the animals, the people. They're all being manufactured.
KIRK: By who? And why? And why these particular things?
SPOCK: All we know for certain is that they act exactly like the real thing. Just as pleasant or just as deadly.
(There's a buzzing sound in the air, and a plane flies overhead)

[Woodland path]

TELLER: What is it?
RODRIGUEZ: Of all the crazy things. Remember what I was telling you a while ago, about the early wars and funny air vehicles they used? That's one of them.
TELLER: Can it hurt us?
RODRIGUEZ: Not unless it makes a strafing run.
TELLER: A what?
RODRIGUEZ: The way they used to attack people on the ground. (the plane descends) Come on.
(They run along the path, as a second plane joins the first, straight into a clump of trees. Angela falls to the ground having hit the tree.) 
RODRIGUEZ: Angela.

[Glade]

(Everyone has been watching the air show, then Sulu notices...) 
SULU: Captain!
KIRK: McCoy's body? 
SULU: He's gone. Dragged off. 
TONIA: The black knight, too.
KIRK: Spock?
SPOCK: At this point, Captain, my analysis may not sound very scientific. 
KIRK: McCoy's death is a scientific fact. 
SPOCK: There is one slight possibility, very slim, but nevertheless. Captain, what were your thoughts just before you encountered the people you described? 
KIRK: I was, I was thinking about the Academy. My days 
FINNEGAN: Hey, Jim baby! I see you brought out reinforcements. Ha! Well, I'm waiting for you, Jimmy boy.
KIRK: Finnegan. Finnegan! What's been happening to my people?
(Finnegan laughs and runs off) 
KIRK: Take Sulu. Find McCoy's body. This man is my problem.
SPOCK: Captain, wait.
KIRK: That's an order, Mister Spock.
(He runs off after Finnegan) 
FINNEGAN: Here I am! Run!

[Rocky outcrop]

FINNEGAN: Jim! Find me! Can't you see me? Come and get me! Here I am! Come on. You never could find your head with both hands! Like it used to be, Jimmy. Remember? (finally Kirk catches up to him, because he's lounging on a ledge) Hey, Jim 
KIRK: I want some answers.
FINNEGAN: Coming up. 
(He jumps on Kirk and they have a fight. Finnegan knocks Kirk down) 
FINNEGAN: Get up. Get up. Get up. Always fight fair, don't you? True officer and gentleman, you. You stupid underclassman. I've got the edge. I'm still twenty years old. Look at you. You're an old man.
(The fight resumes, and Kirk punches Finnegan till he falls down a rocky slope and ends up writhing in pain) 
FINNEGAN: I can't move me leg. I can't feel me leg. My back is broken. You've broken me back. 
KIRK: Can you feel that? 
(He gets kicked to the ground) 
FINNEGAN: Can you feel that, now? (Kirk passes out) Sleep sweet, Jimmy boy. Sleep as long as you like. Sleep forever, Jim boy. Forever and forever. 
(A little later, Kirk regains consciousness) 
FINNEGAN: Won't you ever learn, Jim boy? You never could take me, you know.
KIRK: Finnegan. One thing
FINNEGAN: Sure. Name it.
KIRK: Answers.
FINNEGAN: Earn them! 
(He throws dirt in Kirk's face and the exchange of punches resumes until they're both too tired to continue.) 
FINNEGAN: Not bad. Kind of makes up for things, huh, Jim?
KIRK: A lot of things. What's been happening to my people?
FINNEGAN: I never answer questions from plebes, Jimmy boy.
KIRK: I'm not a plebe. This is today, fifteen years later. What are you doing here?
FINNEGAN: I'm being exactly what you expect me to be, Jimmy boy.
(Kirk lands the final haymaker that knocks Finnegan out cold) 
SPOCK: Did you enjoy it, Captain?
KIRK: Yes, I enjoyed it. After all these years. (realisation dawns) I did enjoy it. The one thing I wanted to do after all these years was to beat the tar out of Finnegan.
SPOCK: Which supports a theory I've been formulating. 
KIRK: That we're all meeting people and things that we happen to be thinking about at the moment.
SPOCK: Yes. Somehow our thoughts are read, these things are quickly manufactured and provided for us.
KIRK: Dangerous if we happen to be thinking about 
SPOCK: Yes. We must all control our thoughts. 
KIRK: Difficult. 
SPOCK: The force field we encountered is obviously underground, manufacturing these things. Passages lead to the surface. Just for example, when Rodriguez thought of a tiger 
KIRK: Spock. 
(The tiger is behind them, the chain around it's neck tethering it to the spot clearly visible) 
KIRK: We've got to get back to the landing party and warn them. 
(They start to run back to the glade. The aircraft strafe them, Kirk elbows the Samurai out of his way)

[Glade]

(Tonia has changed back into her uniform when Don Juan sneaks up behind her and grabs her, warding off Sulu and Rodriquez with his sword) 
KIRK: Sulu, Rodriguez, Barrows. Front and centre.
(Don Juan runs off) 
SULU: Sir. 
KIRK: Don't ask any questions, Sulu. Face front, everyone. Don't talk. Don't breathe. Don't think. You're at attention. Concentrate on that and only that. Concentrate.
SPOCK: Captain.
(A smiling grey-haired man in a long green robe walks up to Kirk) 
KIRK: Who are you?
CARETAKER: I'm the caretaker of this place, Captain Kirk.
KIRK: You know my name?
CARETAKER: But of course. Lieutenant Rodriguez, Lieutenant Sulu, Yeoman Barrows and Mister Spock. We've just discovered you don't understand all this. These experiences were intended to amuse you.
KIRK: Amuse? That's your word for what we've been through?
CARETAKER: But none of this is permanent. Here you have to only imagine your fondest wishes, either old ones you wish to relive or new ones, anything at all. Battle, fear, love, triumph. Anything that pleases you can be made to happen.
SPOCK: The term is amusement park.
CARETAKER: Of course.
SPOCK: An old Earth name for a place where people could go to see and do all sorts of fascinating things. 
CARETAKER: This entire planet was constructed for our race of people to come and play.
SULU: Play? As advanced as you obviously are, and you still play?
KIRK: Yes, play, Mister Sulu. The more complex the mind, the greater the need for the simplicity of play.
CARETAKER: Exactly, Captain. How very perceptive of you.
KIRK: But that still doesn't explain the death of my ship's surgeon.
MCCOY: Possibly because no one has died, Jim. (Strolls in with a lovely girl on each arm) I was taken below the surface for some rather remarkable repairs. It's amazing. They've got a factory complex down there you wouldn't believe. They can build or do anything immediately.
TONIA: (not amused) And how do you explain them?
MCCOY: Oh. Them. Well I, er, I was thinking about a little cabaret I know on Rigel Two, and, er, there were these two girls in the chorus line. And well, here they are. Well after all, I am on shore leave.
TONIA: And so am l.
MCCOY: Oh, yes. So you are. Well, girls, I suppose you can turn something up.
(The cabaret girls go to Sulu and Spock.) 
CARETAKER: We regret that some of you've been made uncomfortable.Balance of Terror
Stardate: 1709.2
Original Airdate: 15 Dec, 1966

[Ship's Chapel]
SCOTT: The ceremony will be carried on all viewing screens, sir. 
KIRK: Good. 
MCCOY: There was a call for you from the Bridge. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Still no answer from Earth Outpost number two, Captain, and now number three's gone silent. 
KIRK: Maintain course to outpost four. Keep me informed. Kirk out. 
(At the door, a young lady in gold uniform and a pretty head-dress takes Scott's arm and is escorted into the room, to the strains of 'Here Comes The Bride'. Kirk goes to the rostrum.) 
KIRK: Since the days of the first wooden vessels, all shipmasters have had one happy privilege. That of uniting two people in the bonds of matrimony. We are gathered here today with you, Angela Martine, and you, Robert Tomlinson, in the sight of your fellows, in accordance with our laws and our many beliefs so that you may pledge your 
SULU [OC]: Alert! Alert! All decks alert! Alert! Alert! Captain to the Bridge. All decks alert. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Earth Outpost four reports they're under attack. A space vessel, identity unknown. 
KIRK: Full ahead. All decks, condition red.

[Corridor]

SULU [OC]: All decks, condition red. All decks, condition red.

Captain's Log, stardate 1709.2. Patrolling outposts guarding the neutral zone between planets Romulus and Remus and the rest of the galaxy, received emergency call from outpost 4. The U.S.S. Enterprise is moving to investigate and assist.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Outpost 4 reported under attack, sir. Then message terminates. 
SPOCK: Verified, Captain. 
SULU: Our speed is now maximum, sir. 
STILES: Position, eight minutes from Outpost four at this velocity, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty. 
SCOTT: I've talked to my engine room, sir. We'll get more speed out of her. 
KIRK: Did Outpost 4 give anything at all on the attacking vessel, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: No identification, sir. 
STILES: There can't be much doubt who's attacking, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, put this star sector on our screen. Now show our position. Signal this to all decks, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: All decks standing by, sir.

[Corridor]

KIRK [OC]: This is the Captain speaking. In our next action, we can risk neither miscalculation nor error

[Bridge]

KIRK: By any man aboard. Listen carefully. Science Officer. 
SPOCK: Referring to the map on your screens, you will note beyond the moving position of our vessel, a line of Earth outpost stations. Constructed on asteroids, they monitor the Neutral Zone established by treaty after the Earth-Romulan conflict a century ago.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK [OC]: As you may recall from your histories, this conflict was fought,

[Engineering]

SPOCK [OC]: By our standards today, with primitive atomic weapons and in primitive space vessels

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Which allowed no quarter, no captives. Nor was there even ship-to-ship visual communication. Therefore, no human, Romulan, or ally has ever seen the other. Earth believes the Romulans to be warlike, cruel, treacherous, and only the Romulans know what they think of Earth. The treaty, set by sub-space radio, established this Neutral Zone, entry into which by either side, would constitute an act of war. The treaty has been unbroken since that time. Captain. 
KIRK: What you do not know and must be told is that my command orders on this subject are precise and inviolable. No act, no provocation

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Will be considered sufficient reason to violate the zone. We may defend ourselves,

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: But if necessary to avoid interspace war,

[Bridge]

KIRK: Both these outposts and this vessel will be considered expendable. Captain out. 
STILES: We know Outpost four has been attacked, sir, so if we intercept Romulans now 
KIRK: After a whole century, what will a Romulan ship look like, Mister Stiles? I doubt they'll radio and identify themselves. 
STILES: You'll know, sir. They're painted like a giant bird-of-prey. 
KIRK: I had no idea that history was your specialty. 
STILES: Family history. There was a Captain Stiles was in the space service then. Two Commanders and several junior officers. All lost in that war, sir. 
KIRK: Their war, Mister Stiles. Not yours. Don't forget it. 
STILES: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Outpost two coming into sensor range, Captain. 
KIRK: Outpost 2 was the first to go silent, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Yes, Captain, then Outpost three an hour later. 
SPOCK: Sweeping the area of Outpost two. Sensor reading indefinite. Double-checking Outpost three. I read dust and debris. Both Earth outposts gone, and the asteroids they were constructed on, pulverised. 
KIRK: Open a channel to our nearest command base. Quarter hour reports on our position and status. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Call battle stations, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Battle stations. All hands to battle stations. Battle stations. Battle stations. All decks acknowledge. All decks acknowledge, sir. All stations show green. 
KIRK: Energise main phasers, Mister Styles. All weapons to full power. 
STILES: All weapons to full power. Phaser control room.

[Phaser Control]

STILES [OC]: Energise. Acknowledge. 
ANGELA: (the bride) Phaser control acknowledging. All weapons energising to full. 
ROBERT: (the groom) Happy wedding day, almost. 
ANGELA: You won't get off my hook this easily. I'm going to marry you, Mister, battle or phaser weapons notwithstanding. 
ROBERT: Well, meanwhile, temporarily at least, I am still your superior officer. So get with it, Mister. 
TEC 1: Port weapons show ready. 
TEC 2: Starboard and midship weapons show ready. 
ANGELA: Acknowledge. All weapons batteries ready.

[Bridge]

STILES: Outpost four now five minutes away, sir. 
SPOCK: And showing on my sensors, Captain. At least it's still there. 
UHURA: Sir, regaining contact with Outpost four. Switching to speakers. 
HANSEN [OC]: Outpost four. Do you read me, Enterprise? This is Commander Hansen. 
KIRK: Kirk here. We're minutes away, Hansen. What's your status? 
HANSEN [OC]: Outposts two, three, and eight are gone. Unknown weapon. Completely destroyed, even though we were alerted. Had our deflector shield on maximum. Hit by enormous power. First attack blew our deflector shield. If they hit us again with our deflector shield gone. Do you read me, Enterprise? 
KIRK: Confirm what hit you, Hansen. What vessel? Identity? 
HANSEN [OC]: Space vessel, only glimpse of. 
KIRK: Can you locate the intruder for us? 
HANSEN [OC]: Negative. It seems to have disappeared somehow. I have you on my screen now. Switching to visual. 
KIRK: Tie us in. 
UHURA: Tied in, sir. 
(The viewscreen shows a man in a wrecked room, surrounded by fires) 
HANSEN [on viewscreen]: Enterprise, can you see it? My command post here. We're a mile deep on an asteroid. Almost solid iron. And even through our deflectors, it did this. Can you see? 
KIRK: Affirmative. You're visual, Hansen. What do you have on the intruder? 
HANSEN [on viewscreen]: No identification. No answer to our challenge. Only a glimpse of it. Then they fired something at us, some form of high-energy plasma. Fantastic power. And then the whole vessel disappeared. But it's out there somewhere. Our sensors show that much. Enterprise, something coming on our viewing screen, coming at us fast. 
KIRK: Lock us onto your screen. 
HANSEN [on viewscreen]: Switching. Can you see it, Enterprise? Can you see it? It's becoming visible in the centre of my screen. 
(A ship appears from nowhere on the screen) 
KIRK: Do you have phaser capacity? We're still out of range. 
HANSEN: Negative. Phasers gone. Weapons crew dead. 
KIRK: Make a challenge. Warn that ship off. 
UHURA: Trying to, sir. They don't acknowledge. 
(The alien ship fires a big red plasma ball, and the viewscreen switches to Hansen as the outpost is hit, then just bright light. Back to the attacking ship, which then vanishes.) 
SPOCK: Outpost four disintegrated, Captain. 
KIRK: Position of the intruder, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Disappeared. Interesting how they became visible for just a moment. 
KIRK: When they opened fire. Perhaps necessary when they use their weapon. SPOCK: I have a blip on the motion sensor. Could be the intruder. 
KIRK: Go to full magnification. 
SULU: Screen is on full mag, sir. 
KIRK: I don't see anything. I can't understand it. 
SPOCK: Invisibility is theoretically possible, Captain, with selective bending of light. But the power cost is enormous. 
They may have solved that problem. 
UHURA: Continuing to challenge, sir. Still no response. 
KIRK: Discontinue. Contact remaining outposts. Have them signal us any sightings or sensor readings in their area. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Blip has changed its heading. And in a very leisurely manoeuvre. They may not be aware of us. 
KIRK: Their invisibility screen may work both ways. With that kind of power consumption, they may not be able to see us. 
SPOCK: His heading is now one eleven mark fourteen. The exact heading a Romulan would take, Jim, for the Neutral Zone and home. 
KIRK: Parallel course. 
STILES: Don't you mean interception course, sir? 
KIRK: Negative. You and Mister Sulu will match its course and speed with the object on our sensors exactly, move for move. If he has sensors, I want him to think we're a reflection, an echo. Under no circumstances are you to cross into the Neutral Zone without my direct orders. 
SULU: Acknowledged, sir. 
KIRK: Cancel battle stations. All decks, standby alert. 
SULU: Cancel battle stations. 
STILES: Captain, may I respectfully remind the Captain what has happened? The Romulans have crossed the Neutral Zone, attacked our outposts, killed our men. 
KIRK: Mister Stiles. 
STILES: Add to that the fact it was a sneak attack. 
KIRK: Mister Stiles, are you questioning my orders? 
STILES: Negative, sir. I'm pointing our that we could have Romulan spies aboard this ship. 
SULU: I agree, sir. Respectfully recommend all decks maintain security alert. 
KIRK: Very well. All decks, security alert. 
SULU: Security alert, sir. 
UHURA: Picking up communication. It's from their ship. 
KIRK: Pipe it in. 
UHURA: Sounds like code, sir. 
SPOCK: I have a fix on it, Captain. I believe I can lock on it, get a picture of their Bridge. 
KIRK: Put it on the screen. 
(Up shimmers an image of a group of four humanoids around a console. One leaves his post and salutes the figure with his back to us. That figure then turns, and we see someone who looks just like - a Vulcan. Both Spock's eyebrows hit the ceiling. There's a long silence and a lot of stares.) KIRK: Decoding? 
UHURA: Cryptography is working on it, sir. 
STILES: Give it to Spock. 
KIRK: I didn't quite get that, Mister Stiles. 
STILES: Nothing, sir. 
KIRK: Repeat it. 
STILES: I was suggesting that Mister Spock could probably translate it for you, sir. 
KIRK: I assume you're complimenting Mister Spock on his ability to decode. 
STILES: I'm not sure, sir. 
KIRK: Well, here's one thing you can be sure of, Mister. Leave any bigotry in your quarters. There's no room for it on the Bridge. Do I make myself clear? 
STILES: You do, sir. 
UHURA: Transmission has been cut off. (to Spock) I made a tape of it, sir. 
SPOCK: Very well. (runs the tape through his computer) 
SULU: Something visual ahead, Captain, at extreme range. He's changing course, sir. 
KIRK: Stay with him, helm. 
SULU: Turning, sir.

[Romulan ship]

(We're given a lovely shot of the bird painted on it's belly) 
COMMANDER: We grow visible. Attend the cloaking system. 
ROMULAN: It consumes much power, Commander. With no enemy to concern us. 
COMMANDER: That Earth outpost called to an Earth vessel. Now it follows us. 
ROMULAN: Which neither retreats nor grows nearer. It turns as we turn. Commander, it is our judgment we run from a reflection. 
COMMANDER: Perhaps so, but my judgment prevails. 
ROMULAN: Cloaking system on, sir. 
COMMANDER: It is good we approach the Neutral Zone. Not too soon for me to see the stars of home. I know they are following. 
CENTURION: (an older man) If an Earth ship, why does he not attack? 
COMMANDER: First study the enemy, seek weakness. If I were their commander, that is what I would do. 
DECIUS: My Commander sent for Decius. 
COMMANDER: A message was dispatched. You've broken the rule of silence. 
DECIUS: Only in code, Commander. To inform our Praetor of this glorious mission. 
COMMANDER: Your carelessness might have ended this glorious mission. You're reduced two steps in rank. Return to post. 
CENTURION: Take care, Commander. He has friends, and friends of his kind mean power. And power is danger. 
COMMANDER: Danger and I are old companions. 
CENTURION: We've seen a hundred campaigns together, and still I do not understand you. 
COMMANDER: I think you do. No need to tell you what happens when we reach home with proof of the Earthmen's weakness. And we will have proof. The Earth commander will follow. He must. When he attacks, we will destroy him. Our gift to the homeland, another war. 
CENTURION: If we are the strong, isn't this the signal for war? 
COMMANDER: Must it always be so? How many comrades have we lost in this way? 
CENTURION: Our portion, Commander, is obedience. 
COMMANDER: Obedience. Duty. Death and more death. Soon even enough for the Praetor's taste. Centurion, I find myself wishing for destruction before we can return. Worry not. Like you, I am too well-trained in my duty to permit it. Continue evasive manoeuvres. Now, back to the first course.

[Bridge]

SULU: They're turning, sir. We're staying with them. 
SPOCK: Steady on one eleven mark fourteen. Back on their original course, Captain, toward the Neutral Zone. 
KIRK: What's our position, navigator? 
STILES: We'll enter the Neutral Zone in less than an hour, sir. Assuming, of course, that we don't turn back. 
SCOTT [OC]: We now have aboard debris from Outpost four, Captain. 
KIRK: Bring it to the briefing room. Are you ready, gentlemen?

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: From the outpost's protective shield. Cast rodinium. This is the hardest substance known to our science. 
(He crushes it with his hand) 
SPOCK: Lab theorises an enveloping energy plasma forcing an implosion. 
KIRK: Comments? 
SPOCK: Obviously, their weaponry is superior to ours, and they have a practical invisibility screen. 
MCCOY: You're discussing tactics. Do you realise what this really comes down to? Millions and millions of lives hanging on what this vessel does. 
SPOCK: Or on what this vessel fails to do, Doctor. 
KIRK: Yes, well gentlemen, the question still remains. Can we engage them with a reasonable possibility of victory? 
SCOTT: No question. Their power is simple impulse. 
KIRK: Meaning we can outrun them? 
STILES: To be used in chasing them or retreating, sir? 
KIRK: Go ahead, Mister Styles. I called this session for opinions. 
STILES: We have to attack immediately. 
KIRK: Explain. 
STILES: They're still on our side of the Neutral Zone. There would be no doubt they broke the treaty. 
SULU: Attack, without a visible target? How do we aim our phasers? 
STILES: Aim with sensors. Not accurate, but if we blanket them 
SULU: And hope for a lucky shot before they zero in on us? 
STILES: And if we don't? Once back, they'll report that we saw their weapons and ran. 
SULU: And if they could report they destroyed us? 
STILES: These are Romulans! You run away from them and you guarantee war. They'll be back. Not just one ship but with everything they've got. You know that, Mister Science Officer. You've the expert on these people, always left out that one point. Why? I'm very interested in why. 
KIRK: Sit down, Mister. 
SPOCK: I agree. Attack. 
KIRK: Are you suggesting we fight to prevent a fight? 
MCCOY: Based on what? Memories of a war over a century ago? On theories about a people we've never even met face to face? 
STILES: We know what they look like. 
SPOCK: Yes, indeed we do, Mister Stiles. And if Romulans are an offshoot of my Vulcan blood, and I think this likely, then attack becomes even more imperative. 
MCCOY: War is never imperative, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: It is for them, Doctor. Vulcan, like Earth, had its aggressive colonising period. Savage, even by Earth standards. And if Romulans retain this martial philosophy, then weakness is something we dare not show. 
SPOCK: Do you want a galactic war on your conscience? 
KIRK: Captain to Bridge. 
UHURA [OC]: This is Uhura, Captain. 
KIRK: What's our position? 
UHURA [OC]: Course unchanged, sir. Estimating treaty boundary in twenty one minutes. 
KIRK: Are you continuing to broadcast tactical reports? 
UHURA [OC]: Affirmative, Captain. 
KIRK: And at this distance? 
UHURA [OC]: Approximately three hours before receiving a reply to our first message. 
KIRK: Thank you, Lieutenant. Check our course ahead, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: A comet, magnitude seven, dead ahead, and the intruder changing course toward it. 
KIRK: Comet Icarus four. Composition? 
SPOCK: Quite ordinary. An ionised mass, a trail of frozen vapour particles. 
KIRK: And when an object passes through it, even an invisible object? 
SPOCK: It leaves a visible trail. 
KIRK: Our chance, gentlemen. Prepare to attack. All hands, battle stations. I hope we won't need your services, Bones. 
MCCOY: Amen to that. We're taking a big gamble, Jim.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Battle status? 
SULU: All stations manned, Captain. 
STILES: Phaser weapons energised. Set for proximity blast. 
SPOCK: Intruder now bearing directly for comet's tail. 
KIRK: Plot his exact point of entry, Mister Stiles. 
STILES: Computed. On the board, sir. 
KIRK: The moment he begins entering the comet's tail, he becomes visible. End run, gentlemen. We'll swing around the other side and catch him at that moment. 
SULU: Acknowledged, Captain. 
SPOCK: He's maintaining that bearing, Captain. 
KIRK: Let's get him, Mister Sulu.

[Romulan ship]

COMMANDER: How pleasing to the eye it is. Behold a marvel in the darkness. 
CENTURION: You spoke of entrapment. 
COMMANDER: Its many particles will obscure their sensing device, Centurion. 
ROMULAN: We enter it, Commander. 
COMMANDER: Once fully obscured, we will turn suddenly back upon our adversary. 
ROMULAN: At last the screen is clear, Commander. 
COMMANDER: Clear? 
ROMULAN: Our reflection no longer follows us. 
COMMANDER: Escape manoeuvre one, quickly!

[Bridge]

SPOCK: We're losing sensor contact, Captain. 
KIRK: Steady as she goes. Phaser crews ready? 
SULU: Phaser crew signal ready, sir. 
KIRK: He'll only be visible for a moment. Stand by. 
SULU: Sir, nothing in 
KIRK: At the last moment he must have guessed our move. Hard to starboard, helm! 
SULU: Hard to starboard. 
KIRK: He did exactly what I would have done. I won't underestimate him again. Now, fire blind. Lay down a pattern. 
STILES: Traverse pattern. All phasers fire.

[Phaser control]

ROBERT: Phaser one, fire. 
CREWMAN: Phaser one, fire. 
(Pulse phaser shots go into the darkness, rocking the Romulan ship) 
ROBERT: Phaser two, fire. 
CREWMAN: Phaser two, fire.

[Romulan ship]

(The Centurion pushes his Commander out of the way of a falling beam) 
COMMANDER: Divert all power to weapons.

[Bridge]

SULU: Phaser overload. Control circuit burnout. 
(Spock goes under his station to put out the flames) 
SPOCK: It'll take time to correct, sir. 
SULU: Captain, are they surrendering? 
(The Romulan ship has become visible) 
KIRK: Full astern! Emergency warp speed! 
(A red plasma blast is heading towards them) 
KIRK: Do we have emergency warp? 
SULU: Full power, sir. It's still overtaking us. If we can get one phaser working, sir, one shot might detonate it. 
KIRK: Navigation? 
STILES: Estimate it'll overtake us in two minutes, sir. 
KIRK: Phasers, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Impossible, Captain. 
KIRK: Feed this to the space recorder and jettison immediately. 
RAND: Captain, should I continue log entry? 
KIRK: Yeoman. Affirmative. Continue log entries. 
RAND: Yes, sir. 
SULU: Ten seconds to impact. Captain, It's dissipating, sir. 
STILES: It must have a range limit. 
(Rand stands as close as humanly possible to Kirk) 
SULU: Five, four, three, two, one. Impact! 
(Everyone gets thrown about a bit) 
KIRK: Limited range. 
SPOCK: Phasers operational, Captain. Intruder bearing one eleven mark fourteen. 
KIRK: Back to his old course. 
SPOCK: He may think we're destroyed, Captain. 
KIRK: I wouldn't make that assumption. I don't think their Captain will either. 
SPOCK: Intruder holding steady. Course one eleven mark fourteen. 
KIRK: Same as before, Mister Sulu. Stay with him.

[Romulan ship]

(The Commander tends to his injured friend) 
ROMULAN: Commander, the reflection returns. 
COMMANDER: Activate our cloak. 
ROMULAN: Commander, our fuel runs low. 
COMMANDER: Quickly! 
DECIUS: The Earth vessel? Impossible. 
ROMULAN: It moves as we move. 
COMMANDER: Its commander is not one to repeat a mistake.

[Bridge]

STILES: We'll enter the Neutral Zone in one minute, Captain. 
MCCOY: Do we violate the treaty, Captain? 
SPOCK: They did, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Once inside, they can claim we did. A set-up. They want war, we furnish the provocation. 
SPOCK: We're still on our side, Captain. 
KIRK: Let's get them while we are. Before we enter the Neutral Zone. Full ahead, Mister Sulu. Maximum warp. 
SULU: Ahead, sir. Maximum. 
KIRK: Phasers, stand by. 
STILES: Sir, at this distance? 
KIRK: We know their Achilles heel, Mister Stiles. Their weapon takes all their energy. They must become visible in order to launch it. 
STILES: A phaser hit at this distance would be the wildest stroke of luck. 
KIRK: I'm aware of that, Mister Stiles. Are phasers ready? 
STILES: Phasers show ready, sir.

[Romulan ship]

ROMULAN: Commander! 
COMMANDER: Evasive action. The Earth ship again. 
(They are hit by phaser fire again)

[Bridge]

STILES: Twenty seconds to Neutral Zone, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, inform Command base, In my opinion, no option. On my responsibility, we are proceeding into the Neutral Zone. Steady as we go, Mister Sulu. Continue firing.

[Romulan ship]

DECIUS: Commander, they stay within range. I will tend to the centurion. 
COMMANDER: No need. The Centurion is dead. 
DECIUS: Why don't we fire, Commander? 
COMMANDER: No. No, he's shrewd, this starship commander. He tries to make us waste energy. He has estimated we have only enough. It is time. All debris into disposal tubes. 
DECIUS: Yes, Commander. 
COMMANDER: The body of the Centurion, too. Forgive me, my old friend, but I must use all my experience now to get home.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Motion sensor signal stopped. 
KIRK: Cease fire. 
SULU: Debris scatter ahead, sir. We've hit him. 
SPOCK: Vessel wreckage. Metal moulds, conduit, plastoform and a body, Captain. However. 
KIRK: However? 
SPOCK: Insufficient mass, sir. 
KIRK: What? 
SPOCK: Simple debris. Not a vessel, a trick. 
KIRK: Go to sensor probes. 
SPOCK: Nothing, sir. No motion out there at all. We've lost them, Captain.

Captain's log, Stardate 1709.6. We are at the Neutral Zone. Have lost contact with the intruder. No reaction on our motion sensors but believe the Romulan vessel to be somewhere close by. With all engines and systems shut down, the Enterprise is also playing the silent waiting game in hope of regaining contact.

[Bridge]

(The lights are being dimmed and systems shut down as they rig for silent running) 
SPOCK: Captain, I must make further repairs on the transfer coil. It's giving out again. 
KIRK: All right, Mister Spock, work quietly.

[Romulan ship]

DECIUS: Now twenty full cycles, Commander. Still no sign. I say he's been fooled. He must have gone on. 
COMMANDER: Shh. He is there, somewhere. I feel it.

Captain's log, supplemental. Now motionless for nine hours, forty seven minutes.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Yeoman Rand walks in without knocking, to find the Captain lying on his bed.) 
RAND: Can I get you something from the galley, sir? Coffee, at least? 
KIRK: Thank you, Yeoman. Bring it to the Bridge. I'll be there in a moment. 
RAND: Yes, sir. 
(McCoy walks in unannounced, and Rand leaves.) 
KIRK: I wish I were on a long sea voyage somewhere. Not too much deck tennis, no frantic dancing, and no responsibility. Why me? I look around that Bridge, and I see the men waiting for me to make the next move. And Bones, what if I'm wrong? 
MCCOY: Captain, I 
KIRK: No, I don't really expect an answer. 
MCCOY: But I've got one. Something I seldom say to a customer, Jim. In this galaxy, there's a mathematical probability of three million Earth-type planets. And in all of the universe, three million million galaxies like this. And in all of that, and perhaps more, only one of each of us. Don't destroy the one named Kirk.

[Bridge]

(Spock carefully closes the cover on his repairs, and is reaching up to his station to help himself up when he accidentally touches a button, turning on a system) 
STILES: What? 
KIRK: It's all right. It's all right.

[Romulan ship]

ROMULAN: A signal, Commander. 
COMMANDER: We have him. Move toward him.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Power on. Reverse course. He'll try to slip under us. 
SULU: Lateral power, sir. 
STILES: Coming around, sir. 
KIRK: Phasers, fire. 
STILES: Phasers, fire.

[Romulan ship]

(They are taking damage) 
DECIUS: How, Commander. How? 
COMMANDER: He's a sorcerer, that one. He reads the thoughts in my brain. Our fuel supply all but gone and he stays out of reach. 
DECIUS: We are beaten. Can it be true? The Praetor's finest and proudest flagship beaten. 
COMMANDER: Perhaps we can yet save your Praetor's pride for him. More debris into the tubes. Decius, do we have the old-style nuclear warheads aboard? 
DECIUS: Yes Commander, but only for self-destruction. 
COMMANDER: Place one with the debris. Proximity fuse. 
DECIUS: Yes, Commander. At once.

[Bridge]

SULU: More wreckage, sir, scattering across our path. 
KIRK: Cease fire. 
SPOCK: Debris on our scanners. 
KIRK: Analysis, quickly. 
SPOCK: Same type as before, sir, except, one metal-cased object! 
KIRK: Helm, hard over. Phasers, fire point-blank. 
STILES: Phasers, fire! 
(There's a big explosion, everyone gets thrown across the Bridge. Enterprise hangs crooked and motionless in space.)

[Romulan ship]

DECIUS: Glorious. Glorious. 
COMMANDER: Now we go home. 
DECIUS: They're at our mercy. Commander, I remind you of your duty.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Captain to Sickbay. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy here. 
KIRK: Casualties? 
MCCOY [OC]: Twenty two so far. Mainly radiation burns, mostly from the ship's outer areas. Could have been much, much worse, Captain. 
KIRK: Thank you, Doctor. (the lights come back on) Report, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Nuclear device of some kind, sir. Our phasers detonated it less than one hundred metres away. 
KIRK: Ship damage? 
SPOCK: Mainly overloads and circuit burnouts. 
KIRK: Weapons status? 
SCOTT [OC]: We've only the forward phaser room, Captain. 
KIRK: Fully operable, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Yes, sir. But Specialist Tomlinson is manning it alone. No standby crew available. 
STILES: Sir, my first assignment was in weapons control. 
KIRK: Go. Lieutenant Uhura, take over navigation. 
UHURA: Yes, Captain. 
SPOCK: We have engine power now, Captain, if you'd like to move off and make repairs. 
KIRK: Maybe we can pull them back to our side of the Neutral Zone. Hold our position. Play dead.

[Romulan ship]

DECIUS: Still no sign of movement, Commander. 
COMMANDER: We've damaged ourselves. Our fuel reserve is gone. 
DECIUS: And it is our duty to crush the Praetor's enemies. 
COMMANDER: I do not trust their Captain. 
DECIUS: We are in the Neutral Zone. They will not enter. If you refuse, permit me the glory of the kill, Commander. 
COMMANDER: We will attack, but on my order.

[Phaser control]

SPOCK: Damage reports, Mister Stiles? 
STILES: Negative. 
SPOCK: Will you require assistance here? 
STILES: This time, we'll handle things without your help, Vulcan. 
(Spock leaves. then Stiles notices purple gas escaping from a seal) 
STILES: Tomlinson!

[Bridge]

SULU: Enemy vessel becoming visible, sir. 
KIRK: Forward phasers, stand by. (the Romulan becomes a clear image) Fire! Fire! Stiles, can you hear me? Fire!

[Corridor]

(Spock is walking slowly when he hears the Captain's commands over the intercom) 
KIRK [OC]: Fire! Stiles, can you hear me? Fire! 
(Spock turns and runs back to Phaser Control) 
KIRK [OC]: Fire!

[Phaser Control]

(The room is full of purple smoke) 
KIRK: Stiles, can you hear me? Fire! Stiles! 
(Spock enters just as Stiles tries and fails to reach the firing button. He activates the controls and the phaser pulses hit the Romulan ship)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Sulu, prepare to move in on the Romulan vessel. Ship-to-ship, Uhura. Put this on the screen. 
UHURA: (still at the navigation station) Hailing frequencies open, sir. 
(The viewscreen shows a wrecked room and just the Commander still on his feet) 
KIRK: Captain. Standing by to beam your survivors aboard our ship. Prepare to abandon your vessel. 
COMMANDER [on viewscreen]: No. No, that is not our way. I regret that we meet in this way. You and I are of a kind. In a different reality, I could have called you friend. 
KIRK: What purpose will it serve to die? 
COMMANDER [on viewscreen]: We are creatures of duty, Captain. I have lived my life by it. Just one more duty to perform. 
(He goes to the control console, turns a switch, and the whole ship explodes)

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Are you all right, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, very well, thank you, Captain. 
KIRK: And you, Stiles? 
STILES: I'm alive, sir. But I wouldn't be. Mister Spock pulled me out of the phaser room. He saved my life. He risked his life after I 
SPOCK: I saved a trained navigator so he could return to duty. I am capable of no other feelings in such matters. 
KIRK: How many men did we lose, Bones? 
MCCOY: Only one. Tomlinson. The boy who was getting married this morning. His fiance is at the chapel. 
(Kirk turns to go, and Rand enters) 
RAND: We finally received an answer from Command base, sir. They say they'll support whatever decision you have to make. 
(Kirk leaves)

[Ship's Chapel]

(Angela is kneeling in front of the altarpiece, crying, when Kirk enters. She gets up and hugs him.) 
KIRK: It never makes any sense. We both have to know that there was a reason. 
ANGELA: I'm all right.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Conscience of the King
Stardate: 2817.6 
Original Airdate: 8 Dec, 1966

[Theatre]
(On stage, a velvet-clad arm raises a bloody knife, then plunges it again into his sleeping victim. The audience are rapt.) 
KIRK: Interesting. An Arcturian Macbeth. 
LEIGHTON: (a man with an eyepatch) Watch him. Watch Macbeth. 
LENORE: (as Lady M) Is he dead? Speak. Is King Duncan dead? 
KARIDIAN: Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hands. 
LEIGHTON: That voice. He's back. That man on the stage. I'm certain of it. That's Kodos the Executioner. 
KARIDIAN: Pluck out mine eyes!

Captain's log, star date 2817.6. Starship Enterprise diverted from scheduled course. Purpose, to confirm discover by Doctor Thomas Leighton of an extraordinary new synthetic food which would totally end the threat of famine on Cygnia Minor, a nearby Earth colony.

[Leighton's home]

KIRK: You mean to tell me you've called me three light years off my course just to accuse an actor of being Kodos? 
LEIGHTON: He is Kodos. I'm sure of it. 
KIRK: You said you discovered a new food concentrate. What am I supposed to put in my log, that you lied? That you diverted a starship with false information? You're not only in trouble, you've put me in trouble, too. 
LEIGHTON: I did it to trap Kodos! 
KIRK: Kodos is dead. 
LEIGHTON: Is he? Is anyone sure? A body burned beyond recognition? 
KIRK: Tom, the authorities closed the book on that case years ago. 
LEIGHTON: Then let's reopen it. Jim, four thousand people were butchered. 
KIRK: Martha, you tell him. 
MARTHA: I can't tell him anything, Jim. He's been like this since the company of actors arrived. 
KIRK: Kodos is dead. I'm satisfied of that. 
LEIGHTON: Well, I'm not. I remember him. That voice. The bloody thing he did. 
(He turns his head to reveal it's not just an eyepatch, but a covering over half his face) 
LEIGHTON: Jim, Jim, I need your help. There were only eight or nine of us who actually saw Kodos. I was one, you were another. If he's to be exposed, 
KIRK: He's dead. 
LEIGHTON: Then it will be a ghost Martha and I receive in our home tonight. I invited the entire company to a cocktail party. I have to be sure. 
KIRK: And I have to get back to my ship and figure out how I'm going to enter all this in my log. Tom. Martha.

[Briefing room]

COMPUTER: Library computer. 
KIRK: History files. Subject, former Governor Kodos of Tarsus Four, also known as Kodos the Executioner. After that, background on actor Anton Karidian. 
COMPUTER: Working. Kodos the Executioner, summary. Governor of Tarsus Four twenty Earth years ago. Invoked martial law. Slaughtered fifty percent of population Earth colony, that planet. Burned body found when Earth forces arrived. No positive identification. Case closed. Detailed information follows. On stardate 2794.7, 
KIRK: Stop. Information on Anton Karidian. 
COMPUTER: Director and star of travelling company of actors sponsored by galactic cultural exchange project, touring official installations last nine years. Has daughter, Lenore, nineteen years old, 
KIRK: Stop. Give comparative identification between actor Karidian and Governor Kodos. 
COMPUTER: No identification records available on actor Anton Karidian. 
KIRK: Give information on actor Karidian prior to Kodos' death. 
COMPUTER: No information available, Anton Karidian, prior to twenty years ago 
KIRK: Photograph Kodos. (an image of a red-haired man with a beard comes on the monitor) Photograph Karidian. (the grey-haired man with a small moustache) Now photograph both. 
(Door opens) 
KIRK: Mister Spock. You know Doctor Leighton, don't you? Would you say he's given to fantasy? 
SPOCK: A good empirical research scientist. Steady, reputable, occasionally brilliant. 
KIRK: With a very long memory. 
SPOCK: I have no information on that, Captain. We are ready to leave orbit. 
KIRK: We'll delay departure for a time. I'm beaming back down to the planet.

[Leighton's home]

(The cocktail party is in full swing in the main room, and Martha is bringing another tray of drinks for her guests.)
KIRK: Where's Tom? 
MARTHA: He went to town. He called. He's on his way back. 
(The lovely young blonde Lenore Karidian enters, and Kirk beams) 
KIRK: The others are on the patio. 
LENORE: I take it you're the welcoming committee. (referring to his glass) Is that for me? 
KIRK: Why not? I saw your performance today. May I extend my appreciation? 
LENORE: My father will be delighted, Mister. Mister? 
KIRK: Captain James Kirk, Starship Enterprise. 
LENORE: We are honoured. 
KIRK: I had hoped to meet your father, here, tonight, personally. 
LENORE: I'm sorry, Captain Kirk. He has a rigid rule about that. He never sees anyone personally, and he never attends parties. 
KIRK: An actor turning away his admirers? Very unusual. 
LENORE: Karidian is a most unusual man. You saw Macbeth. That was my father. 
KIRK: Then I'll talk to Lady Macbeth. 
(They sit) 
LENORE: So. Captain of the Enterprise. Interesting. 
KIRK: So, Lady Macbeth. Interesting. What's your next move? 
LENORE: We play two performances at Benecia, if the AstraI Queen can get us there. 
KIRK: She's a good ship. (takes a glass from a passing tray) Thank you. You were very impressive as Lady Macbeth. 
LENORE: Thank you. And as Lenore Karidian? 
KIRK: Very impressive. Lenore. I'd like to see you again. 
LENORE: You mean professionally? 
KIRK: Not necessarily. 
LENORE: I think I'd like that. Unfortunately, we must keep a schedule. 
KIRK: You don't have a schedule now, do you? 
LENORE: You mean leave? But I've only just arrived. 
KIRK; So have I. 
LENORE: And you hate to overstay a welcome. 
KIRK: Exactly. 
LENORE: Why not? 
KIRK: Good. I'll make our apologies to our hostess. I'll meet you outside.

[Countryside]

(Meandering between rocks and scrubby trees, arm in arm) 
KIRK; Tired of walking? 
LENORE: No. Just thinking. 
KIRK: About what? 
LENORE: At the party, you were such a brash young man. 
KIRK; And now? 
LENORE: Now somehow different. Not a ship's Captain with all those people to be strong and confident in front of. You know, you're really very dear, aren't you? In some ways, very lonely. 
(But just as their lips are about to meet, Kirk spots a body among the rocks and goes to investigate) 
KIRK: It's Tom Leighton. He's dead.

[Leighton's home]

(Tom's body is laid out on the couch, and Martha covers it) 
MARTHA: At least he has peace now. He never really had that before. Oh, why was Tom killed if what he suspected wasn't true? 
KIRK: I don't know. I'll try and find out. 
MARTHA: Oh, Jim. How I'll miss him. (bursts into tears and leaves) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge here, Captain. 
KIRK: Put me through to Captain Jon Daily of the AstraI Queen on orbit station, and put it on scramble. 
UHURA [OC]: Captain Daily's on, sir. 
KIRK; Jon? Jim Kirk. 
DAILY [OC]: Hi, Jim. 
KIRK: Can you do me a favour? 
DAILY [OC]: I owe you a dozen. Just ask. 
KIRK: Don't make your pick-up here. 
DAILY [OC]: You mean strand all those actors? 
KIRK: I'll pick them up. And if there's any trouble, it'll be my responsibility. 
DAILY [OC]: Will do. Anything else? 
KIRK: Just keep this between the two of us and accept my thanks. Over and out. Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge here, Captain. 
KIRK: Transporter room, ready to beam up.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Ready to resume course, Captain. 
KIRK: I think we're due for a pick-up. 
SPOCK: What kind? Personnel? Cargo? 
UHURA: Captain? A Miss Karidian has been transported aboard ship. She requests permission to see you. 
KIRK: Tell her to come up to the Bridge, Lieutenant.

[Transporter room]

UHURA [OC]: Escort Miss Karidian to the Bridge.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: How did you know this lady was coming aboard? 
KIRK: I'm the Captain. 
LENORE: Captain Kirk, I didn't think we'd be meeting again so soon. 
KIRK: You probably wouldn't believe me if I told you I arranged it. 
LENORE: No, but it's a delightful thought. Captain, I'm afraid we need your help. We've been stranded. It seems that our transportation has cancelled out on us. 
KIRK: Can't you make other arrangements? 
LENORE: Yes, but not in time. You see, our schedule is like a chain. One break and it all collapses. 
KIRK: It'd be a shame if that happened. 
LENORE: If ever we needed a Good Samaritan. 
KIRK: Well. 
LENORE: I appeal to you. 
(Spock's eyebrow hits the ceiling) 
KIRK: The regulations are very clear about taking on passengers. 
LENORE: I'll make a bargain with you, Captain. 
KIRK: What have you got to trade? 
LENORE: Special performance for the crew in exchange for a lift. 
KIRK: You make it sound very interesting. The crew has been on patrol for a long time. They could use a break in the monotony. 
LENORE: Then you'll do it? 
KIRK: You've got me backed into a corner. The men would never forgive me if I deprived them of your performance, and your presence. 
LENORE: Thank you, Captain. I'm eternally grateful. I'll get the company ready. This means so much to them. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, prepare to leave orbit as soon as the Karidian company is aboard the ship. 
(Lenore and her escort enter the turbolift) 
SPOCK: May I inquire as to our course, Captain? 
KIRK: Benecia Colony. 
SPOCK: Benecia Colony is eight light years off our course. 
KIRK: If my memory needs refreshing, Mister Spock, I'll ask you for it. In the meantime, follow my orders.

Captain's log, stardate 2818.9. There are many questions in my mind, too many, perhaps, about the actor Karidian and his daughter. For personal reasons, I'm almost afraid to learn the answers.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Spock, ETA the Benecia Colony. 
SPOCK: We'll arrive stardate 2825.3, Captain, approximately fifteen hundred Benecia time. 
(Kirk goes over to Spock's station and throws a few switches) 
COMPUTER: Library computer. 
KIRK: Data on question submitted to personnel files. 
COMPUTER: Data being received. Kodos file of all survivors. There are nine actual eye witnesses who can identify Kodos. 
KIRK: Stop. Give list. 
COMPUTER: Kirk, J., presently Enterprise Captain, Leighton, T., Moulton, E., Riley, K., Eames, D., 
KIRK: Stop. Is that star service Lieutenant Kevin Riley? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. Riley, Kevin. Presently assigned U.S.S. Enterprise communications section. 
KIRK: Stop. Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Kevin Riley in communications, I wish to have him transferred down to the engineering decks. 
SPOCK: He came up from engineering, Captain. 
KIRK: I'm sending him back. 
SPOCK: Any explanation? He's a fine young officer. He's bound to consider this transfer a disciplinary action. 
KIRK: I don't wish to discuss it, Mister Spock. Please follow my orders.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Mister Spock, the man on top walks a lonely street. The chain of command is often a noose. 
SPOCK: Spare me your philosophical metaphors, Doctor. The Captain is acting strangely. I'm asking if you've noticed. 
MCCOY: Negative. Did you know this is the first time in a week I've had time for a drop of the true? Would you care for a drink, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: My father's race was spared the dubious benefits of alcohol. 
MCCOY: Now I know why they were conquered. What are you so worried about, anyway? I find Jim generally knows what he's doing. 
KIRK: It was illogical for him to bring those players aboard. 
MCCOY: Illogical? Did you get a look at that Juliet? That's a pretty exciting creature. Of course your, personal chemistry would prevent you from seeing that. Did it ever occur to you that he simply might like the girl? 
SPOCK: It occurred. I dismissed it. 
MCCOY: You would. 
SPOCK: Did you know that he suddenly transferred Lieutenant Riley to engineering? 
MCCOY: Lots of things go on around here that I don't know, Mister Spock. Now, he's the Captain. He can transfer whoever he pleases. You can look that up in a hundred volumes of space regulations somewhere. All right? Come on, have a drink. 
SPOCK: No, thank you. 
MCCOY: You're welcome. But I will. And please, Mister Spock, if you won't join me, don't disapprove of me. At least not until you've tried it, huh?

[Observation deck]

(Lenore is getting a personal tour of the ship) 
KIRK: This is the observation deck. That's the flight deck down there with the shuttle craft. 
LENORE: Interesting. 
KIRK: Isn't it? 
LENORE: Tell me, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Anything. 
LENORE: Did you order the soft lights especially for the occasion? 
KIRK: If I had ordered soft lights, I'd also have arranged for music and flowers. Unfortunately, it isn't so. On the Enterprise, we try to duplicate earth conditions of night and day as closely as possible. 
LENORE: Star light, star bright. I wish I may, I wish I might. Do you remember that, Captain? 
KIRK: It's very old. 
LENORE: Almost as old as the stars themselves. And this ship. All this power, surging and throbbing, yet under control. Are you like that, Captain? All this power at your command, yet the decisions that you have to make 
KIRK: Come from a very human source. 
LENORE: Are you, Captain? Human? 
KIRK: You can count on it. 
LENORE: Tell me about the women in your world, Captain. 
KIRK: I'd rather talk about you. You must have wanted to perform since you first saw your father act. When was that? 
LENORE: In the beginning. 
KIRK: Tell me about it. 
LENORE: That's not fair. You haven't answered my question about the women. 
KIRK: What would you like to know? 
LENORE: Has the machine changed them? Made them just people instead of women? 
KIRK: Worlds may change, galaxies disintegrate, but a woman always remains a woman. 
LENORE: All this and power too. The Caesar of the stars and the Cleopatra to worship him. 
(Finally, a passionate embrace)

[Bridge]

(Spock is on duty, and thinking) 
COMPUTER: Library computer. 
SPOCK: Full personal dossiers on the following names. Doctor Thomas Leighton, Anton Karidian, Lieutenant Kevin Riley, and Captain James T. Kirk. 
COMPUTER: Accomplished. Standing by. 
SPOCK: Correlate. Check their past histories. Report any item, any past episode or experience they all have in common. 
COMPUTER: Affirmative.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: I appreciate whatever concern you may have for the ship's company, Mister Spock, 
SPOCK: I will continue, Doctor. According to our library banks, it started on the Earth colony of Tarsus Four, when the food supply was attacked by an exotic fungus and largely destroyed. There were over eight thousand colonists and virtually no food. And that was when Governor Kodos seized full power and declared emergency martial law. 
MCCOY: I've heard of it. 
SPOCK: You may not have heard it all. Kodos began to separate the colonists. Some would live, be rationed whatever food was left. The remainder would be immediately put to death. Apparently he had his own theories of eugenics. 
MCCOY: Unfortunately, he wasn't the first. 
SPOCK: Perhaps not. But he was certainly among the most ruthless, to decide arbitrarily who would survive and who would not, using his own personal standards, and then to implement his decision without mercy. Children watching their parents die. Whole families destroyed. Over four thousand people. They died quickly, without pain, but they died. Relief arrived, but too late to prevent the executions. And Kodos? There never was a positive identification of his body. 
MCCOY: What has Karidian to do with it? 
SPOCK: His history begins almost to the day where Kodos disappeared. 
MCCOY: You think Jim suspects he's Kodos? 
SPOCK: He'd better. There were nine eye witnesses who survived the massacre, who'd actually seen Kodos with their own eyes. Jim Kirk was one of them. With the exception of Riley and Captain Kirk, every other eye witness is dead. And my library computer shows that wherever they were, on Earth, on a colony, or aboard ship, the Karidian Company of Players was somewhere near when they died. 
MCCOY: It's unbelievable.

[Engineering]

(There's just one officer on duty, and he hasn't touched the meal lying on a plate nearby) 
RILEY: Hey. Rec room. Somebody.

[Rec room]

RILEY [OC]: Talk to me. 
MATSON: Larry Matson here. Is that you, Riley?

[Engineering]

MATSON [OC]: What's up? 
RILEY: Not me. I am down. In the engineering room. 
MATSON [OC]: You've been a bad boy. 
RILEY: Maybe so. Whatever I've done, they're sure keeping it a secret from me.

[Rec room]

RILEY [OC]: Hey. Is that Uhura playing? Let me talk to her. 
MATSON: I think his heart is sore. 
UHURA: What can I do for you, Riley?

[Engineering]

RILEY: A song. Make it a love song. Just something to reassure me I'm not the only living thing left in the universe, huh?

[Rec room]

UHURA: Well, you're not, and I'll prove it to you. 
(sings) The skies are green and glowing

[Engineering]

UHURA [OC]: Where my heart is 
Where my heart is 
Where the scented lunar flower is growing 
Somewhere beyond the stars 
Beyond Antares. 
(As Riley listens, we see a shadow moving)

[Rec room]

UHURA: I'll be back, though it takes forever 
Forever is just a day 
Forever is just another journey

{Engineering]

UHURA [OC]: Tomorrow a stop along the way 
(Something gets squirted into Riley's milk) 
UHURA [OC]: Then let the years go fading

[Rec room]

UHURA: Where my heart is

[Engineering]

(Riley reaches for his tray) 
UHURA [OC]: Where my heart is 
Where my love eternal is waiting' 
Somewhere beyond the stars 
Beyond Antares. 
(He drinks)

[Rec room]

UHURA: How'd you like that, Riley?

[Engineering]

(But Riley is sweating and choking) 
RILEY: Help me, please. 
(He collapses)

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: You've got to pull him through. 
MCCOY: I'm not sure I can. 
SPOCK: If he dies, the only one who'll be able to identify Kodos is the Captain. And he'll be the next target.

Captain's log, stardate 2819.1. Ship's officer Riley's condition worsening. Doctor McCoy making lab analysis to determine cause and antidote. Entire crew deeply concerned.

[McCoy's office]

MCCOY: As of this date, lab report indicates presence of appreciable amount of tetralubisol, a highly volatile lubricant in use aboard ship. 
SPOCK: Someone tried to poison him. 
MCCOY: Tetralubisol us a milky substance. Someone could have gotten careless, made a mistake. 
SPOCK: I don't believe that and neither do you. I want the Captain to see that report. 
MCCOY: When I've finished logging it. 
SPOCK: Now.

[Captain's quarters]

KIRK: Come. 
MCCOY: My report on Lieutenant Riley. 
KIRK: Will he make it? 
MCCOY: He's got a good chance. 
SPOCK: Can we predict the same for you, Captain? 
KIRK: All right, Mister Spock. Let's have it. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant Riley was a witness. So were you. 
KIRK: All right. 
SPOCK: Someone tried to kill him. 
MCCOY: Could have been an accident. 
SPOCK: You should be told the difference between empiricism and stubbornness, Doctor. I checked with the library computer, just as you did. I got the same information. 
KIRK: Aren't you getting a little out of line, Mister Spock? My personal business, 
SPOCK: Is my personal business when it might interfere with the smooth operation of this ship. 
KIRK: You think that happened? 
SPOCK: It could happen. 
KIRK: I don't like anyone meddling in my private affairs. Not even my second in command. 
MCCOY: Jim, Spock's simply trying, 
KIRK: I know what he's doing, and I don't like it. 
MCCOY: It's his job, and you know it. 
KIRK: And you also know that nothing is proven. 
SPOCK: Even in this corner of the galaxy, Captain, two plus two equals four. Almost certainly an attempt will be made to kill you. Why do you invite death? 
KIRK: I'm not. I'm interested in justice. 
MCCOY: Are you? Are you sure it's not vengeance? 
KIRK: No, I'm not sure. I wish I was. I've done things I've never done before. I've placed my command in jeopardy. From here on I've got to determine whether or not Karidian is Kodos. 
SPOCK: He is. 
KIRK: You sound certain. I wish I could be. Before I accuse a man of that, I've got to be. I saw him once, twenty years ago. Men change. Memory changes. Look at him now, he's an actor. He can change his appearance. No. Logic is not enough. I've got to feel my way, make absolutely sure. 
MCCOY: What if you decide he is Kodos? What then? Do you play God, carry his head through the corridors in triumph? That won't bring back the dead, Jim. 
KIRK: No, but they may rest easier. 
(A scene break, during which McCoy apparently leaves) 
SPOCK: Logic, Captain. Doctor Leighton was murdered while the Karidian Company was on Planet Q. Now an attempt has been made against Riley while the company is on board the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Doc isn't sure it was a murder attempt. Besides, I have an idea may prove 
SPOCK: Shh. Listen. Do you hear it? That low hum. 
KIRK: A phaser. 
SPOCK: On overload. (starts searching) 
KIRK: This is the Captain. There's a phaser on overload in my quarters. If it blows, it'll take out the entire deck. Evacuate all personnel in this quadrant. Double Red Alert. (now starts searching himself) You get out of here. 
SPOCK: You can't stay. 
KIRK: Go on. Block off this section. Hurry. I'll find it.

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Evacuate this section. Seal it off. Clear section C4 and C5. 
(In Kirk's quarters the noise gets louder, and finally he sees the phaser silhouetted against the Red Alert light high in a bulkhead. He gets it, dashes into the corridor and drops it into a convenient pressure waste disposal unit directly opposite. Spock returns in time for the bang that throws them against the opposite wall)

[Karidian's quarters]

KIRK: (barging in without knocking) We're overdue for our talk, aren't we? 
KARIDIAN: I hoped you would have respected my privacy, Captain. 
KIRK: A moment ago, we narrowly averted an explosion which would have destroyed several decks of this ship. Before that, someone tried to poison one of my crewmen. 
KARIDIAN: I am sorry to hear that. 
KIRK: I'm sure you are. Are you Kodos? I asked you a question. 
KARIDIAN: Do you believe that I am? 
KIRK: I do. 
KARIDIAN: Then I am Kodos, if it pleases you to believe so. I am an actor. I play many parts. 
KIRK: You're an actor now. What were you twenty years ago? 
KARIDIAN: Younger, Captain. Much younger. 
KIRK: So was I. But I remember. Let's see if you do. Read this into that communicator on the wall. It will be recorded and compared to a piece of Kodos' voice film we have in our files. The test is virtually infallible. It will tell us whether you're Karidian, or Kodos the Executioner. (switches on comm.) Ready for voice test. Disguising your voice will make no difference. 
KARIDIAN: (reading) The revolution is successful, but survival depends on drastic measures. Your continued existence represents a threat to the well-being of society. (stops looking at the paper) Your lives means slow death to the more valued members of the colony. Therefore I have no alternative but to sentence you to death. Your execution is so ordered. Signed, Kodos, governor of Tarsus Four. 
KIRK: I remember the words. I wrote them down. You said them like you knew them. You hardly glanced at the paper. 
KARIDIAN: I learn my parts very quickly. 
KIRK: Are you sure? Are you sure you didn't act this role out in front of a captive audience whom you blasted out of existence without mercy? 
KARIDIAN: I find your use of the word mercy strangely inappropriate, Captain. Here you stand, the perfect symbol of our technical society. Mechanised, electronicised, and not very human. You've done away with humanity, the striving of man to achieve greatness through his own resources. 
KIRK: We've armed man with tools. The striving for greatness continues. But Kodos 
KARIDIAN: Kodos, whoever he was 
KIRK: Or is. 
KARIDIAN: Or is. Kodos made a decision of life and death. Some had to die that others might live. You're a man of decision, Captain. You ought to understand that. 
KIRK: All I understand is that four thousand people were needlessly butchered. 
KARIDIAN: In order to save four thousand others. And if the supply ships hadn't come earlier than expected, this Kodos of yours might have gone down in history as a great hero. 
KIRK: But he didn't. And history has made its judgment. 
KARIDIAN: If you're so sure that I'm Kodos, why not kill me now? Let bloody vengeance take its final course! And see what difference it makes to this universe of yours. 
KIRK: Those beautiful words, well acted, change nothing. 
KARIDIAN: I suppose not. They're merely tools, like this ship of yours. 
KIRK: There are no previous records to Anton Karidian prior to twenty years ago. 
KARIDIAN: Blood thins. The body fails. One is finally grateful for a failing memory. I no longer treasure life, not even my own. I am tired! And the past is a blank. Did you get everything you, wanted, Captain Kirk? 
KIRK: If I had gotten everything I wanted, you might not walk out of this room alive. 
LENORE: Captain Kirk. 
(She enters from the next room) 
LENORE: (to Karidian) You'd better rest now. There's a stain of cruelty on your shining armour, Captain. You could have spared him, and me. You talked of using tools. I was a tool, wasn't l? A tool to use against my father. 
KIRK: In the beginning perhaps. But later, I wanted it to be more than that. 
LENORE: Later. Everything's always later. Later. Latest. Too late. Too late, Captain. You are like your ship, powerful, and not human. There is no mercy in you. 
KIRK: If he is Kodos, then I've shown him more mercy than he deserves. And if he isn't, then we'll let you off at Benecia, and no harm done. 
LENORE: Captain Kirk. Who are you to say what harm was done? 
KIRK: Who do I have to be?

[Sickbay]

(Kevin is pacing up and down in the background, overhearing what is being dictated) 
MCCOY: Medical log. Lieutenant Riley's sufficiently recovered to be discharged, but the Captain's ordered him restricted to Sickbay to prevent contact with the passenger who calls himself Karidian and who's suspected of being Kodos the Executioner and of murdering the Lieutenant's family.

Captain's log, stardate 2819.8. Suspect under surveillance. Strategic areas under double guard. Performance of the Karidian Players taking place as scheduled.

[Ship's Theatre]  

LENORE: (on stage) Tonight, the Karidian Players present Hamlet, another in a series of living plays presented in space, dedicated to the tradition of classic theatre. Hamlet is a violent play about violent times when life was cheap and ambition was God.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Two pieces of paper are lined up on his desk) 
SPOCK: I believe we have a match, Captain. 
KIRK: But not an exact match, Mister Spock. We're dealing with a man's life. No machine can make that decision.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: In the long history of medicine, no doctor has ever caught the first few minutes of a play. Riley, don't forget to 
(but he's not there) 
MCCOY: Riley? Captain Kirk, McCoy here. 
KIRK [OC]: Yes, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Riley's gone. I was recording my log about Karidian and Kodos. If he overheard

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: You've made your point, Doctor. 
SECURITY [OC]: Captain? Security, H deck, The weapons locker has been broken into. One phaser is missing. 
KIRK: This is the Captain. Security two alert. Find and restrain Lieutenant Kevin Riley. He's armed and possibly headed towards the ship's theatre.

[Ship's Theatre]

(The Ghost summons Hamlet) 
HAMLET: Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, I'll go no further. 
KARIDIAN Mark me. 
HAMLET: I will. 
(Kirk comes creeping around backstage) 
KARIDIAN: My hour is almost come, when I to sulphurous and tormenting fires must render up myself. 
HAMLET: Speak. I am bound to hear. 
KARIDIAN: So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear. I am thy father's spirit, doomed for a certain term to walk the night, 
(Kirk spots Kevin with the phaser) 
KIRK: Riley, get back to the Sickbay. 
RILEY: He murdered my father, and my mother. 
KIRK: You could be wrong. Don't throw away your life on a mistake. 
RILEY: I'm not wrong. 
KARIDIAN: But that I am forbid to tell the secrets of my prison house, 
RILEY: I know that voice, that face, I know it. I saw it. He murdered them. 
KARIDIAN: Thy soul, freeze thy young blood. 
KIRK: It's an order. Give me the weapon. 
(Takes it from Riley) 
KIRK: Now get back to Sickbay. Go on. 
(Riley leaves, and there is polite applause at the end of the scene on stage. Karidian comes backstage.) 
LENORE: It's going beautifully. What is it? What's wrong? 
KARIDIAN: There was a voice out of the past haunting me, torturing me. There was another part I once played long ago. I never told you about it. Now that same curtain rises again. The time has come. 
LENORE: No, Father. The time will never come. Tonight, after my performance, the last two who can harm you will be gone. 
KARIDIAN: What are you saying? 
LENORE: There were nine. Now there are only two, and they will be gone as soon as I. Don't look at me like that. 
KARIDIAN: What have you done? 
LENORE: What had to be done. They had to be silenced. 
KARIDIAN: All of them? All seven? More blood on my hands? 
LENORE: No Father, not anymore. I'm strong, Father. It's nothing. 
STAGEHAND [OC]: Second act, three minutes. 
LENORE: We'll be ready. Don't you see? All the ghosts are dead. I've buried them. There's no more blood on your hands. 
KARIDIAN: Oh, my child, my child. You've left me nothing! You were the one thing in my life untouched by what I'd done. 
LENORE: But you're safe now, Father. I've saved you. Now, no one can touch you. Not even Captain Kirk. See Caesar come? He's awed by your greatness, your shining brightness. Bright as a blade before it is stained with blood. 
KIRK: Bright as a blade. Come with me, both of you. 
LENORE: Of course. After the play. 
KIRK: The play is over. It's been over for twenty years. 
KARIDIAN: I was a soldier in a cause. There were things to be done, terrible things. 
LENORE: Stop it, Father! You have nothing to justify. 
KARIDIAN: Murder, flight, suicide, madness. I never wanted the blood on my hands ever to stain you. 
LENORE: I did it for you. I've saved you. 
KIRK: By killing seven innocent men. 
LENORE: They weren't innocent! They were dangerous! I would have killed a world to save him! 
STAGEHAND [OC]: Curtain going up, one minute.
(Kirk takes Karidian's arm) 
LENORE: The play, Captain. He must go on. This is the great Karidian.
KIRK: Guard.
LENORE: You cannot deny him his last performance! 
(She grabs the security guard's phaser and runs out onto the stage) 
KARIDIAN: Lenore, don't!
KIRK: You'll never get off the ship.
LENORE: It will become a floating tomb, drifting through space with the soul of the great Karidian giving performances at every star he touches. (Kirk moves towards her) I know how to use this, Captain.
KARIDIAN: No.
LENORE: Caesar, beware the ides of March.
KARIDIAN: No, child! Don't! 
(As she squeezes the trigger, her father steps in front of Kirk, and takes the shot himself. Lenore screams at what she has done. and Kirk takes the phaser from her as she kneels over Karidian's body) 
LENORE: Father. Father! O, proud, death! What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, that thou, such a prince at a shot so bloodily hast struck? The curtain, the curtain rises. It rises. There's no time to sleep. The play. The play. The play's the thing, wherein we'll catch the conscience of the king.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Medical report. (hands it over) She'll receive the best of care, Jim. She remembers nothing. She even thinks her father's still alive giving performances before cheering crowds. You really cared for her, didn't you? 
SPOCK: Ready to leave Benecia orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Leslie. All channels cleared, Uhura?
UHURA: All channels clear, sir.
KIRK: Whenever you're ready, Mister Leslie.
LESLIE: Leaving orbit, sir.
MCCOY: You're not going to answer my question, are you?
KIRK: Ahead warp factor one, Mister Leslie.
MCCOY: That's an answer.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Menagerie, part 2
Stardate:3012.4 
Original Airdate: 24 Nov, 1966

Personal log, stardate 3013.1. I find it hard to believe the events of the past twenty four hours or the plea of Mister Spock standing general court-martial.
[Recap of part one]

MENDEZ: How do you plead to the charge of unlawfully taking command?
SPOCK: Guilty.
MENDEZ: Of sabotaging the computers of this vessel and locking it on a course for planet Talos Four?
SPOCK: Guilty.
MENDEZ: And of forcibly attempting to transport Captain Pike to that planet?
SPOCK: Guilty.
KIRK [OC]: Why? Why does Spock want to take to that forbidden world his former captain. Mutilated by a recent space disaster, now a shell of a man, unable to speak or move? The only answer Spock would give was on the hearing-room screen. How Spock could do this he refused to explain, but there before our eyes, actual images from thirteen years ago of Captain Pike as he was when he commanded this vessel, of Spock in those days, and of how the Enterprise had become the first and only starship to visit Talos Four. They had received a distress signal from that planet and discovered there, still alive after many years, the survivors of a missing vessel, only to find it was all an illusion. No survivors, no encampment, it was all a trap set by a race of beings who could make a man believe he was seeing anything they wished him to see, and Captain Pike was gone, a prisoner for some unknown purpose.
KIRK: And the images we've been seeing are
SPOCK: Are coming from Talos Four, sir.
MENDEZ: Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty.
KIRK: Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
SPOCK: Captain, Jim, please. Don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.

[Hearing room]

KIRK [OC]: The court-martial of Mister Spock has been convened in closed session. Despite all we can do, images continue to be transmitted to us from Talos Four.
MENDEZ: Starfleet has ordered no contact with Talos Four. They made no exceptions.
SPOCK: You have no choice, sir. I'm sorry. The Keeper has taken over control of our screen. Do you understand, sir? (flash) As you saw before, Captain Pike had been knocked unconscious and captured by the Talosians.

[Pike's cage]

(Pike discovers there is a transparent wall blocking his escape, and tests it's strength. A group of aliens arrive)
PIKE: Can you hear me? My name is Christopher Pike, commander of the space vehicle Enterprise from a stellar group at the other end of this galaxy. Our intentions are peaceful. Can you understand me?
(the aliens communicate with their minds, not voices)
TALOSIAN: It appears, Magistrate, that the intelligence of the specimen is shockingly limited.
MAGISTRATE: This is no surprise since his vessel was baited here so easily with a simulated message. As you can read in its thoughts, it is only now beginning to suspect that the survivors and encampment were a simple illusion we placed in their minds.
PIKE: You're not speaking, yet I hear you.
MAGISTRATE: You will note the confusion as it reads our thought transmissions.
PIKE: All right, then, telepathy. You can read my mind. I can read yours. Now, unless you want my ship to consider capturing me an unfriendly act
MAGISTRATE: You now see the primitive fear/threat reaction. The specimen is about to boast of his strength, the weaponry of his vessel, and so on. Next, frustrated into a need to display physical prowess, the creature will throw himself against the transparency.
PIKE: If you were in here, wouldn't you test the strength of these walls, too? There's a way out of any cage, and I'll find it.
MAGISTRATE: Despite its frustration, the creature appears more adaptable than our specimens from other planets. We can soon begin the experiment.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: The inhabitants of this planet must live deep underground, probably manufacture food and other needs down there. Our tests indicate the planet surface, without considerably more vegetation or some animals, simply too barren to support life.
NUMBER ONE: So we just thought we saw survivors there.
SPOCK: Exactly. An illusion placed in our minds by this planet's inhabitants.
BOYCE: It was a perfect illusion. They had us seeing just what we wanted to see, human beings who'd survived with dignity and bravery, everything entirely logical, right down to the building of the camp, the tattered clothing, everything. Now let's be sure we understand the danger of this. The inhabitants of this planet can read our minds, they can create illusions out of a person's own thoughts, memories, and experiences, even out of a person's own desires. Illusions just as real and solid as this table top and just as impossible to ignore.
TYLER: It's Captain Pike they've got. He needs help.
SPOCK: If we start buzzing about down there, we're liable to find their mental power's so great they could reach out and swat this ship as though it were a fly.
TYLER: Now that entry may have stood up against hand lasers but we can transmit the ship's power against it, enough to blast half a continent.
NUMBER ONE: Engineering deck will rig to transmit ship's power. We'll try blasting through that metal.

[Talosian monitoring room]

TALOSIAN: Thousands of us are already probing the creature's thoughts, Magistrate. We find excellent memory capacity.
MAGISTRATE: I read most strongly a recent death struggle in which it fought to protect its life. We will begin with this, giving the specimen something more interesting to protect.

[Rigel 7]

VINA: Come on, we must hide ourselves. Come, come, hurry. It's deserted. There'll be weapons and perhaps food.
PIKE: This is Rigel Seven.
VINA: Please, we must hide ourselves.
PIKE: I was in a cage, a cell, in some kind of a zoo. I must still be there.
VINA: Come on.
PIKE: They've reached into my mind and taken the memory of somewhere I've been.
VINA: The Kaylar!
PIKE: It's starting just as it happened two weeks ago, except for you.

[Hearing room]

SPOCK: A brilliant deduction by Captain Pike, gentlemen. Yes, he was still inside his cell, but knowing that couldn't help him.
KIRK: The Talosians controlled his brain.
SPOCK: And could make him live any place, any time, any situation they wished. He would see, taste, suffer with the same reality as you gentlemen sitting there.
PIKE [on screen]: Longer hair, different dress, but it is you, the one the survivors call Vina. Or rather the image of Vina. But why you again? Why didn't they create a different girl?

[Rigel 7]

VINA: Quick. If you attack while it's not looking.
PIKE: But it's only a dream.
VINA: You have to kill him as you did here before.
PIKE: You can tell my jailers I won't go along with it. I'm not an animal performing for its supper.
VINA: It doesn't matter what you call this, you'll feel it. That's what matters. You'll feel every moment of what happens to you.
(so Pike fights the Kaylar, first with mace and shield, then whatever he can grab. He is pushed off a ledge, and as it jumps off after him, he impales it on a barbed spearhead)

[Pike's cell]

VINA: It's over. (she hugs her hero, then sees the Talosians)

[Hearing room]

MENDEZ: What is it? Why have they stopped the images?
SPOCK: Because they know that Captain Pike is fatigued. We can reconvene later.
KIRK: Then they care about the Captain.
SPOCK: They want him back alive, sir.
MENDEZ: I demand to know why.
SPOCK: If you'll be patient, the answers to your questions
MENDEZ: You're forgetting you're on trial, Spock. You will answer all questions put to you.
SPOCK: My answer to your question would be quite unbelievable, sir. I regret we'll have to wait and see it there.

Personal log, stardate 3013.2. Reconvening court-martial of Mister Spock and the strangest trial evidence ever heard aboard a starship. From the mysterious planet now only one hour ahead of us, the story of Captain Pike's imprisonment there.

[Hearing room]

PIKE [on screen]: Why are you here?
VINA [on screen]: To please you.
PIKE [on screen]: Are you real?
VINA [on screen]: As real as you wish.

[Pike's cell]

PIKE: No, no. No, that's not an answer. I've never met you before, never even imagined you.
VINA: Perhaps they made me out of dreams you've forgotten.
PIKE: What, and dress you in the same metal fabric they wear?
VINA: I can wear whatever you wish, be anything you wish.
PIKE: So they can see how their specimen performs? They want to see how I react, is that it?
VINA: Don't you have a, a dream, something you've always wanted very badly?
PIKE: Or do they do more than just watch me? Do they feel with me, too?
VINA: You can have whatever dream you want. I can become anything, any woman you, you've ever imagined. You can have anything you want in the whole universe. Let me please you.
PIKE: Yes. Yes, you can please me. You can tell me about them. Is there any way I can keep them from probing my mind, from using my thoughts against me? Does that frighten you? Does that mean there is a way?
VINA: You're a fool.
PIKE: Since you're not real, there's not much point in continuing this conversation, is there?

[Planet surface]

NUMBER ONE: All circuits engaged, Mister Spock.
SPOCK [OC]: Standing by, Number One.
NUMBER ONE: Take cover.
SPOCK [OC]: Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
(the phaser cannon blasts at the rock face)
NUMBER ONE: Increase to full power! Can you give us any more?
SPOCK [OC]: Our circuits are beginning to heat. We'll have to cease power.
NUMBER ONE: Disengage. The top of that knoll should have been sheared off the first second.
BOYCE: Maybe it was. It's what I tried to explain in the briefing room. Their power of illusion is so great, we can't be sure of anything we do, anything we see.

[Pike's cell]

VINA: Perhaps if you asked me some questions I could answer.
PIKE: How far can they control my mind?
VINA: If I tell you, then will you pick some dream you've had and let me live it with you?
PIKE: Perhaps.
VINA: They can't actually make you do anything you don't want to do.
PIKE: But they try to trick me with their illusions.
VINA: And, er, they can punish you when you're not co-operative. You'll find out about that. 
PIKE: Did they ever live on the surface of this planet? Why did they go underground?
VINA: War, thousands of centuries ago.
PIKE: That's why it's so barren up there?
VINA; The planet's only now becoming able to support life again.
PIKE: So the Talosians who came underground found life limited here and they concentrated on developing their mental power.
VINA: But they found it's a trap, like a narcotic, because when dreams become more important than reality, you give up travel, building, creating. You even forget how to repair the machines left behind by your ancestors. You just sit, living and reliving other lives left behind in the thought record.
PIKE: Or sit probing minds of zoo specimens like me.
VINA: You're better than a theatre to them. They create the illusion for you, they watch you react, feel your emotions. They have a whole collection of specimens, descendants of life brought back long ago from all over this part of the galaxy.
PIKE: Which means they had to have more than one of each animal.
VINA: Please.
PIKE: They'll need a pair of humans too. Where do they get intend to get the Earth woman?
VINA: You said that if I answered questions
PIKE: But that was a bargain with something that didn't exist. You said you weren't real, remember?
VINA: I'm a woman as real and as human as you are. We are like Adam and Eve. If we. No, please, no! Don't punish me! I'll die! (disappears)

[Hearing room]

MENDEZ: An Earth woman? Then you were captured as breeding stock. (flash) 
KIRK: Why? Just to maintain a supply of zoo specimens?
SPOCK: Much more, Captain.

[Pike's cell]

(as Pike searches the walls for a door, a hatch opens and a glass is placed on the floor)
KEEPER: The vial contains a nourishing protein complex.
PIKE: Is the keeper actually communicating with one of his animals?
KEEPER: If the form and the colour is not appealing, it can appear as any food you wish to visualise.
PIKE: And if I prefer
KEEPER: To starve? You overlook the unpleasant alternative of punishment.
(Pike is surrounded by fire and brimstone, screaming in pain)
KEEPER: From a fable you once heard in childhood. You will now consume the nourishment.
PIKE: Why not just put irresistible hunger in my mind? Because you can't, can you? You do have limitations, don't you?
KEEPER: If you continue to disobey, from deeper in your mind, there are things even more unpleasant.
(he drinks the nourishment then launches himself at the glass wall. The Keeper steps back in surprise)
PIKE: That's very interesting.
KEEPER: Now to the female.
PIKE: You were startled. Weren't you reading my mind then?
KEEPER: As you've conjectured, an Earth vessel did crash on our planet, but with only a single survivor.
PIKE: No, let's stay on the first subject. All I wanted for that moment was to get my hands around your neck.
KEEPER: We repaired the survivor's injuries and found the species interesting.
PIKE: Do primitive thoughts put up a block you can't read through?
KEEPER: It became necessary to attract a mate.
PIKE: All right, all right. Let's talk about the girl. You seem to be going out of your way to make her attractive, to make me feel protective.
KEEPER; This is necessary in order to perpetuate the species.
PIKE: Seems more important to you now that I begin to accept her and like her.
KEEPER: We wish our specimens to be happy in their new life.
PIKE: Assuming that's a lie, why would you want me attracted to her? So I'll feel love in a husband-wife relationship? That would be necessary only if you intend to build a family group or perhaps a whole human community.
KEEPER: With the female now properly conditioned.
PIKE: You mean properly punished! I'm the one who's not cooperating! Why don't you punish me?
KEEPER: First, an emotion of protectiveness. Now one of sympathy. Excellent.

[Woodland glade]

VINA: You want some coffee, dear? I left the thermos hooked to my saddle.
PIKE: Tango! You old devil, you. Uh, I'm sorry I don't have any sugar. Well, they think of everything, don't they? (feeds lumps to the horse) 
VINA: Is it good to be home?
PIKE: They read our minds very well. Home, anything else I want if I co-operate, is that it?
VINA: My, it turned out to be a lovely day, didn't it? You're home. You can even stay if you want.
PIKE: But we're not here, neither of us. We're in a menagerie, a cage!
VINA: No.
PIKE; I can't help either one of us if you won't give me a chance. Now, you told me once they used illusions as a narcotic. They couldn't repair the machines left by their ancestors. Is that why they want us, to build a colony of slaves?
VINA: Stop it. Don't you care what they'll do to us?
PIKE: Back in my cage, it seemed for a couple of minutes that our keeper couldn't read my thoughts. Do emotions like hate, keeping hate in your mind, does that block off our mind from them?
VINA: Yes. They can't read through primitive emotions, but you can't keep it up for long enough. I've tried. They keep at you and at you year after year, tricking and punishing, and they won. They own me. I know you must hate me for that.
PIKE: Oh, no. I don't hate you. I can guess what it was like.
VINA: But that's not enough. Don't you see? They read my thoughts, my feelings, my dreams of what would be a perfect man. That's why they picked you. I can't help but love you and they expect you to feel the same way.
PIKE: If they can read my mind, then they know I'm attracted to you. I was from the very first moment I saw you in the survivor's camp. You were like a wild little animal. 
VINA; I'm beginning to see why none of this has worked for you. You've been home, and fighting as on Rigel. That's not new to you, either. A person's strongest dreams are about what he can't do. Yes, a ship's captain, always having to be so formal, so decent and honest and proper. You must wonder what it would be like to forget all that.

[Open air party]

(a band plays, and a green woman dances sensuously)
TRADER: Nice place you have here, Mister Pike.
PIKE: Vina?

[Hearing room]

KIRK: That's Vina again, as the green Orion slave girl? (flash)
MENDEZ: They're like animals, vicious, seductive. They say no human male can resist them.
KIRK [OC]: Strange evidence from the past, how the Talosians, planning to breed a society of human slaves, tempted Captain Pike with the Earth woman they held in captivity. And as she appeared to him in many forms, each more exciting than the last, Pike was beginning to weaken.

[Open air party]

OFFICER: Suppose you had all of space to choose from and this was only one small sample. 
TRADER: Wouldn't you say it was worth a man's soul?
(Pike gets up and leaves. Vina follows him into the rock room)

[Transporter room]

NUMBER ONE: Now, you all know the situation. We're hoping to transport down inside the Talosian community.
SPOCK: If our measurements and readings are an illusion also, one could find oneself materialised inside solid rock.
NUMBER ONE: Nothing will be said if any volunteer wants to back out.
(Pitcairn energises but only the two women dematerialise) 
SPOCK: The women!

[Pike's cage]

NUMBER ONE: Captain! Captain.
VINA: No! Let me finish!
NUMBER ONE: But we were a party of six.
COLT: We were the only ones transported.
VINA: It's not fair. You don't need them.
PIKE: (grabbing the phase pistols) They don't work.
NUMBER ONE: They were fully charged when we left. It's dead. (communicator) I can't make a signal. What is it?
PIKE: Don't say anything. I'm filling my mind with a picture of beating their huge, misshapen heads to pulp, thoughts so primitive they black out everything else. I'm filling my mind with hate.
VINA: How long can you block your thoughts? A few minutes, an hour? How can that help?
COLT: Leave him alone.
VINA: He doesn't need you. He's already picked me.
COLT: Picked her? For what? I don't understand.
VINA: Now, there's a fine choice for intelligent offspring.
COLT: Offspring, as in children?
NUMBER ONE: Offspring as in, he's Adam. Is that it?
VINA: You're no better choice. They'd have more luck crossing him with a computer.
NUMBER ONE: Well, shall we do some time computation? There was a Vina listed on that expedition as an adult crewman. Now, adding eighteen years to your age then.
(The Keeper approaches the cage)
VINA: It's not fair. I did what you asked.
KEEPER: Since you resist the present specimen, you now have a selection.
PIKE: I'll break out of this zoo somehow and get to you. Is your blood red like ours? I'm going to find out.
KEEPER: Each of the two new specimens has qualities in her favour. The female you call Number One has the superior mind and would produce highly intelligent children.
PIKE: All I want to do is get my hands on you. Can you read these thoughts, images of hate, killing?
KEEPER: The other new arrival has considered you unreachable but now is realising this has changed. The factors in her favour are youth and strength, plus unusually strong female drives. 
PIKE: You'll find my thoughts more interesting, thoughts so primitive you can't understand. Emotions so (stricken by pain)
KEEPER: Wrong thinking is punishable. Right thinking will be as quickly rewarded. You will find it an effective combination. (leaves)
NUMBER ONE: Captain.
PIKE: No. No, don't help me. I have to concentrate. They can't read through hate.
(the group are apparently dozing when the Keeper opens the hatch to get the laser pistols Pike dropped there. He grabs him and pulls him into the cage, and starts to throttle him)
PIKE: Hold still, or I'll break your neck.
VINA: Don't hurt them. They don't mean to be evil.
PIKE: I've had some samples of how good they are.
(the Talosian appears to be a vicious monster)
PIKE: You stop this illusion, or I'll twist your head off. All right, now you try one more illusion, you try anything at all, and I'll break your neck.
KEEPER: Your ship. Release me, or we'll destroy it.
VINA: He's not bluffing, Captain. With illusion they can make your crew work the wrong controls or push any button it takes to destroy your ship.
PIKE: I'm going to gamble you're too intelligent to kill for no reason at all. (hands him over to Number One and picks up the laser pistols, firing them at the glass wall) On the other hand, I've got a reason. I'm willing to bet you've created an illusion this laser is empty. I think it just blasted a hole in that window and you're keep us from seeing it. You want me to test my theory out on your head?
COLT: Captain. (there is a hole in the glass, and they all leave through it)

[Hearing room]

MENDEZ: It seems the Talosians have deserted you.
SPOCK: Gentlemen, a moment, please.
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock?
MENDEZ: (to Pike) May I have your verdict?
SPOCK: Signal you want them to wait. Captain, please. It's your life now, at least a chance for life.
KIRK: You keep talking about life, Mister Spock. A chance for life. How? As a prisoner, caged, a zoo specimen, living the illusions that amuse his keepers?
SPOCK: No, Captain. there's more to it. Watch. (the screen remains blank)
MENDEZ: Guilty, yes or no, Captain? (flash) Yes. I must also vote guilty as charged. And you, Captain?
KIRK: Guilty as charged.

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Bridge to Commander.

[Hearing room]

MENDEZ: Mendez here.
HANSEN [on monitor]: Sir, we're entering orbit Talos Four.
SPOCK: Talos controls the vessel now, sir, as they did thirteen years ago. You've asked me why. You'll see the answer now.

[Planet surface]

PIKE: Make contact, Number One.
NUMBER ONE: They kept us from seeing this, too. We cut through and never knew it. Captain.
KEEPER: As you see, your attempt to escape accomplished nothing.
PIKE: I want to contact our ship.
KEEPER: You are now on the surface where we wished you to be. With the female of your choice, you will now begin carefully guided lives.
PIKE: And start by burying you?
KEEPER: That is your choice. To help you reclaim the planet's surface, our zoological gardens will furnish a variety of plant life.
PIKE: Look, I'll make a deal with you. You and your life for the lives of these two Earth women. You give me proof that our ship is all right, send these two back, and I'll stay with Vina.
NUMBER ONE: (setting laser pistol to overload) It's wrong to create a whole race of humans to live as slaves.
KEEPER: Is this a deception? Do you intend to destroy yourselves?
VINA: What is that?
PIKE: The weapon is building up an overload, a force chamber explosion. You still have time to get underground. Well, go on! (pushes Vina away) Just to show you how primitive humans are, Talosian, you go with her.
VINA: If, if you all think it's this important, then I can't go, either. I suppose if they have one human being, they might try again. (more Talosians arrive) 
PIKE: Wait.
TALOSIAN: Their method of storing records is crude and consumed much time. Are you prepared to assimilate it?
KEEPER: We had not believed this possible. The customs and history of your race show a unique hatred of captivity. Even when it's pleasant and benevolent, you prefer death. This makes you too violent and dangerous a species for our needs.
VINA: He means that they can't use you. You're free to go back to the ship.
PIKE: And that's it. No apologies. You captured one of us, threatened all of us.
TALOSIAN: Your unsuitability has condemned the Talosian race to eventual death. Is this not sufficient?
KEEPER: No other specimen has shown your adaptability. You were our last hope.
PIKE: But wouldn't some form of trade, mutual cooperation.
KEEPER: Your race would learn our power of illusion and destroy itself, too.
NUMBER ONE: Captain, we have transporter control now.
PIKE: Let's get back to the ship.
VINA: I can't. I can't go with you.

[Transporter room]

PITCAIRN: Sir, it just came on. We can't shut the power off.
SPOCK: Mister Spock here.
TYLER [OC]: All power has come on, Mister Spock. The helm is answering to control.
(first Colt, then Number One are beamed aboard)
??: The captain.

[Planet surface]

(Vina is changed into a scarred, misshapen older woman)
VINA: You see why I can't go with you.
KEEPER: This is the female's true appearance.
VINA: They found me in the wreckage, dying, a lump of flesh. They rebuilt me. Everything works, but they had never seen a human. They had no guide for putting me back together.
KEEPER: It was necessary to convince you her desire to stay is an honest one.
PIKE: You'll give her back her illusion of beauty? 
KEEPER: And more.

[Transporter room]

PITCAIRN: Mister Spock, the system is coming on again.

[Hearing room]

COLT [on screen]: What's happened to Vina? 
NUMBER ONE [on screen]: Isn't she coming with us?
PIKE [on screen]: No. No, and I agreed with her reasons.
(scene moves to the Bridge, but we're watching the disabled Pike)
SPOCK [OC]: All decks prepare for hyperdrive.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: All decks are ready, sir.
PIKE [on screen]: Engage.
KIRK: Commodore, don't you think that (Mendez disappears)
KEEPER [on screen]: What you now seem to hear, Captain Kirk, are my thought transmissions. The Commodore was never aboard your vessel. His presence there and in the shuttlecraft was an illusion. Mister Spock had related to us your strength of will. It was thought the fiction of a court-martial would divert you from too soon regaining control of your vessel. Captain Pike is welcome to spend the rest of his life with us, unfettered by his physical body. The decision is yours and his.
KIRK: Mister Spock, even if regulations are explicit, you could have come to me and explained.
SPOCK: Ask you to face the death penalty, too? One of us was enough, Captain.
KIRK: Yes.
UHURA [OC]: Message from Starbase Eleven, sir. Received images from Talos Four. In view of historic importance of Captain Pike in space exploration, General Order Seven prohibiting contact Talos Four is suspended this occasion. No action contemplated against Spock. Proceed as you think best. Signed, Mendez, J.I., Commodore, Starbase Eleven. 
KIRK: Chris, do you want to go there? (flash) Mister Spock, would you care to take Captain Pike to the transporter room, see him off?
SPOCK: Thank you, sir, for both of us. (flash)
KIRK: Er, Mister Spock, when you're finished, please come back and see me. I want to talk to you. This regret table tendency you've been showing lately towards flagrant emotionalism
SPOCK: I see no reason to insult me, sir. I believe I've been completely logical about the whole affair.
KEEPER [OC] Captain Kirk.
(screen shows the healthy young Vina and healthy young Pike hand in hand)
KEEPER [on screen]: Captain Pike has an illusion, and you have reality. May you find your way as pleasant.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Menagerie, part 1
Stardate:3012.4 
Original Airdate: 17 Nov, 1966

[Starbase 11, outside]
PIPER: Welcome to Starbase Eleven, Captain. The Commodore's waiting to see you. He's curious why you suddenly changed course and came here.
KIRK: We received a subspace message asking us to divert here immediately.
PIPER: This base sent no message, Captain.

[Mendez' office]

MENDEZ: Oh, Jim, I just can't understand this.
KIRK: Mister Spock received a starbase transmission, a message from the former commander of the Enterprise, Fleet Captain Pike, urgently requesting that we divert here.
MENDEZ: Impossible.
KIRK: If my first officer states he received a transmission from 
MENDEZ: Jim, I'm not doubting anyone's word. I'm simply telling you it's impossible.
KIRK: Why?
MENDEZ: You don't know? You actually don't know what's happened to Captain Pike? There's been subspace chatter about it for months. I'm sorry to have to be the one to show you. He's upstairs in the medical section.

[Intensive Care Area]

MENDEZ: You ever met Chris Pike?
KIRK: When he was promoted to Fleet Captain.
MENDEZ: About your age. Big, handsome man, vital, active.
KIRK: I took over the Enterprise from him. Spock served with him for several years.
SPOCK: Eleven years, four months, five days.
MCCOY: What's his problem, Commodore?
MENDEZ: Inspection tour of a cadet vessel. Old Class J starship. One of the baffle plates ruptured.
MCCOY: The delta rays?
MENDEZ: He went in bringing out all those kids that were still alive. Just wanted you gentlemen to be prepared.

[Pike's room]

MENDEZ: Captain Pike. (a scarred head and shoulders sticking out of wheelchair device) Captain, you remember these gentlemen. They wanted to visit you. Two flashes mean no. I thought you might make an exception for them. (flash, flash) I'm sorry, gentlemen.
KIRK: Chris, if there's anything I can do for you. (flash, flash)
SPOCK: Captain Pike, may I remain for a moment? (flash, the others leave) You know why I've come, Captain. It's only six days away at maximum warp and I have it well-planned. (flash, flash) I have never disobeyed your orders before, Captain, but this time I must. (flash, flash) I know. I know it is treachery and it's mutiny. but I must do this. (flash, flash) I have no choice. (flash, flash)

[Mendez' office]

KIRK: Once more, Jose. Spock stated he received a message for us to come here. He entered same in his log. That's all the proof I require.
MENDEZ: And what do those record tapes show? No message sent from here. No message received by your vessel.
KIRK: Then I suggest the record tapes have been deliberately changed. A computer expert can change record tapes, duplicate voices, say anything, say nothing.
MENDEZ: The fact remains that your first officer's former captain is hospitalised, horribly injured, at this base, and that same first officer seems to be the only one who heard that message.
KIRK: If he had wanted to see Captain Pike he could have requested a leave. I would have granted it.
MENDEZ: Well, that's true of course.
KIRK: Who would want to divert us here? There's no trouble in the space sector we're patrolling now. No alien problems.
MENDEZ: Computer Centre.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

HUMBOLDT: Chief Humboldt here, sir.
MENDEZ [OC]: Have you rechecked all the record tapes on the date in question?
HUMBOLDT: Yes, sir.
MENDEZ [OC]: Is there any way at all a message could have been sent from here without us knowing it?
HUMBOLDT: Negative, Commodore. We've checked and double-checked everything possible.
MENDEZ [OC]: All right. Start checking the impossible. Mendez out. 
(Spock creeps up behind Humboldt and neck-pinches him, then does something to the innards of a computer bank)

[Mendez' office]

MENDEZ: Oh, have I introduced Miss Piper, Jim? This is Captain Kirk, Miss Piper.
PIPER: I recognized the Captain immediately. A mutual friend described you, sir. Lieutenant Helen Johansson.
KIRK: Helen described 
PIPER: She merely mentioned she knew you, sir.
MENDEZ: You have something to report, Miss Piper?
PIPER: Oh, yes, sir. I'm afraid our investigation turned up very little, Commodore. There is, of course, Mister Spock's years of service with Captain Pike. Indications of his extreme loyalty to this former commander.
KIRK: Miss Piper, a Vulcan can no sooner be disloyal than he can exist without breathing. That goes for his present commander as well as his past.
PIPER: We're forced to consider every possibility, sir. We can be certain Captain Pike cannot have sent a message. In his condition he's under observation every minute of every day.
MENDEZ: And totally unable to move, Jim. His wheel chair is constructed to respond to his brain waves. Oh, he can turn it, move it forwards, or backwards slightly.
PIPER: With the flashing light, he can say yes or no.
MENDEZ: But that's it, Jim. That's as much as that poor devil can do. His mind is as active as yours and mine, but it's trapped inside a useless vegetating body. He's kept alive mechanically, a battery-driven heart. 
KIRK: There's no way he could even have asked for that message to be sent?

[Starbase Computer Centre]

VOICE [OC]: (slow) Starbase Operations. (fast) Starbase Operations. (Spock adjusts it to sound normal) Starbase Operations. Starbase Operations, Enterprise. Standby to receive new orders, Enterprise.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Starbase Operation, Mister Hansen. 
VOICE [OC]: Starbase Operations to Enterprise. Standby to receive new orders. They're to be fed directly into the ship's computers. This is top secret and scrambled.
HANSEN: Enterprise standing by. Request confirmation.
UHURA: Enterprise to Starbase. Request confirmation.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

CHIEF: Sir, this is a security area. What are you doing here? 
SPOCK: I have security clearance, Chief.
CHIEF: Who gave you clearance? I haven't been notified. You're cross-circuiting the. (struggle) Whose tapes are these?
UHURA [OC]: Repeat, Enterprise to Starbase. Orders received. We need operating confirmation from the ship's Captain. (Spock pinches the Chief unconscious)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Come in, Starbase. Come in, Captain Kirk.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

(Spock inserts data chip) 
KIRK [OC]: This is Captain Kirk. You have confirmation, Miss Uhura.

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Hansen here, Captain.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

HANSEN [OC]: Our destination has been scramble-fed into ship's computers. Er, how can I handle the helm if I don't know where we're going?
KIRK [OC]: (another chip) Mister Spock is with me here. He'll answer all questions. Kirk out.
SPOCK: This is Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: The ship's computers will handle the helm on this voyage, Mister Hansen. Course will be computed and set automatically.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

SPOCK: You will not discuss this with ship's crew or starbase personnel. Do you read?

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Acknowledged, sir.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

SPOCK: Stand by. We'll warp out of orbit in one hour.

[Mendez' office]

KIRK: (watching Pike on monitor) He keeps blinking no. No to what?
MCCOY: They've tried questioning him. He's almost agitated himself into a coma.
KIRK: How long will he live?
MCCOY: As long as any of us. Blast medicine anyway. We've learned to tie into every human organ in the body except one. The brain. The brain is what life is all about. Now, that man can think any thought that we can, and love, hope, dream as much as we can, but he can't reach out, and no one can reach in.
KIRK: He keeps blinking no.
MCCOY: No to what? They could question him for days, weeks, before they stumble on the right thing.
KIRK: Bones, could this have anything to do with Spock?
MCCOY: I don't read you at all, Jim.
KIRK: What I mean is either a message was received. It was one of two things. Either someone sent a message diverting us here, or someone on board the ship lied about receiving it. Could that someone be Mister Spock?
MCCOY: Jim, forgetting how well we both know Spock, the simple fact that he's a Vulcan means he's incapable of telling a lie.
KIRK: He's also half human.
MCCOY: And that half is completely submerged. To be caught acting like us or even thinking like us would completely embarrass him.
KIRK: Someone's interfering with my command and my ship. I don't know who it is, but I mean to find out. Even you. If I thought you had the technical know-how I'd suspect you, but you don't. Spock does.
MCCOY: He would not make a false entry. 
KIRK: There's a false entry in the log right now which doesn't jibe with the established facts. How do you explain that.
MCCOY: I can't, but to question Spock of all people? Me, yes. I could run off half-cocked given a good reason. So could you, but not Spock. It's impossible.
VOICE [OC]: Doctor McCoy, report to Transporter Control. Doctor McCoy to Transporter Control.
MCCOY: McCoy here.
VOICE [OC]: You're needed aboard the Enterprise, Doctor. Medical emergency.
MCCOY: Well, what is it? Sickness? Injury? How bad is it?
VOICE [OC]: That's all we have on it, Doctor. Just needed aboard.
MCCOY: Probably somebody discovered a hangnail. I'll beam up and let you know, Jim.

KIRK: (reading) For eyes of Starfleet Command only.
MENDEZ: Oh, I'm certifying I ordered you to read it. Know anything at all about this planet?
KIRK: What every ship Captain knows. General Order 7, no vessel under any condition, emergency or otherwise, is to visit Talos Four. 
MENDEZ: And to do so is the only death penalty left on our books. Only Fleet Command knows why. Not even this file explains that. (unlocks the magnetic strip) But it does name the only Earth ship that ever visited the planet.
KIRK: The Enterprise, commanded by Captain Christopher Pike.
MENDEZ: With a half Vulcan science officer named Spock.
PIPER: Commodore! Captain Pike, he's gone!
MENDEZ: Mendez here. What is it?
VOICE [OC]: Starship Enterprise, Commodore. It's warping out of orbit. Refuses to acknowledge our signal.

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Out of orbit, Mister Spock. Seems strange with no navigator on duty.
SPOCK: The Enterprise knows where she's going, Mister Hansen.
UHURA: Someone's trying to hail us, sir.
SPOCK: Maintain radio silence, Lieutenant. This is First Officer Spock. Per Starfleet orders this date, I have been placed in temporary command of the Enterprise. While our destination is secret, our mission is relatively simple. Starbase Command has assigned Captain Kirk medical rest leave until our return. His instructions are that you will obey my orders as you would his. First Officer out.
MCCOY: What's going on around here? Who said Jim needed a medical rest leave? And this call about me being needed aboard the ship. I've checked everywhere. 
SPOCK: And no one from the ship made such a call.
MCCOY: That's right. 
SPOCK: Doctor, I regret they elected to keep certain things from you. Will you come with me, please.

[Pike's quarters]

MCCOY: What is this, Spock? Captain, are you all right? (flash, flash) I see that you're still signaling
SPOCK: Doctor, one moment, please.
KIRK [OC]: Kirk to Doctor McCoy. I'm recording you this message, Bones, so there will be no misunderstanding. I'm sorry to have to make it an order. You're not to disturb Captain Pike with any questions. Simply take good care of him. Follow Spock's instructions to the letter. Kirk out. (flash, flash)

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Sir, scanners report an object following us, about the size of a starbase shuttlecraft. Shall we reverse helm?
SPOCK: Take no action, Mister Hansen.
HANSEN: But at our speed, they'll never catch us. In case they want to reach us 
SPOCK: You have your orders, Mister Hansen. We'll make no contact.

[Shuttlecraft]

MENDEZ: Starbase Shuttlecraft one to Enterprise. Come in, please. Enterprise, Commodore Mendez and Captain Kirk. If you read me, you are ordered to reply. Repeating it on all emergency frequencies, Jim.
KIRK: Spock is headed for Talos Four, all right.
MENDEZ: Pulling ahead of us fast. Fuel is down to sixty three point three. If we turn back now, we've just got barely enough to get us back to the base.
KIRK: Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in!

[Bridge]

COMPUTER: Library computer.
SPOCK: Lock on to sensors. Measure object now following the Enterprise.
COMPUTER: Computed. Object is a Class F shuttlecraft. Duranium metal shell, ion engine power
SPOCK: Stop. How long before shuttlecraft's fuel supply forces return to starbase?
COMPUTER: Computed. Shuttlecraft is already past point of safe return.

[Shuttlecraft]

MENDEZ: We coast.
KIRK: Blast you any way. You had no right to come along.
MENDEZ: RHIP, Captain. Rank hath its privileges.
KIRK: Two hours of oxygen left.
MENDEZ: Wonderful.
KIRK: Part of me is hoping the Enterprise won't come back for us. We step on that deck, Spock is finished. Court-martialed, disgraced. 
MENDEZ: He's dead if he makes it to Talos Four. Why would he want to get Pike there? The command reports stated Talos contained absolutely no practical benefits to mankind.
KIRK: Spock would have some logical reason for going there.
MENDEZ: Maybe. Maybe he's just gone mad.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: I keep wondering who might be after us in a shuttlecraft and I keep coming up with the same answers, but I can't be right, can l, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Computer control. Lock on to shuttlecraft following us.
COMPUTER: Locked on. Tractor beam ready.
SPOCK: Go to tape Abel Seven Baker. Execute instructions.
MCCOY: Is it the captain, Mister Spock?
HANSEN: Sir, the engines are reversing. She's brought herself to a dead stop.
SPOCK: This is the First Officer speaking. Security, send an armed team to the Bridge. Transporter Room, stand by to beam Captain Kirk aboard. Effective until then, Lieutenant Hansen is in operational command.
HANSEN: Sir?
SPOCK: First Officer out. Doctor, as senior officer present, I present myself to you for arrest.
MCCOY: You what?
SPOCK: The charge is mutiny, Doctor. I never received orders to take command.
SECURITY: Security reporting, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Doctor.
MCCOY: Mister Spock is, er, under arrest. Is confinement to quarters enough?
SPOCK: Adequate, Doctor. I'll make no trouble.
MCCOY: Well, confine him.
SECURITY: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: Store our shuttlecraft on the hangar deck, Mister Scott. Beam us directly aboard.
SCOTT: All right, Captain. Locked on to you.
HANSEN: Transferring command to you, sir.
KIRK: Accepting command. Where's Mister Spock?
HANSEN: In his quarters, under arrest.
MENDEZ: His quarters, after what he's done, Lieutenant?
UHURA [OC]: Captain from Bridge. The engines are coming on.
KIRK: Reverse power. Hold this position. Tell whoever gave those orders to report
HANSEN: Sir, there's nobody up there giving orders. Mister Spock has the computers running the ship.
KIRK: Disengage computer control, Uhura.
UHURA [OC]: We can't disengage, Captain. The helm does not respond. (Scott leaves, muttering in Gaelic)
KIRK: Computer control, come in.
COMPUTER: Computer.
KIRK: Disengage from helm.
COMPUTER: Unable to comply.

[Spock's quarters]

KIRK [on monitor]: This is the Captain. On voice command, you will override all contrary instructions. Voice command, disengage from helm.
COMPUTER: Unable to comply. Any such attempt will cross-circuit vessel's life-supporting system. Computer control cannot be disengaged until vessel reaches planet Talos Four.

Captain's log, stardate 3012.4. Despite our best efforts to disengage computers, the Enterprise is still locked on a heading for the mysterious planet Talos Four. Meanwhile, as required by Starfleet General Orders, a preliminary hearing on Lieutenant Commander Spock is being convened. And in all the years of my service, this is the most painful moment I've ever faced.

[Hearing room]

KIRK: This hearing is convened. Mister Spock, you're aware of your right to counsel of your choice?
SPOCK: Sir, I waive counsel. Further, I waive rights to this hearing and request immediate court-martial.
KIRK: Request denied.
SPOCK: May I inquire on what grounds, Captain?
KIRK: A mutiny requires a trial board of no less than three command officers. Since there are only two of that rank available
SPOCK: Sir, I must point out that there are three officers of command rank available. Yourself, Commodore Mendez, and Captain Christopher Pike.
KIRK: Denied. Captain Pike is a complete invalid.
SPOCK: I believe you'll find he's still on the active duty list.
MENDEZ: We didn't have the heart to retire him, Jim. He's got you. Whatever he's up to, he's planned it well.

Captain's log, stardate 3012.6. General Court-Martial convened. Mister Spock has again waived counsel and has entered a plea of guilty.

MENDEZ: Mister Spock, are you aware in pleading guilty that a further charge involving the death penalty must be held against you should this vessel enter the Talos star group?
SPOCK: I am.
MENDEZ: Why? What does it accomplish to go there or to take Captain Pike there? I want to know why.
SPOCK: Are your comments a part of the record, sir?
MENDEZ: Yes, it's on the record.
SPOCK: Thank you. Request monitor screen be engaged.
MENDEZ: For what purpose?
SPOCK: To comply with the request you just made, sir, that I explain the importance of going to Talos Four.
KIRK: By asking why, you've opened the door to any evidence he may wish to present. Apparently what he had in mind.
MENDEZ: Present your evidence. Screen on.
SPOCK: This is thirteen years ago. The Enterprise and its commander, Captain Christopher Pike.
SPOCK [on screen]: Definitely something out there, Captain, headed this way.
KIRK: Screen off. Chris, was that really you on the screen? (flash) That's impossible. Mister Spock, no vessel makes record tapes in that detail, that perfect. What were we watching?
SPOCK: I cannot tell you at this time, sir.
MENDEZ: Captain Pike, were any record tapes of this nature made during your voyage? (flash, flash) The court is not obliged to view evidence without knowing its source.
SPOCK: Unless the court asks a prisoner why, Commodore. You did ask that question.
MENDEZ: You mean I was maneuvered into asking. Your evidence is out of order.
KIRK: I am forced to contest that, Commodore. I want to see more.
MENDEZ: You have that right, Captain, but just because the prisoner is your First Officer and your personal friend
KIRK: That has nothing to do with it.
MENDEZ: Very well, continue.
KIRK: Screen on, Mister Scott.
NUMBER ONE [on screen]: No. It's something else. There's still something out there.
SPOCK: As I stated, gentlemen, this was thirteen years ago. We were on routine patrol when the ship's sensors detected something ahead. At first we were not certain what it was.
TYLER [on screen]: It's coming at the speed of light. Collision course.

[Bridge]

TYLER: The meteorite beam has not deflected it, Captain.
NUMBER ONE: Evasive manoeuvres, sir?
PIKE: Steady as we go. 
COMM OFFICER: It's a radio wave, sir. We're passing through an old-style distress signal.
PIKE: They were keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way.
COMM OFFICER: A ship in trouble making a forced landing, sir. That's it. No other message.
TYLER: I have a fix. It comes from the Talos star group.
NUMBER ONE: We've no ships or Earth colonies that far out.
SPOCK: Their call letters check with a survey expedition. S.S. Columbia disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago.
TYLER: It would take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here.
SPOCK: Records show the Talos group has never been explored. Solar system similar to Earth, eleven planets. Number four seems to be Class M, oxygen atmosphere.
NUMBER ONE: Then they could still be alive, even after eighteen years.
PIKE: If they survived the crash.
SPOCK: We aren't going to go, to be certain?
PIKE: Not without any indication of survivors, no. Continue to the Vega Colony and take care of our own sick and injured first. You have the helm. Maintain present course.
NUMBER ONE: Yes, sir.

[Pike's quarters]

BOYCE [OC]: Boyce here.
PIKE: Drop by my cabin, Doctor. (Boyce enters with bag) What's that? I didn't say there's anything wrong with me.
BOYCE: I understand we picked up a distress signal.
PIKE: That's right. Unless we get anything more positive on it, it seems to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent. I'd like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, too.
BOYCE: Oh, I concur with yours, definitely.
PIKE: Good. I'm glad you do, because we're going to stop first at the Vega Colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also. What the devil are you putting in there, ice?
BOYCE: Who wants a warm martini?
PIKE: What makes you think I need one?
BOYCE: Sometimes a man will tell his bartender things he'll never tell his doctor. What's been on your mind, Chris, the fight on Rigel seven?
PIKE: Shouldn't it be? My only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
BOYCE: Was there anything you personally could have done to prevent it?
PIKE: Oh, I should have smelled trouble when I saw the swords and the armour. Instead of that, I let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one of their warriors.
BOYCE: Chris, you set standards for yourself no one could meet. You treat everyone on board like a human being except yourself, and now you're tired and you
PIKE: You bet I'm tired. You bet. I'm tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives. I'm tired of deciding which mission is too risky and which isn't, and who's going on the landing party and who doesn't, and who lives and who dies. Boy, I've had it, Phil.
BOYCE: To the point of finally taking my advice, a rest leave?
PIKE: To the point of considering resigning.
BOYCE: And do what?
PIKE: Well, for one thing, go home. Nice little town with fifty miles of park land around it. Remember I told you I had two horses, and we used to take some food and ride out all day.
BOYCE: Ah, that sounds exciting. Ride out with a picnic lunch every day.
PIKE: I said that's one place I might go. I might go into business on Regulus or on the Orion colony.
BOYCE: You, an Orion trader, dealing in green animal women, slaves?
PIKE: The point is this isn't the only life available. There's a whole galaxy of things to choose from.
BOYCE: Not for you. A man either lives life as it happens to him, meets it head-on, and licks it, or he turns his back on it and starts to wither away.
PIKE: Now you're beginning to talk like a doctor, bartender.
BOYCE: Take your choice. We both get the same two kinds of customers. The living and the dying.
SPOCK [on monitor]: Mister Spock here. We're intercepting a follow-up message, sir. There are crash survivors on Talos.

[Bridge]

OFFICER: (reads) Eleven survivors from crash. Gravity and oxygen within limits. Food and water obtainable, but unless. The message faded at that point, sir.
PIKE: Address intercraft.
TYLER: System open.
PIKE: This is the captain. Our destination is the Talos star group.

[Hearing room]

PIKE [on screen]: Our time warp, factor seven.
TYLER [on screen]: Course computed and on the screen.
NUMBER ONE [on screen]: All decks have acknowledged, sir.
PIKE [on screen]: Engage.
MENDEZ: Screen off. Mister Spock, I'm truly amazed at your technical prowess in somehow manufacturing all this. I congratulate you on your imagination. But this is a court of space law, not a theatre.
SPOCK: Captain, please tell the court this is not imagination, nor some clever photographic record. Are we seeing the actual events of thirteen years ago? (flash) Yes, gentlemen. On that screen as it happened, the incredible experience of Captain Christopher Pike on Talos Four. If, after witnessing this, the court wishes to turn this vessel back, I will release this ship to manual control.
MENDEZ: You're in no position to bargain. This is ridiculous. This man mutinied, stole your ship, abducted Captain Pike. Well, for me this has gone far enough.
KIRK: We still haven't heard the full story. I vote to continue.
MENDEZ: And I vote we do not. Deadlock, and since I'm 
KIRK: Not a deadlock. There's still one member of the trial board to be heard from.
MENDEZ: Very well. Captain Pike, it's up to you. Do we continue under these conditions? (flash)
KIRK: Yes.
Captain's log supplemental. Mister Spock, on trial for mutiny, has forced the court to accept unusual evidence. On our monitor screen, the voyage of Captain Pike and the Enterprise to the one forbidden world in all the galaxy.
MENDEZ: Screen on.

[Bridge]

TYLER: We've settled into orbit, sir.
GEOLOGIST: Geological lab report complete, Captain.
SPOCK: Preliminary lab survey ready, sir.
PIKE: Spectography?
GEOLOGIST: Our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, heavy with inert elements but well within safety limits.
PIKE: Gravity?
GEOLOGIST: Zero point nine of Earth.
TYLER: Captain? Reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. As I read it, they polarise out as rounded metal bits. Could be parts of a spaceship hull.
PIKE: Prep a landing party of six. You feel up to it?
SPOCK: Yes, sir.
TYLER: Yes, sir. 
PIKE: Sorry, Number One. With little information on this planet, we'll have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us.
NUMBER ONE: Of course, sir.

[Transporter room]

PIKE: There's no indication of problems down there, but let's not take chances.
PITCAIRN: Yes, sir. There's a canyon to the left. We can set you there completely unobserved.
PIKE: Right.

[Planet surface]

(the group explores until they find a rough settlement) 
CREWMAN: Sir.
OLD MAN: They're men. They're humans.
PIKE: Captain Christopher Pike, United Space Ship Enterprise.
HASKINS: Doctor Theodore Haskins, American Continent lnstitute.
SURVIVOR: Is Earth all right?
PIKE: The same old Earth, and you'll see it very soon.
TYLER: And you won't believe how fast you can get back. Well the time barrier's been broken. Our new ships can
HASKINS: This is Vina. Her parents are dead. She was born almost as we crashed.
(The reunion is being watched on another screen, by people with big bald heads) 
PIKE: (as the survivors pack up the settlement) Enterprise.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: Landing party, come in.
PIKE: We'll begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: Quarters are being prepared, sir. Have I permission to send out scouting and scientific parties now?
PIKE: Yes, affirmative on the
VINA: You appear to be healthy and intelligent, Captain. A prime specimen.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: I didn't get that last message, Captain.
PIKE: Er, affirmative on request. Landing party out.
HASKINS: You must forgive her choice of words, Captain. She's lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists.
BOYCE: If they can, er, spare you a moment, I'd like to make my medical report.
VINA: I think it's time to show the Captain our secret.
BOYCE: Their health is excellent, almost too good.
HASKINS: There's a reason for our condition, but we've had some doubt if Earth is ready to learn the secret. Let the girl show you. We'll accept your judgment.
(Pike follows Vina up a slope to a ledge by a rock face) 
VINA: You're tired, but don't worry. You'll feel much better soon. Don't you see it? Here and here.
PIKE: I, I don't understand.
VINA: You will. You're a perfect choice. 
(she vanishes, and so do all the survivors and their encampment. A door opens in the rock face, Pike is knocked out and taken inside. At the settlement -) 
TYLER: Captain! (everyone rushes over in time to see the door closing in the rock. They fire their phasers at it to no avail.

[Hearing room]

SPOCK [on screen]: Spock here.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: Landing party, come in.
SPOCK [on screen]: There is no survivors' encampment, Number One. This is all some sort of trap. We've lost the Captain. Do you read?
KIRK: What is it?
UHURA [OC]: It's for Commodore Mendez.
KIRK: Plead signal for you, sir. Go ahead, Uhura.
UHURA [OC]: Commodore Mendez, urgent. Subspace monitors show Enterprise receiving transmissions from planet Talos Four in violation of Starfleet General Orders.
KIRK: Receiving transmissions from Talos Four? Then the images we've been seeing are
SPOCK: Are coming from Talos Four, sir.
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk is here by relieved. You are ordered to assume command of the Enterprise. Disable vessel if necessary to prevent further contact. Message signed ComSol, Starfleet Command.
MENDEZ: Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty. You've not only finished yourself, Spock, but you've finished your Captain as well.
SPOCK: The Commodore must be aware that Captain Kirk knew nothing of this.
MENDEZ: And you're aware a Captain is responsible for everything that occurs on his ship. I order you to return this vessel back to manual control.
SPOCK: Sir, I respectfully decline.
MENDEZ: Very well. You've earned the consequences. This court is in recess.
(Mendez and yeoman leave, Scott and McCoy wheel Pike out after him)
KIRK: Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
SPOCK: Captain, Jim, please don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.
KIRK: Lock him up.

To be concluded next week...

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Counter-Clock Incident
Stardate: 6770.3
Original Airdate: 12 Oct, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 6770.3. The Enterprise is on course for the planet Babel, where ambassadors from all Federation planets are waiting to honour the Enterprise's distinguished passenger, Commodore Robert April, first captain of the USS Enterprise, and for the past twenty years, Federation Ambassador at large. Now seventy five years old, Commodore April has reached mandatory retirement age.
[Bridge]

APRIL: No matter where I've travelled in the galaxy, Jim, this bridge is more like home than anywhere else. 
KIRK: Yes, Commodore, I know the feeling. 
APRIL: To me she was always like my child. I was there in the San Francisco Navy Yards when her unit components were built. 
(McCoy enters with Mrs. April) 
MCCOY: Jim, I didn't realise how many of the tools I use in Sickbay were designed by Sarah. 
SARAH: As the first medical officer aboard a ship equipped with warp drive, I'm afraid I had to come up with new ideas all the time. 
KIRK: Your modesty is unnecessary, Mrs. April. Your achievements as a pioneer doctor in space are well known. 
MCCOY: And it's nice to know the lady is as intelligent as she is beautiful. Much like the flower she carries. 
SARAH: Oh, Doctor, flattery will get you everywhere. But I'm afraid my flower is dying. 
KIRK: It's a native of Capella Four, isn't it? 
SARAH: Yes, but it has a life span of only a few hours. This morning it was a seedling, within a few hours it will be dead. 
SPOCK: Excuse me, Captain. You asked to be notified when we made visual contact with the Beta Niobe nova. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. Mrs. April, you're about to see another of the galaxy's most beautiful sights, the Beta Niobe's supernova. 
(A glowing ring doughnut is on the viewscreen) 
SARAH: It is beautiful, but also very deadly. 
SPOCK: We're travelling at a safe distance from the nova, Mrs. April. 
APRIL: Beta Niobe. You were present when the star first started its explosion, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, we were, Commodore. 
SPOCK: Captain, sensors are picking up an unidentified object travelling at an incredible speed, presently on collision course with the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Put the ship on Red Alert. How fast is it travelling, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: At a speed that should be impossible to achieve. Something on the order of warp thirty six. 
APRIL: No natural object has ever been recorded as travelling at that speed. 
SPOCK: I believe it is not a natural object, but a ship. 
KIRK: But who would have the technology to build a ship that could travel at such a speed? 
SPOCK: No known race, Captain. Nevertheless, it will contact us in one point four minutes. 
KIRK: Hard about, helmsman. Change course for twenty four mark seven. 
SPOCK: Correction, Captain. The ship was on a collision course only by coincidence. It is apparently heading for the heart of the Beta Niobe nova. 
KIRK: That's a course of self-destruction. Lieutenant Uhura, open hailing frequencies. I want to talk to that ship's captain. 
UHURA: Captain, that ship is not responding. 
KIRK: All right, if they won't talk, we'll slow them down. Mister Sulu, put a tractor beam on that ship. 
SULU: Tractor beam on and operating, Captain. 
AREX: We're having a small effect on other ship's speed, Captain. It has dropped to a speed of warp thirty two. 
UHURA: Captain, they are making visual contact. 
KIRK: Put it on the screen, Lieutenant. 
(A blonde woman appears. She speaks, but the sounds are unintelligible. Then the picture fades) 
KIRK: I've never heard that language before. 
APRIL: Nor I. 
KIRK: Run that message through the universal translator, Lieutenant Uhura. Perhaps it can tell us what language she is speaking in. 
UHURA: Captain, the universal translator has the answer. The woman is speaking the same universal language we speak, but she is speaking in reverse. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, let's hear that tape backward, which should sound forward to us. 
UHURA: Yes, sir, on the screen. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: I am on a priority mission. Your beam is slowing my progress. Release my ship at once or I am doomed. 
KIRK: Open hailing frequencies again, Lieutenant. Tell her she is endangering her life if she remains on her present course. 
UHURA: No use, sir. She's refusing to answer. 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty, what is it? 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain, the engines are buckling. We cannot keep up at this speed. 
KIRK: Mister Arex, what is our speed? 
AREX: Now at warp eleven, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, how long until the alien vessel makes contact with the Beta Niobe nova? 
SPOCK: Three minutes forty two point seven seconds.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Give me three and a half minutes, Scotty.

[Bridge]

AREX: Still increasing speed, Captain. Warp fourteen. Warp fifteen. 
KIRK: I have no choice. I have to release the tractor beam. I can't destroy this ship and four hundred and thirty people to save one person. Mister Sulu, release our beam. 
SULU: Sir, I can't release the tractor beam. 
KIRK: What do you mean, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Our controls are inoperative. The ship isn't responding like it should. 
KIRK: Go to manual override. 
SULU: NO responding, sir. 
KIRK: We've got to release that beam, or we're going to follow that ship into the nova! 
SPOCK: Our speed is now warp twenty, and the other ship will contact the nova in one minute fifty eight point three seconds. 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Commodore, Mrs. April. It looks as though we may not reach Babel. 
APRIL: As starship personnel, we were always prepared to give our lives, Captain. 
SARAH: We are still starship personnel, Captain. 
KIRK: There's still one chance. After that ship enters the nova, it should burn up and break contact with our tractor beam. Mister Spock, how long will we have to apply full braking power and execute course change? 
SPOCK: We are up to warp twenty two and increasing, Captain. We shall have forty two point eight five seconds to correct our course after the alien ship enters the nova. 
KIRK: You heard that, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, we're going to apply full braking power in a minute.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, Captain. Our engines are almost gone.

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: They've only lasted this long at this speed because the alien vessel is pulling us with our own tractor beam. 
SPOCK: The alien vessel will contact Beta Niobe in fifty two point three seconds, Captain. 
SPOCK: Contact in thirty nine seconds. Thirty eight, thirty seven 
SPOCK: Thirteen, twelve, eleven 
KIRK: Get ready to execute course change, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
(The little ship enters the nova) 
KIRK: Now, Mister Sulu! 
SULU: Something's wrong, Captain. We're still being pulled by the alien ship. 
KIRK: Impossible. It should have been destroyed instantly. 
AREX: Apparently it was not, Captain. Our tractor beam is still connected to her. 
SPOCK: And we are still increasing speed. Contact with the nova in thirty five point one eight seconds. 
KIRK: That other ship may have been able to survive the heat of a nova, but the Enterprise can't. Mister Scott, how about that full braking power?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: We're as badly off as before, Captain. We have no control of the ship as long as that alien lassie has us in tow.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Contact in twenty seconds. 
KIRK: Keep trying those controls, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Still no change, Captain. 
KIRK: It's got to work. 
(Kirk Fiddles with Sulu's switches) 
SPOCK: Fourteen seconds, thirteen, twelve 
KIRK: Never mind, Mister Spock, it's no use. 
(Sarah's flower shrivels in her hand. The Enterprise enters the nova and gets surrounded by sparkles) 
KIRK: We're still here. Lieutenant Uhura, can you get us a visual? 
(The viewscreen is white with black dots) 
APRIL: What? 
KIRK: Where are we? 
(The Enterprise is sailing serenely through this reverse negative universe - backwards)

Captain's log, stardate 6770.6. The Enterprise has passed into the most alien landscape I have ever seen. We are in some reverse universe where black stars shine in a white void. We are still in the tow of the alien ship, both of us having survived the extreme heat of the Beta Niobe nova.

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: This is Scott calling the Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty. How are we doing down there?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Well, we just had to learn to run the ship all over again. Every control is working in reverse.

[Bridge]

KIRK: All right. Lieutenant Uhura, we're going to contact that ship again. We need some answers. 
SARAH: Captain Kirk. The Capellan flower! 
APRIL: I'm sure Captain Kirk has other problems besides your flower, dear. 
SARAH: You don't understand. Before we entered this universe it was about to die. and now it's in full bloom again. 
KIRK: How's that possible? 
SARAH: It's as if it were growing younger again. I can almost feel it while I'm holding it. 
SPOCK: Captain, the flower is not the only thing on board that is growing younger. 
KIRK: Explain, Spock. 
SPOCK: Ship's chronometers are also running backward. The flow of time is reversed in this universe. The longer we stay here, the younger we will become. 
(Sarah's flower becomes a seed) 
UHURA: The alien ship is responding to our call, Captain. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: Your interference almost cost me my life. 
KIRK: I can understand her now, without the aid of the universal translator. 
SPOCK: Apparently our brains are also working in reverse, Captain, so we can now understand her language. That is why the ship seems to be operating in the reverse to us. 
KIRK: I'm Captain James T Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We tried to prevent you from entering the Beta Niobe nova. We assumed your ship would burn up. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: I had to return to my own universe, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Who are you? How did you come to be in our universe? 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: I am an explorer of space. I was caught unaware when Amphion, previously a dead star, went nova and came to life. I was pulled into the star. But instead of burning up, I passed into a universe where everything operates in reverse to my universe. 
KIRK: Our universe. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: Yes. My theory is that two stars going nova in the same place in both universes created a gateway which I passed through. 
APRIL: In her universe, a nova is a dead star which comes to life! And when the explosions of a nova in her universe and one in our universe occur together, it's possible to travel between the two universes. 
KIRK: Then we must return the same way, through the two novas. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: That would be impossible, Captain. Amphion is no longer nova. It has begun it's life as a star. I suggest you set a course to follow my ship. Perhaps our scientists can help solve your problem. 
KIRK: We have little choice.

Captain's log, supplemental. We are proceeding to Karla Five's planet, Arret.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Gentlemen, I'm sure none of us mind growing younger instead of older for a change. 
APRIL: It pleases me, Jim. If we stay here long enough, I'll no longer be at the mandatory retirement age. 
KIRK: Nevertheless, we must return home and I am open to suggestions. 
SPOCK: It is logical that we must reproduce the conditions that brought us here. Two novas must occupy the same space in both universes in order to create a gateway for us to travel through. One star dying in our universe, and one being born here would recreate the correct conditions. 
APRIL: That would take a remarkable coincidence, Mister Spock. 
UHURA [on monitor]: Captain, we are approaching Arret. Karla Five is asking if you are prepared to beam down to the planet. 
KIRK: Tell Karla Five that Mister Spock, Commodore April and myself will be beaming down. 
UHURA [on monitor}: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Karla Five has given us coordinates to beam down to her son's laboratory, Captain. 
KIRK: Her son? We don't have time for children's games right now, Scotty, but beam us down. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Laboratory]

(There is a baby in a playpen, and a man at a computer console) 
KARLA: May I introduce my son, Karl Four. 
KARL: (the man, of course) My honour to meet you, gentlemen. 
SPOCK: Most logical. If the flow of time is reversed, then one is born at an old age, and dies in infancy. Your descendants are born before you, and your ancestors are born after you. 
KIRK: Then the young child in the playpen 
KARLA: My father, Captain. 
KIRK: We could remain forever awed with the differences between our universes, Karla Five, but we must discover a way to return to our positive matter universe. 
KARL: Exactly the problem I have been working on since Karla informed me of your troubles, Captain Kirk. This is a map of our galaxy. Our home solar system is here. You entered our universe through the Amphion nova, here. (the opposite arm of the galaxy) 
KIRK: We need to coordinate this to our own universe. Can we do that, Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Apparently the two universes occupy the same space, but in different dimensions. 
APRIL: Assuming Beta Niobe and Amphion occupy the same space, we can determine if there are any other novas occupying the same space in both universes. 
SPOCK: Correct, Commodore. Now if you'll watch the star map, you'll see the Milky Way. Here is Beta Niobe, and here is Earth. It corresponds exactly with Arret. By superimposing both star maps, we will see where two stars occupy the same place in both universes. The red spheres indicate where two stars are in the same space. No pair are novas in both universes. 
APRIL: If stars begin as dead stars here then we could bring one of them to life prematurely. 
KIRK: Yes, we could act as a midwife giving birth to a star. Then we would have two novas in the same position and theoretically return home. 
KARLA: But I had to pass through the novas at my ship's top speed to avoid burning up. Your ship isn't capable of such a speed. 
SPOCK: That's true, Captain. 
KARLA: You are welcome to use my ship, Captain. 
KIRK: I have a crew of four hundred and thirty, Karla Five. Your ship is suitable for only a few people. 
SPOCK: We can't use her ship to transport us, Captain, but we could use it as an unmanned ship with our tractor beam attached. 
APRIL: It could work. That's how we arrived here in the first place. 
KIRK: It should work, yes. But any miscalculation anywhere along the way and we'll be plunging tail first into a supernova.

Captain's log, stardate 6770.1. Time continues to flow backward for us. We have set course for a dead star in this anti-matter universe that corresponds with the nova Minara in ours. We're being pulled by Karla Five's unmanned vessel, which is equipped with enough positive matter armament to ignite the dead star into life.

[Bridge]

KIRK: we just might get you to Babel after all, Commodore. 
APRIL: I'll be glad to get home, but not necessarily to Babel. It only means the end of my career, Jim. 
UHURA: Message coming in from Arret, Captain. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: I want to wish you luck, Captain. Whether you succeed or fail, the outcome will remain unknown to me. 
KIRK: Yes, Karla Five. We'll burn to a crisp or escape into our own universe. Either way, you'll never hear from us again. Thank you for the sacrifice of your vessel. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: It is a small sacrifice, Captain Kirk. Success. 
SULU: Tractor beam working properly, Captain. 
AREX: We're meeting the speed of Karla Five's unmanned vessel, Captain. 
KIRK: How much time before the youngest crew member returns to the time of birth? 
SPOCK: Eighteen minutes thirty seven seconds in real time. But long before that we shall all be children. And, Captain, that also means we are losing our knowledge at an alarming rate. It is possible we will soon be unable to operate the Enterprise. 
KIRK: How is our course, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: I don't know. What am I doing here? What is all this equipment? 
SPOCK: He's too young, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Arex, take over for him. Lieutenant Uhura, report to navigation console. 
UHURA: I'm sorry, sir, I don't understand all this equipment. What do I do with these controls? 
KIRK: Never mind. Spock, can you fill in for Sulu and Uhura? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain, but who will fill in for you? 
KIRK: What do you mean? 
SPOCK: At what age did you become a starship captain? And when did you enter Starfleet Academy? 
KIRK: I see what you mean. 
SPOCK: As a Vulcan, I age the slowest. I will be capable of assuming command longer than anyone else. But even I will become too young to know what to do.

Captain's log, supplemental. We have eleven minutes of real time left to reach the dead star, but all around my crew are turning into children, unable to operate the ship.

[Bridge]

(Kirk looks like he's not old enough to shave, April is middle-aged and Uhura's feet don't reach the floor any more) 
SPOCK: Ten minutes fourteen point twenty one seconds, Captain. We shall arrive with only moments to spare. We will need to disconnect the tractor beam at the appropriate time. 
KIRK: Tractor beam? How do we do that, Spock? 
SPOCK: Captain, I must assume command. You are no longer able to command the Enterprise.
KIRK: Whatever you say. What shall I do? 
APRIL: Mister Spock, as long as I am aboard, I am senior officer. I hate to pull rank, but you will be capable of command only for a few minutes, not long enough to complete the manoeuvres necessary to take us home. 
SPOCK: You are correct, of course. Commodore April, command is yours. 
APRIL: Commodore? I'm Captain April, Mister Spock. 
SARAH: (now a vibrant red head) Robert, we're the only adults on the bridge. They're all teenagers and children. 
APRIL: Make sure no harm comes to them, Sarah. We have to ignite that dead star if we're going home. Mister Spock, you are still capable of following orders? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. 
APRIL: Very good. Assume your post at the navigation console. 
SPOCK: The dead star is directly ahead, Captain, twelve degrees south of galactic plane. 
APRIL: Arm Karla Five's vessel, Spock. 
SPOCK: Vessel armed, Captain. Nine seconds to impact. Eight, seven, 
(The two ships rush towards the star) 
SPOCK: Three, two 
APRIL: Hang on, we're going right into the heart of the nova. 
(Kaboom, sparkles, and Enterprise flies out of an expanding gas cloud, the right way around) 
APRIL: We did it! We're home again! We're all right. We're home. The reverse aging process has stopped. 
SARAH: But the Enterprise crew, they're all children. 
APRIL: They can enter the transporter. It retains a memory of their original molecular structure. 
SARAH: But what about us? We don't have to use the transporter. We can remain young, live our lives over again. You could command a starship once more. 
APRIL: What a blessing to be able to live one's life over again, if the life you've led has left you unfulfilled. No Sarah, I don't want to live it all over again. I couldn't improve one bit on what we've had together. 
SARAH: Oh, Robert. 
(They embrace and kiss) 
(Later, everyone is back to how they were at the start of the show) 
KIRK: We've received a message from the Federation that might bring you some cheer. Lieutenant Uhura, would you relay it to Commodore April and his wife? 
UHURA: In view of Commodore April's heroic actions aboard the USS Enterprise this stardate, we are reviewing his mandatory retirement, and will consider his appeal to remain Federation Ambassador at large. 
APRIL: Well, good. Just because someone is seventy five years old doesn't mean they're ready to stop giving service to the galaxy! 
SULU: Arriving at Babel in one hour fifteen minutes, Captain. 
KIRK: I see your flower has blossomed again. 
SARAH: Yes, our trip into the negative universe gave it a second life. It gave all of us a second life.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


Albatross
Stardate: 5275.6
Original Airdate: 28 Sep, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 5275.6. Preparing to beam aboard the Enterprise, following the successful completion of delivery of medical supplies to the planet Dramia, in the remote Dramian star system.
[Dramia]

(Dramians are light orange, have massive torsos and feet, minute waists and hips, and elongated four fingered hands) 
DRAMIAN: We of Dramia wish to thank you and the others of your Federation for your invaluable assistance, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: We hope through our medical assistance programs. to develop and strengthen relations with star systems such as yours, Supreme Prefect. Well, shall we? Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us aboard, Scotty. 
DRAMIAN: If you would be so kind, Captain. 
KIRK: Belay that, Mister Scott. Yes, sir? 
DRAMIAN: Commander Demos? 
DEMOS: I have here a warrant for the arrest and trial of one of your party, Captain. 
KIRK: Warrant? Who? 
DRAMIAN: Read it, Captain. 
KIRK: (reading scroll) You are hereby directed to surrender for trial by the people of Dramia, Doctor Leonard McCoy, Medical Officer, USS Enterprise. Is this some kind of joke? 
DEMOS: The wanton slaughter of hundreds of people is not a joke, Captain. 
MCCOY: Slaughter? Hundreds of people? 
SPOCK: According to this, Doctor McCoy was responsible for a plague which ravaged the planet Dramia Two some nineteen years ago, Captain. 
KIRK: Let me see that. 
DRAMIAN: As you will note, Captain, the warrant is perfectly in order, approved by your own Federation.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Doctor McCoy arrested? For murder, Captain? Sir, if you want me and some of the men to beam down, just in case 
KIRK [OC]: No, Mister Scott. The warrant's legal. Mister Spock and I are at the Hall of Justice. We'll keep you informed.

[Hall of Justice]

DEMOS: Your Doctor McCoy headed a mass inoculation programme on Dramia Two, nineteen years ago. When his force left, a massive plague struck the planet, killing most of its people. 
KIRK: That doesn't mean he was responsible for it. 
DEMOS: His trial will tell, Captain. 
KIRK: Trial? You mean kangaroo court. I've heard about Dramian justice. 
SPOCK: Captain, you're becoming emotional. 
KIRK: Of course I am. Bones harming other beings. You know better, Spock. I know better. Not Bones.

[Detention cell]

MCCOY: I wish I could be as sure, Jim. I, I just don't know. Is it possible that I really did? 
KIRK: Nonsense. 
SPOCK: The termination of your inoculation programme and the subsequent outbreak of plague could have been coincidence, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Or a tragic mistake on my part. 
KIRK: I don't buy that, Bones. Guard! 
SPOCK: What now, Captain? 
KIRK: Some pre-trial investigation, Mister Spock. On Dramia Two. 
GUARD: Do not be assured by your friend's plans. Dramian justice is swift. Too swift for them to save you, perhaps.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Anything yet, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: No, Captain. The historical records of this solar system are spotty, at best, going back nineteen years. Mostly they're technical data, meteor showers, auroras, radiation reports. 
KIRK: There it is. 
SPOCK: Plague, Dramia Two. Of unknown origin, characterised by pigmentation changes in skin of victim, debilitation, death. Certain species known to have natural immunity, notably Vulcan. Hmm. Interesting. 
KIRK: Go on, Mister Spock.

[Hall of Justice]

DEMOS: You are sure? 
GUARD: Yes, Commander. The Earth captain is planning to visit Dramia Two to investigate the case. 
DEMOS: Ready a patrol ship.

Captain's log, stardate 5275.8. Underway for planet Dramia Two for investigation of McCoy case. We are beyond subspace communications with Starfleet. Am proceeding under my own authority.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Estimated time of arrival, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Approximately four hours, Captain. 
KIRK: Increase to warp six, Mister Scott. We may be racing against time.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: If I know Dramian justice methods. 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, Captain!

[Bridge]

SULU: Ship in pursuit, Captain. 
KIRK: Origin? 
SULU: I'd say Dramia, sir. It appears to be a one-man craft. 
UHURA: Shall I make contact, sir? 
KIRK: Yes. Belay that, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: You're planning something, Captain? 
KIRK: Unless I miss my guess, that's friend Demos. 
SULU: What if he attacks, sir? 
KIRK: Why should he? We haven't contacted him, so we must not have detected him. He'd have to explain an attack. Besides, he'll probably prefer to sneak aboard, seeing that we carelessly left the hangar doors open. 
UHURA: But the hangar doors aren't open, Captain. 
KIRK: Ah, yes. Take care of that oversight, will you, Mister Sulu? 
(Demos sees the hangar doors open, and flies straight in)

[Corridor outside hangar deck]

(Kirk and Spock arrive. Demos goes for a weapon) 
KIRK: Now, now, Demos. You're hardly in a position to take on an entire crew. 
DEMOS: And you are not in authority to conduct an investigation in our star system. 
KIRK: You will remind me to report my conduct to the Federation, won't you Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Of course, Captain. 
DEMOS: I demand that you report to the Federation now! 
KIRK: I would, but unfortunately we're out of communications range. 
DEMOS: Then I will proceed to your starbase and report your act. 
KIRK: Sorry, Commander. Your ship is, er, impounded. 
SPOCK: You are a stowaway, Commander. 
DEMOS: I have been tricked.

Captain's log, stardate 5275.9. We are approaching Dramia Two, where we hope to find the answers concerning the question of Doctor McCoy's guilt or innocence. Situation normal. Aurora reported in the sector, however.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Radiation level, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Intense, Captain. 
SPOCK: Decidedly non-lethal, however. 
KIRK: Good. Then it's safe for us to beam down to Dramia Two. Shall we, gentlemen?

[Transporter room]

(Kirk, Spock and Demos are on the pads) 
SCOTT: You're sure it's safe, Captain? 
KIRK: Absolutely. 
SPOCK: Decidedly. There's a difference, Captain. 
KIRK: Now, now, Mister Spock, you're not trying to scare our Dramian friend, are you? Of course, you can back out if you'd like, Commander. 
DEMOS: I go. 
KIRK: You heard the man, Mister Scott.

[Planet surface]

(It is a scene of devastation. Barren ground and ruined buildings) 
KIRK: Not the most enchanting place I've ever been to. 
DEMOS: Plagues seldom leave behind fields of flowers, Captain. 
(They see a figure amongst the ruins) 
KIRK: Trouble? 
DEMOS: They do not like outsiders. 
SPOCK: Surely you're not an outsider, Commander. You're Dramian. 
DEMOS: The distinction here is between the world of the living and the world of the walking dead. 
KIRK: Inhospitable or not, he mustn't get away. 
(They pursue a figure) 
KIRK: Wait! 
(The figure jumps off a cliff) 
KIRK: He's disappeared. It's almost as if he dematerialised. 
SPOCK: Not likely, Captain. 
(Speck points to an opening in the cliff face)

[Cave entrance]

DEMOS: I would advise against that, Captain. 
KIRK: I'm sure you won't mind if I ignore your advice. 
SPOCK: Caution would seem to be advisable, Captain. 
KIRK: Bones' life is on the line, Mister Spock.

[Cave]

KIRK: Cave dwellers? In the midst of your civilisation? 
DEMOS: A result of your Doctor McCoy and his inhumane methods. 
KIRK: You say it, Demos, but that doesn't 
(Then he is pounced upon by the Dramian they have been chasing. Spock and Demos pull him off) 
DEMOS: He attacked you because you are an Earthling, Captain, even as was McCoy. 
KIRK: But how did he survive the plague? 
DEMOS: He, like the others who remain here, was away at the time. They returned to their planet to find that their families had succumbed to the plague. He and a few others, senseless in their grief, chose to live here in desolation. You see, Captain, there were no actual survivors. 
KOL-TAI: You are wrong. There was a survivor. I, Kol-Tai, survived. By what miracle, I do not know. 
KIRK: Then you can tell us. Do you remember? 
KOL-TAI: I remember people all about me, becoming blue in colour, then green and finally red. 
SPOCK: The pigmentation changes associated with the disease in our computer records, Captain. 
KIRK: Kol-Tai. Doctor McCoy, do you remember him? 
KOL-TAI: The Earth doctor. He saved my life. He treated me for Saurian virus. A man who saves does not also kill, Commander.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Beam us aboard, Mister Scott. Quickly. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Let's get underway for Dramia. 
SCOTT: Sir, who is that? 
KIRK: Meet Kol-Tai, Mister Scott. A friend of Doctor McCoy's.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Warp six, Scotty.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: I'll pour on the coal, Captain. 
(As in an old blooper reel....)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Spock? 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes, Captain?

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: How's our number one passenger doing? 
SPOCK: Clean, fed, in good health, and resting. 
KIRK [OC]: Good. We want him to be a sterling witness.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise's course takes it through the yellow, green, blue and red aurora) 
SULU: Approaching Dramia, Captain. 
KIRK: Let's hope the trial hasn't started. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. What is it? 
SPOCK [OC]: The trial may be academic. 
KIRK: Academic.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Kol-Tai is turning blue.

[Bridge]

KIRK: The plague!

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Set up an immediate quarantine, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: He's hardly fit to testify at the trial, Captain. 
KIRK: We've got to save him. 
DEMOS: For McCoy's sake. 
KIRK: Yes, for McCoy's sake. And for Kol-Tai's sake too. You see, Commander, we do place a value on life. All life. Does that shock you, Commander? 
DEMOS: It is not that. It is 
SPOCK: Captain, you're blue. 
(So are all the bridge crew, and Scott, and Demos. As they start to collapse) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, take command.

SPOCK: Captain's log, stardate 5276.4. We are in orbit around the planet Dramia, under the conditions of general quarantine. As Commanding Office, I have ordered the activation of General Order Six.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: General Order Six has been activated? 
SULU: Yes, sir. If everyone on board has perished at the end of twenty four hours, the ship will self-destruct in order to protect other beings from the disease on board. 
SPOCK: Good. Report to Sickbay, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: But sir, who will monitor? 
SPOCK: I assure you I am capable, Mister Sulu. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
(He collapses against the wall) 
SPOCK: Captain, your condition. 
KIRK: We have to get McCoy. Must find an antidote. 
(Uhura passes out) 
SPOCK: This is the Enterprise. I must speak with the Supreme Prefect. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: Why do you speak, and not your Captain? 
SPOCK: The Captain and all of the crew members are incapacitated. The plague is aboard the Enterprise. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: Demos? 
SPOCK: The same. You must release Doctor McCoy temporarily. He is needed to find an antidote. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: No. 
SPOCK: We have a witness in McCoy's behalf. You must trust me. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: Let the witness speak. 
SPOCK: Impossible. He too is stricken. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: Demos cannot speak, the witness cannot speak. Yet you wish us to release the prisoner, McCoy. Your treachery is transparent, Vulcan. 
(end of transmission) 
KIRK: Got to get McCoy. 
SPOCK: If you'll permit me, Captain, I might be able to get McCoy. 
KIRK: Spock, (he turns green) you're sure? 
SPOCK: I can't infect the planet, Captain. And I can get McCoy.

[Detention cell]

(Spock neck-pinches the guard) 
MCCOY: Spock! What in the world? 
SPOCK: Later, Doctor. 
(He uses the guard's device to nullify the forcefield holding McCoy) 
MCCOY: Spock, have you and Jim gone out of your minds? Why, this is a jailbreak! 
SPOCK: Doctor, just come with me, please. 
MCCOY: No, Spock. It's illegal, that's what it is. Besides, I must stand trial. I have to find out. 
SPOCK: Doctor, you will stand trial, you will find out, after you've found and antidote for the plague which is about to kill everyone aboard the Enterprise. 
MCCOY: Plague? Why didn't you tell me? 
SPOCK: You wouldn't give me a chance. You realise, Doctor, if you go, and fail to find an antidote, you too will die. 
MCCOY: I'm a doctor, Spock, a doctor. Get us beamed aboard. 
SPOCK: Beam us aboard, Captain.

[Transporter room]

(Kirk has operated the controls, then collapsed again) 
MCCOY: Jim!

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Anything, Spock?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Negative, Doctor. The file on all known diseases doesn't recognise these symptoms of pigmentation changes.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Blast it, Spock, work harder. They're in the terminal stage. 
(Kirk is yellow) 
MCCOY: My readings keep shifting. It must be the activity of that blasted aurora. 
KIRK: Bones, that's it. Aurora, changing colour. 
MCCOY: Jim? Aurora? What

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: Spock, feed in the data without mentioning the colour change symptoms.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK [OC]: That's it, Doctor. The colour change symptoms were misleading the computer. 
MCCOY: Because they were caused by the aurora. Spock, there was an aurora nineteen years ago. I remember 
SPOCK [OC]: Which brought on the particular plague just as this aurora has brought it on. 
MCCOY: I didn't do it! Spock, the disease, what is it? What's the antidote?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: That's the problem, Doctor. There is no known antidote. However, Doctor, do you remember a certain Kol-Tai? A man you treated for Saurian virus?

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Yes, I think I do. But what has that got to do with anything?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Possibly nothing. However, Kol-Tai did survive the first plague.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Spock, I see what you mean. Saurian virus antibodies in his blood, that's what made him immune.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: I presume, Doctor, that you have a supply of live Saurian virus antibodies in your laboratory?

[Sickbay]

(McCoy gives the patients an injection, and their skin colour returns to normal. They are soon up and about again) 
KIRK: Bones, you did it! 
KOL-TAI: Again. 
DEMOS: Thank you, Doctor.

Captain's log, stardate 5276.8. Preparing to beam aboard the Enterprise, following the Dramian ceremonies honouring Doctor Leonard McCoy for his significant achievements in the field of interstellar medicine.

[Dramia]

DRAMIAN: We of Dramia wish to thank you, Doctor, for your discovery of the antidote which frees us from future attacks of the auroral plague.
MCCOY: Thank Mister Spock too. And Captain Kirk. 
DRAMIAN: We will even forget about the unorthodox manner of your release, Doctor. 
KIRK: And we'll forget about a certain stowaway. 
DEMOS: We must apologise. 
MCCOY: I think it's time we got aboard ship, isn't it, Jim? 
KIRK: Beam us aboard, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, Captain.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Gentlemen, I don't know about you, but I'm ready to get back to Starbase. 
SCOTT: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: And I'm ready to get back to some of that monotonous, old, routine Sickbay work. 
SPOCK: Including, I would hope, some of that monotonous, old dispensing of the regular vitamin rations to the crew. 
MCCOY: What is that supposed to mean? 
SPOCK: Well, you have been derelict in your duties of late, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Spock, you know as well as I do what we've all just been through. 
SPOCK: Hippocrates would not have approved of lame excuses, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Why, that, that. Jim, if I'm ever in jail again, don't send that Vulcan to release me. Just let me rot.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Practical Joker
Stardate: 3183.3
Original Airdate: 21 Sep, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 3183.3. Our present mission, a routine geological survey of type four asteroids, is nearing completion. The cruise has been uneventful and we are now approaching the final asteroid in our assigned sector, a full seventy two hours ahead of schedule.
[Bridge]

(As they approach the asteroid, three Romulan warships become visible, and Enterprise is attacked) 
KIRK: Scotty, give us maximum shielding. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, bring us about to a new heading of nine oh two mark six. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. Mister Spock, who the devil's attacking us? 
SPOCK: Romulans, Captain. They were apparently lying in wait on the far side of that asteroid.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: A cold-blooded ambush. Let's give the heathens a fight they won't soon forget.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Negative. We've suffered damage and we're outnumbered three to one. I think this is an instance where discretion is the better part of valour. 
UHURA: Captain, I've established contact with the Romulan commander. 
KIRK: I demand an explanation for this unprovoked attack. 
COMMANDER [on viewscreen]: Unprovoked? My dear Captain, your ship trespassed into Romulan territory, in defiance of your own treaty. We had no choice but to defend ourselves. 
KIRK: We came nowhere near Romulan territory. I deny all charges and plan to file a detailed complaint with the Federation. 
COMMANDER [on viewscreen]: You seem to forget that invasion of Romulan territory is punishable by death. 
(More weapons hits) 
SPOCK: Captain, the Romulan ships are overtaking us. At close range our deflectors will be unable to repel their attack. 
SULU: Captain Kirk! An unidentified energy field is drifting into our path. 
SPOCK: Strange. It's not on the charts. 
KIRK: But it may be just what we need to shake the Romulans. Batten down, we're going through. 
(Enterprise sails into a foggy area with electrical discharges) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, what are our chances? 
SPOCK: The field is composed of highly charged subatomic particles. If the density grows no worse we should be able to ride it out.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Hold together, little darling, hold together.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise emerges from the other side) 
SULU: It worked. The Romulans turned back rather than risk the energy field. 
KIRK: Reduce speed to sub warp cruise. We'll lay by here for repairs. 
UHURA: After that ride, I could use some repairs.

[Officer's mess]

(A sumptuous feast with platters of fruit and dessert still on the table, and drinking glasses that look like some vases I've got) 
KIRK: How are the repairs progressing, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Just fine, Captain. We should be in tip-top shape in another twenty four hours, no thanks to those Romulan vultures. 
MCCOY: Nevertheless, we're still in business and I propose a toast to a narrow escape. 
UHURA: Cheers! 
KIRK: Salud! 
UHURA: To us. 
SULU: He, this glass just leaked all over me. 
UHURA: How do you like that? So did mine. 
SCOTT: And mine. 
SPOCK: It appears we're all victims of a rather bizarre coincidence. The odds against something like this happening are astronomical. 
MCCOY: What coincidence? We used to pull stunts like this in medical school with trick glasses. Don't look now, but we've got a practical joker in our midst. 
KIRK: Now let's not jump to conclusions, Bones. Yes, we all got wet, so what's the joke? 
SCOTT: Twas probably a minor slip-up of the food synthesisers. I'll check it out after lunch. 
KIRK: Fine. Right now why don't we all eat up before our food gets cold. 
(But before the fork reaches his lips, it bends and the food slides off) 
MCCOY: Another coincidence, Jim? 
KIRK: I'm beginning to wonder, Bones, I am beginning to wonder.

Captain's log, supplemental. Unusual incidents have continued to plague our crew. Even the perceptive Mister Spock has fallen victim to these simple-minded pranks.

[Bridge]

(Spock has his eyes pressed against a binocular device) 
SPOCK: Curious, very curious. 
KIRK: What have you got there, Spock? 
SPOCK: Captain, I found this device on my console. It seems to serve no useful function, and 
(When he lifts his face from the eye pieces, of course there are rings around his eyes and laughter from the crew) 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Spock, it's your

As these little surprises have grown more and more frequent, our crew members have found them less and less amusing.

[Mess hall]

AREX: Officer Scott, won't you join us for lunch? 
SCOTT: No thanks, Arex. I'm just going to grab a sandwich and get me back to work. 
AREX: Very good. 
SCOTT: One grilled cheese on rye. What the blazes? Hold it just a doggone minute! 
(All sorts of foods are being thrown from the dispenser and piling up around his feet) 
SCOTT: I said one sandwich, that's all. Someone turn off this infernal food factory. 
M'RESS: Excuse me for laughing, but 
SCOTT: Go ahead and laugh. Big joke. I'll bet you two are responsible for this, ay? 
AREX: Hey, wait a minute. We didn't cause this to happen. 
SCOTT: Tell that to the Captain. I'm reporting both of you just as soon as I 
(Then he gets a custard pie in the face)

The situation has reached the point where friends are accusing friends. The entire crew is on edge, myself included.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Okay, this whole thing has gone far enough! 
AREX: Sir? 
KIRK: I've just picked up my clean uniforms from the service chute and when I put this one on, I discovered this. 
(In big bold letters on his back - Kirk is a Jerk. The comm. system bursts into laughter) 
KIRK: When you all finish laughing, I'd appreciate an explanation. 
SPOCK: Captain, I never laugh. 
KIRK: Well somebody certainly did. 
M'RESS: Captain Kirk, look behind you. 
KIRK: Really, M'Ress, you're going to have to be a little more clever than that. 
AREX: This is no joke, sir. 
KIRK: Now what? 
(Vapour is coming from under the bridge doors)

[Corridor]

(Kirk and Spock exit the turbolift) 
SPOCK: It appears to be a legitimate fog. Perhaps the humidification system is 
KIRK: Here, Spock. Whoops! 
SPOCK: Amazing. This deck is covered with ice. 
KIRK: And it was almost covered with us. I don't know what's going on here, but it's going to stop before someone's hurt. 
(laughter from the comm. system)
KIRK: There's that laugh again. Something awfully familiar about it. What do you make of all this, Spock? 
SPOCK: The evidence all points to one guilty party, Captain. 
KIRK: You mean you know who's behind these stunts? 
SPOCK: Not who, what. I believe our practical joker is the Enterprise itself. 
KIRK: Of course. That laugh, it's the voice of our main computer. 
SPOCK: Precisely. 
KIRK: Spock, I want all hands at their stations. We're going to run a complete systems check from bow to stern and get to the bottom of this.

[Outside Rec Room]

(A light by the door sign says unoccupied) 
UHURA: Good, the Rec Room is unoccupied. At least we can enjoy our off-hour without worrying about practical jokes. 
MCCOY: Just what the doctor ordered. 
(They go inside and the doors close just as) 
SPOCK [OC]: All hands to your stations. This is a general alert. Repeat, all hands to your

[Rec room]

(In the big, empty room, oblivious to the announcement) 
SULU: Well, what'll it be, a swim at the beach? 
(It's a holodeck. They get a beach with waves and seagulls) 
MCCOY: It is lovely, but I'm more in the mood for a nice quiet walk in the woods. 
UHURA: Doctor, that sounds perfect. 
SULU: Then woods it is. 
(He works the panel, and they get their grass and trees. 
MCCOY: Ah, now that's more like it. Shall we?

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Captain, crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura are still in the Recreation room and do not answer the call to stations. 
KIRK: That's strange. Repeat the call. 
M'RESS: Doctor McCoy, Lieutenant Uhura and Helmsman Sulu, report to the Bridge immediately. Doctor McCoy, Lieutenant Uhura and

[Rec room - forest]

SULU: It's so peaceful. So relaxing. 
MCCOY: And best of all, no practical jokes. 
(laughter) 
UHURA: What was that? 
SULU: I'm not sure. It almost sounded like someone chuckling. 
MCCOY: It was probably just one of the audio tapes rewinding. Come on, there's lots more to see. 
(Out of their sight, a pit in the ground gets covered by fallen branches, then leaves. Laughter as the three walk towards it) 
MCCOY: Lieutenant Uhura, I have to hand it to you. This is just what the doctor would have ordered. 
(Then they fall into the pit) 
SULU: There it is again. Someone is definitely laughing at us. 
MCCOY: I'm going to get to the bottom of this right now. 
COMPUTER: Get to the bottom of this (laughs) 
MCCOY: Okay, whoever you are, so we fell for your juvenile joke. Now get us out. 
COMPUTER: Fell for my joke. (laughs)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock, quiz the central computer about McCoy and the others. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Question. Why are we unable to communicate with crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura? 
COMPUTER: Answer. That is for me to know and for you to find out. 
KIRK: Did I hear that right? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. The dysfunction is more severe than I thought. Question. Are you deliberately holding our missing crewmembers prisoner? 
COMPUTER: I'll never tell. 
KIRK: Let me try. This is Captain James T Kirk speaking. You are programmed to obey any direct order I may give, correct? 
COMPUTER: Correct. 
KIRK: Very well. I order you to release crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura immediately. 
COMPUTER: Say please. 
KIRK: Well, I'll be 
SPOCK: I suggest compliance, Captain. 
KIRK: Pu-leese. 
COMPUTER: Say pretty please with sugar on. 
(Instead, he calls up Scott on the main viewer) 
KIRK: Scotty. 
SCOTT [on viewscreen]: Aye, Captain. 
KIRK: We've got serious trouble with the main computer. We have reason to believe it's kidnapped three of our crew. 
SCOTT [on viewscreen]: Kidnapped? Blue blazes. 
KIRK: To prevent any further trouble, I want you to shut down all logic functions until we can get a handle on the problem. 
SCOTT [on viewscreen]: Aye, aye, sir.

[Rec room - forest]

(Uhura and Sulu help McCoy climb from the pit) 
UHURA: There. 
MCCOY: When I get my hands on the clown who's behind all this, I'll put him in Sickbay for a week. 
COMPUTER: Temper, temper. Perhaps this will cool you off. 
(And now they are in the middle of a blizzard and up to their knees in snow) 
SULU: We've got a whiteout condition here. How will we ever find the exit?

[Computer room]

SCOTT: Time for a nap, old girl. Captain's orders. 
(Then the gravity goes off) 
SCOTT: (into communicator) Engineering to Bridge. Emergency.

[Bridge]

KIRK: (into communicator) Scotty, what the devil's going on?

[Computer room]

SCOTT: Beats me, sir. Our gravity just reversed polarity all by itself.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: An obvious defensive manoeuvre by the computer. 
KIRK: This is crazy. Our own computer's declared war on us and I haven't the slightest idea why. 
SPOCK: I have a theory, Captain, but first I suggest that if Officer Scott moves away from the computer, it might feel less threatened. 
KIRK: Scotty, vacate the computer room.

[Computer room]

SCOTT: Vacate sir? But

[Bridge]

KIRK: On the double, Officer Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye sir.

[Corridor]

(Scott crawls along the ceiling into the corridor, where he promptly falls to the floor) 
SCOTT: You bloody big scatterbrain. Make up your monumental mind.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Congratulations, Spock. Your strategy worked. Now would you tell me what's happening to my ship? 
SPOCK: You recall that energy field we passed through? 
KIRK: Certainly. 
SPOCK: Apparently, subatomic particles from that field have invaded our computer's circuits, much like bacteria infect living matter. As a result, the Enterprise is suffering the electronic equivalent of a nervous breakdown. 
KIRK: What can we do to stop it? 
SPOCK: I'm afraid I don't know, Captain. Its illogical behaviour precludes a logical solution.

[Rec room - arctic]

SULU: The temperature must be twenty below and its still dropping. 
UHURA: Look, this is still a room, no matter how it appears. If we can travel long enough in one direction, we're bound to reach a wall. Then we can feel our way to an exit. 
MCCOY: Then let's move before we all turn into icicles.

[Bridge]

CREWMAN [OC]: Search party seven to Bridge. 
KIRK: Bridge here. Report. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Captain, our sensors show the missing crewmembers are in the Rec Room all right, but the door's jammed. 
KIRK: Okay, stand by. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering. 
KIRK: Scotty, we need a work crew with power tools to open a frozen door. Have them report to, report to 
(Kirk starts giggling) 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain, what is it? Are you all (laughs) Are you 
(As everyone else starts laughing, Spock raises an eyebrow) 
KIRK: Come on, Spock. Where's that Vulcan sense of humour? 
SPOCK: Hmm. Just as I thought. 
AREX: Spock, what, what are you mumbling about? 
SPOCK: Our air is being pumped full of nitrous oxide. Better known as laughing gas. But it's no laughing matter, especially for Vulcans.

[Rec room - arctic]

(The three trapped people also have the giggles) 
UHURA: This blizzard keeps getting worse. 
SULU: I know. If we don't, if we don't keep moving we're going to freeze.

Captain's log, supplemental. Somehow Spock managed to switch on our emergency air before collapsing from the effects of the gas. The fresh air quickly revived us, although it'll be exhausted in another six hours.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We must cure the computer by then or there's no telling what we'll be forced to breathe next. Scotty, how's the door coming? 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain, none of our power tools work.

[Corridor]

SCOTT: Some kind of energy drain set up by the ship. We're giving it a mighty go with the crowbars, though. 
KIRK [OC]: Keep at it. We've got three people in there whose lives may depend on it.

[Rec room - arctic]

MCCOY: You two better go on without me. My old legs have given out. 
UHURA: But Doctor, we can't. 
(And the computer takes pity on them, They are in a formal garden) 
SULU: Well, what do you know? Come on, Doctor, we're finally getting out of here. 
MCCOY: I hate to be a pessimist, but that may not be as easy as you think. 
(Correction, not a garden, a maze. But the doors are pried open) 
MCCOY: Then again

[Bridge]

KIRK: You don't know how good it is to have you back on the Bridge, alive and well. 
MCCOY: We're as happy about it as you are, Jim. I'd just like to make one request. 
KIRK: Sure, Bones, what? 
MCCOY: Could you turn up the heat? 
KIRK: I'll see what I can 
SPOCK: Captain, we're underway. 
UHURA: Engine room reports all engines shut down, yet they're firing. 
SULU: Captain, the helm no longer responds. We're coming about to a new heading. 
KIRK: As soon as our course stabilizes, give me a reading. 
SULU: Course stabilizing at one one four mark twelve. 
SPOCK: We're heading back to the Neutral Zone. 
KIRK: And you can bet those Romulan ships will be gunning for us. 
(After a while) 
SPOCK: Sensors are picking up three ships, Captain. Magnification shows them to be Romulan warships. 
SULU: We're decelerating, sir. 
UHURA: Main cargo hatches are opening. I'll put them on the viewing screen. 
MCCOY: Jim, what in heaven's name is going on? 
KIRK: You know as much as I do, Bones. 
(Something floats out of the hatch, then expands to become a huge version of the Enterprise) 
SPOCK: The Romulan ships have halted their attack. Apparently the sight of a spacecraft twenty times their size has given them second thoughts. 
MCCOY: Okay, I admit it's an effective bluff, but so what? As soon as they figure it out, they'll destroy the balloon and us. 
KIRK: Wait a minute. There is a method to this madness. 
SPOCK: Please elaborate, Captain. 
KIRK: The Enterprise is pulling her biggest practical joke of all, and this time the joke's on the Romulans, the same Romulan ships that damaged the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: Are you suggesting that the Enterprise is seeking revenge? 
KIRK: What else? She's going to make fools of the Romulans by having them attack a balloon, and Romulans fear disgrace more than death.

[Romulan Bridge]

CENTURION: Commander, there's no radio response from the large ship. 
ROMULAN: Very well, it has refused surrender. Advance at attack speed. 
(They shoot, and it deflates amid computer laughter) 
ROMULAN: We've been tricked. After them. I want that Federation ship blasted into space dust.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: The Romulans are giving chase. 
MCCOY: They must be furious to follow us this deep into Federation territory. 
KIRK: (panic stricken) I don't care about the Romulans, I just want to avoid that energy field we passed through before. Helmsman, do you have a fix on it? 
SULU: Yes, Captain. Our course will take us nowhere near it. 
KIRK: Good! I couldn't face going through there again. 
COMPUTER: The energy field frightens you? 
KIRK: It petrifies me. 
COMPUTER: How interesting. 
SULU: We're changing course, to a direct bearing on the energy field. 
KIRK: No! We can't! 
(They do, and so do the Romulans)

[Romulan Bridge]

CENTURION: Commander, our instruments are useless in this field. We've lost contact with the Federation ship. 
ROMULAN: We've got to clear this field before our ships break up. Bring us about on a heading for home.

[Bridge]

(The computer is laughing, then) 
COMPUTER: My circuits! You tricked me, Kirk. How could you? 
MCCOY: What the devil is going on? 
KIRK: Bones, the worst thing you can do to a practical joker is to play a practical joke on them. 
COMPUTER: It's not fair. 
(Enterprise leaves the energy field) 
SULU: The controls are responding now. 
SPOCK: And I'm getting normal function in all computer modes. That last pass through the energy field apparently reversed all effects. 
MCCOY: Well done, Jim. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm picking up strange transmissions from the Romulan warships. Listen. 
ROMULAN [OC]: Turn off those food synthesisers! We're knee deep in desserts and they're still pouring out! 
MCCOY: Shall we tell them how they can reverse the effects of the field, Jim? 
KIRK: Yes, but later. Let's not spoil their fun just yet.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Bem
Stardate: 7403.6 
Original Airdate: Sep 14, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 7403.6. The Enterprise is on a series of exploratory and contact missions. Travelling with us as an independent observer is a member of a recently contacted alien species, Honorary Commander Ari bn Bem. He's from the planet Pandro in the Garo Seven system. We have taken up orbit around Delta Theta Three, a newly discovered class M planet. A previous scouting mission has reported possible aboriginal life forms here, and the Enterprise is to investigate and report.
[Briefing room]

(Enterprise is orbiting a very green planet) 
KIRK: Sensors report several groupings of aborigines. They may be dangerous. So I want all of us to avoid any unnecessary risks. But these monitoring devices have to be planted. Lieutenant Uhura will be tracking us throughout. Now, if there's any trouble of any kind, beam up immediately. Don't try to be a hero. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

(Bem is a green upright biped in a jumpsuit, with a red crest and slit irises to his eyes. Not quite the Bug Eyed Monster his name implies!) 
BEM: Kirk Captain, settings are almost complete. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, what are you doing here? 
BEM: This one has decided to accompany contact team for observation of same. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, you were assigned to this ship as an independent observer, yet you have spent the past six missions in your quarters. You haven't done any observing at all until now, when we're dealing with possibly a very dangerous planet. 
BEM: Patience. Every planet is dangerous to the ignorant. This one has decided that the nexus is now. Must observe workings of starship and crew. 
KIRK: This mission is not for casual observers. It could be hazardous. 
BEM: Am prepared. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, this is not a joyride, a pleasure excursion. I cannot let you beam down to the planet without adequate protection. I'm sure you understand the diplomatic consequences if anything were to happen to you while you are under my protection. 
BEM: Understanding it is, Captain, but this one remains adamant. Am prepared to accompany. 
KIRK: This is an odd time to remain adamant. All right, let's go. There's a planet waiting for us. 
BEM: This one has already set controls, Mister Scotty. 
SCOTT: Everything appears to be all right, sir. Co-ordinates are locked on the landing site. 
KIRK: Energise.

[Planet surface]

(Three of the party materialise at the edge of a lake, but Kirk and Spock materialise over the water and fall in. Bem jumps in after them) 
BEM: Assistance is offered. 
(Underwater, Bem's lower half walks around the back of Kirk and Spock, and two sinuous arms take their phasers and communicators, replacing them with fakes?) 
KIRK: We're all right. 
(Back on dry land) 
KIRK: In the future, Commander Bem, you will leave the operation of the transporter to Mister Scott, or one of the regular transporter crew. 
SCOTT: Captain, Lieutenant Uhura reports some peculiar activity here on the planet. 
KIRK: (taking Scott's communicator) What is it, Lieutenant?

[Bridge]

UHURA: Lieutenant Arex has been tracking a non-network sensory stasis. It's hardly more than a flicker, and it's several thousand kilometres west of your position. 
KIRK [OC]: Say again. 
UHURA: An anomaly, sir. It resembles a sensor field, but without a scanning grid or other point of reference. 
KIRK [OC]: Is it moving? 
AREX: Brownian movement only, Captain. No discernible direction.

[Planet surface]

SPOCK: The implication is that there is something else on this planet. Perhaps something intelligent. 
KIRK: It might be just an atmospheric effect. Some kind of electrical storm. We've seen unidentified planetary phenomena before that have resembled intelligent activity.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Keep watching it, Lieutenant Uhura, and put the ship on Yellow Alert. We'll continue the contact mission for now, but notify us immediately if there's any change in the situation. Kirk out.

[Planet surface]

(The landing party is walking along) 
SPOCK: The rain forest is especially thick in his district. Life on this planet appears to be geologically younger than one would expect, given the age of this star. 
(Something is watching them) 
BEM: This one is picking up readings of a large group of life forms directly ahead. 
KIRK: All right. We must take care not to be seen. Hey, Bem. Bem, come back! Scotty, Sulu, stay here with the monitoring devices. Come on, Spock. 
(They give chase) 
SPOCK: He won't get far in there. 
KIRK: Let's go. 
(But Bem divides into several smaller pieces and floats through the tangle of stems and trunks with ease before rejoining into one) 
KIRK: He's gone. 
SPOCK: He would have had to go through here to escape. 
KIRK: There he is. I don't know how he did it, but he got through. Come on, we'll have to go around. That Pandronian's actions just don't make sense. 
SPOCK: They might to another Pandronian, Captain. I believe he went that way, Captain. On the other hand 
KIRK: I think we've lost him. That way. 
(Bem is surrounded by Lizard people with spears) 
SPOCK: It appears to be a native food-gathering party. 
KIRK: Yes, and the food they have gathered is Bem.

[Bridge]

AREX: Lieutenant Uhura, I'm reading increased activity on the surface of the planet. The sensory anomaly appears to be expanding. 
UHURA: Contact the landing party.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT: Commander Scott here. 
UHURA [OC]: Mister Scott, where's the Captain?

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: He's been separated from us. Commander Bem ran off for some reason. They're in the forest. 
UHURA: The Captain is not answering his communicator and it does not show up on the scanning grid. It's as if its responder has been disconnected. We're picking up increased activity from that anomaly. Is Mister Spock with the Captain?

[Planet surface]

SCOTT: Aye. They both went after Commander Bem.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Lieutenant Arex, start a sensor scan for Captain Kirk and Mister Spock. Landing party, prepare to beam up. 
SCOTT [OC]: Lieutenant Uhura, we could track the Captain down. 
UHURA: I'm sorry, Mister Scott, that's not procedure. We can't take chances.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT: We're talking about the Captain.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I know it, but we have to follow his orders. Stand by to beam up. 
SCOTT: Standing by.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk and Spock are still hiding in foliage) 
KIRK: Maybe we can beam him out of there. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. This isn't my communicator. 
SPOCK: These are not Enterprise communicators, Captain. They are fakes. Excellent, but non-working forgeries. 
KIRK: This communicator's been on my belt since we beamed down. 
SPOCK: Our phasers don't work either. 
KIRK: Our phasers and communicators have been switched for phonies and Commander Bem has run off. We've been separated from the rest of the landing party. Mister Spock, something funny is going on. 
SPOCK: An alternate course of action would appear to be advisable. 
KIRK: But Commander Bem's difficulty appears to be genuine. Phasers or not, we have to rescue him. We're going to have to follow them. 
(Bem is being marched away by the lizard people) 
SPOCK: One of us could go back to contact Mister Scott. 
KIRK: We can't risk it, not while they're moving. We may never be able to find them again. 
(Later, they are lying on a hill overlooking a wicker and thatched hut village) 
SPOCK: These aborigines appear to be in a late primitive state. Obviously intelligent, they seem to have a basic language and social structure. I would assume fairly well developed mores and traditions as well. 
KIRK: Commander Bem seems to be a model prisoner. 
(Bem is in a small wooden cage, just big enough to stand up and turn around in) 
KIRK: We'll have to wait until nightfall.

[Village - night]

BEM: Kirk Captain? 
KIRK: Shut up. We're rescuing you. 
BEM: You are interfering with observations. 
SPOCK: This is how you observe, by being captured? 
BEM: As logical a way as any, Spock Commander. 
KIRK: (opening the door) I don't think Starfleet would approve. Come on. 
(But the lizard people have caught them) 
KIRK: Uh oh.

[Village - day]

(Kirk and Spock have their own personal cages) 
KIRK: How come we always end up like this? 
SPOCK: I assume that's a rhetorical question, Captain, not requiring an answer. 
KIRK: I was just expressing my curiosity at our ability to get into these kind of situations. 
SPOCK: Fate, Captain. Fate. 
KIRK: Fate, Spock? 
SPOCK: I believe that is the correct Earth term. 
KIRK: Why don't you try your Vulcan nerve pinch. 
SPOCK: Captain, I am only a Vulcan. There are limits. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, I'm afraid that we're not going to be able to rescue you. 
BEM: Good intentions, Kirk Captain, are not enough. Planet Pandro will be much displeased. Starfleet told us you are best captain in fleet. Actions to date belie this. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, you are responsible for the situation we are in. You disobeyed orders by running off. Your attitude has been extremely abrasive and, I don't know how you did it. You replaced our phasers and communicators with phonies. 
BEM: You place too much dependence, Kirk Captain, on phasers and communicators. 
KIRK: Either one could solve our problems right now. 
BEM: If that is all. (taking the items out of his pockets) 
KIRK: Commander Bem, if you had those two phasers and those communicators all this time, why didn't you use them to escape? 
BEM: Sir, this one does not demean oneself by the use of casual violence to accomplish goals. But you may demean yourself if you wish. 
KIRK: I want those phasers and communicators now. 
BEM: Compliance with orders is. This one must disassemble. 
(and while his top half hangs in mid air, Bem's lower half runs over to Kirk and small arms hand over the phasers and communicators) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
(Spock is given his equipment) 
SPOCK: Remarkable. Commander Bem is a colony creature. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, if you could split yourself into separate parts, why didn't you escape on your own earlier? 
BEM: And deny you the opportunity to prove your value to planet Pandro by rescuing this one from possibly dangerous situation? 
KIRK: This is not a laboratory, Commander Bem. This is a hostile planet, and representatives of Starfleet are not experimental animals for you to test! Consider yourself under arrest. Protective custody, to keep you from any more escapades. Mister Spock, keep watch.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Lieutenant Arex, have you found them yet? 
AREX: No, sir. It is a big planet. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, that sensory anomaly, it's expanded to cover the whole northern continent. 
SCOTT: What's that? 
UHURA: We can't get any readings at all now. 
SCOTT: Aye, that tears it. The Loch Ness monster couldn't get through that.

[Village]

{Kirk, Spock and Bem are hiding behind a hut) 
KIRK: There's some kind of interference on all channels. We're going to have to get out of this village on our own. 
SPOCK: I doubt we'll be able to do so without being seen, Captain. 
KIRK: I concur, Mister Spock. Set phasers to stun, just in case. 
(They are spotted) 
KIRK: Fire. 
(But a dark red glow envelopes them) 
ENTITY: No, do not use your weapons. 
KIRK: I'm paralysed. 
SPOCK: We're held in stasis, Captain. 
ENTITY: Put away your weapons. These are my children. Do not harm them. 
KIRK: Who are you? 
ENTITY: Who are you? 
KIRK: I am Captain James Tiberius Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock and honorary Commander Ari bn Bem of the planet Pandro. 
ENTITY: Why are you here? Why do you disturb this place? 
KIRK: It is our mission. We must classify this planet. We have to test it. 
ENTITY: Classify? What gives you the right to intrude here? This planet is not for your use. My children are not for your tests. Your weapons will be nullified. 
(The phasers disappear and the glow stops) 
KIRK: There are times, Mister Spock, when I think I should have been a librarian. 
SPOCK: The job of librarian would be no less challenging, Captain, but it would undoubtedly be a lot less dangerous.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Have you found the Captain yet? 
AREX: I have located emanations that could be Captain Kirk's and another set that could be Mister Spock's, but the sensory anomaly has interfered with our detection devices so that positive identification remains impossible. 
UHURA: Which means? 
SCOTT: I think he said 'maybe'. Well, that convinces me. Ready a security squad. We're going down there. Issue phaser rifles.

[Village]

(Kirk, Spock and Bem are back in their cages) 
BEM: You have mishandled situation again, Kirk Captain. This one judges you not an intelligent commander. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, Mister Spock and I are here because we thought that you were worth rescuing. It was more to preserve the diplomatic relations between the Federation and planet Pandro than from any great affection for yourself. 
BEM: Planet Pandro is unconcerned as to fate of this one. Pandro will not have dealings with inefficient and inferior species. You have failed everything you have attempted. You have not rescued this one and you have not been able to handle local aborigines. 
(Bem splits himself up and walks over to Kirk's cage) 
BEM: This one wishes you, what is the Earth word? Luck. You will require it. 
(And he or they walk away) 
KIRK: Wait! Unlock us. Set us free! 
SPOCK: Captain, perhaps we can attract the attention of the alien intelligence and reason with it. 
KIRK: It's worth a try. (into communicator) Kirk to alien intelligence. This is Captain James Tiberius Kirk calling the ruling intelligence of this planet. Answer me, please. 
SPOCK: Perhaps an offering of some sort, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, whatever we're dealing with, I don't think we can bribe it. We must be honest. Kirk to alien intelligence. I don't think it's strong enough to be noticeable. 
SPOCK: Hmm. If we connect our two communicators in series, we can give off a high energy burst which might work, but it will also render the communicators powerless in a very short time. 
KIRK: Do it. 
(Kirk throws his communicator to Spock, and gets it back with the other stuck to it, very quickly) 
KIRK: This is Captain James Tiberius Kirk calling the ruling intelligence of this planet. Do you hear me? Kirk to entity. Kirk to entity. 
ENTITY: I am here. 
KIRK: We apologise for intruding. We did not realise the situation. We will leave. We will tell others of our kind not to bother you here. 
ENTITY: This is good. Go. Go now and do not return. 
KIRK: Just one thing. There is a third member of our group. 
ENTITY: I detect no third intelligence. 
KIRK: He has fled. 
ENTITY: You must go. You must not interfere with my children. I will allow you to contact your ship. Go now! 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise. Uhura here. Captain, are you all right? 
KIRK: Stand by. We're not leaving without Bem. He is our responsibility. We can't leave him here. Beam down a security squad with heavy duty tricorders set for Pandronian scanning. 
UHURA [OC]: Aye, aye, Captain. 
(Four figures materialise) 
SCOTT: Captain, are you all right? 
(Scott phasers the cage open) 
KIRK: Thanks, Scotty. Spread out. Find Commander Bem. He's split into three individual parts. 
SCOTT: Beg pardon, sir? 
KIRK: He's some kind of colony creature. And take care not to injure any of the natives here. Phasers on lightest possible stun setting. And don't fire unless absolutely necessary. 
(No sooner do they spread out to search, than the Lizard people attack. They have captured Bem. The Starfleet people use their phasers and the Lizard people drop their spears and flee) 
KIRK: Let's get out of here before we make any more trouble. 
BEM: Embarrassment results. This one is shamed. This one has failed in its judgement. 
KIRK: You have endangered all of us by your actions, and you have forced us to interfere with the natives of a planet that deserves prime directive protection. 
BEM: This one exists by its own standards. 
KIRK: Not on my ship you don't. 
ENTITY: You are still here? You are still interfering? I am angered. 
KIRK: We could not leave one of our own behind. It is our responsibility to take care of our own, just as it is your responsibility to take care of yours. We could not leave him here where he might further interfere with your, your children. 
ENTITY: Yes, you have some wisdom, James Tiberius Kirk. The lost one is found, then? 
KIRK: He is found, and we will leave. 
BEM: This one has greatly erred. The mission was to judge, and right of judgement was not conferred. This one must disassemble unity. 
KIRK: Disassemble? 
BEM: Never to exist again as a co-operation. This unity is defective. This unity must cease to exist. 
ENTITY: No, do not destroy yourself. 
BEM: But this one has erred. This one has tried to judge Kirk and Spock and been found wanting himself. This one has acted badly. 
ENTITY: Yes. You have erred, but if you disassemble, you cannot learn from your error. Errors demand recognition so that they will not be repeated. 
BEM: You do not demand punishment? 
ENTITY: Punishment? What is punishment? Revenge? Intelligent beings need no revenge. Punishment is necessary only where learning cannot occur without it. You are behind that. My children here are not. That is why you must leave, so as not to corrupt their development with concepts that they are not yet ready for. 
BEM: I am humbled. 
KIRK: We will go now. 
ENTITY: Yes. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us up.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Stand by to break orbit. Mister Spock, classify this planet as being strictly quarantined. Under no circumstances may any Federation vessel approach. 
BEM: Pandro will respect that also. 
SPOCK: Captain, I compliment you on a wise decision. 
KIRK: It is necessary. Not only for them, but for us as well. 
SPOCK: Fascinating, Captain. A highly advanced alien entity using this particular system as a laboratory for guiding another race to intelligence. Almost a god, you might say. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, the difference is meaningless. In comparison, we're all still children. 
BEM: In this one's case, Kirk Captain, this one is still an eggling. 
KIRK: Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Let's go home. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm picking up a message. 
KIRK: Put it on audio, Lieutenant Uhura. 
ENTITY: Go in peace. Yes. Go in peace. You have learned much. Be proud.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Pirates of Orion
Stardate: 6334.1
Original Airdate: 7 Sep, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 6334.1. The outbreak of choriocytosis aboard the Enterprise seems to be under control. Doctor McCoy says the disease is no longer even as serious as pneumonia, and there should be no problem completing our present mission, representing the Federation at the dedication ceremonies for the new Academy of Science on Deneb Five.
[Bridge]

KIRK: Status, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: All systems affirmative, Captain. The Enterprise is on course and on schedule. 
KIRK: It'll be nice to play diplomat for a change, eh, Spock? 
(Spock grimaces in pain and falls to the floor, unconscious. 
KIRK: Kirk to Sickbay. Emergency!

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Jim, choriocytosis is a strange disease. In races with iron-based blood, it's practically nothing, but in others 
KIRK: Get to the point, Bones. 
MCCOY: Spock has contracted the disease. It's fatal to Vulcans. 
KIRK: Are you sure? 
MCCOY: I've triple-checked, Jim. I wish to God I was wrong. Spock's blood is copper-based. The infection enters the blood stream, and encases the cells so they can't carry oxygen. 
KIRK: The result is suffocation. 
MCCOY: Yes, Jim. 
KIRK: Is there any cure? 
MCCOY: One. A naturally occurring drug called strobolin. But it's only found on a few planets in the galaxy. 
KIRK: Library computer. 
COMPUTER: Working. 
KIRK: What is the nearest strobolin supply planet to our present position? 
COMPUTER: Beta Canopus. Four solar days away at maximum warp. 
KIRK: How long can Spock last without the drug? 
MCCOY: I can give him injections of a synthesised drug that would slow the disease. But after two days the body builds up an immunity. It loses its effectiveness. By the end of the third day, the disease will be irreversible. 
KIRK: It'll take four days to get the drug, but Spock will die in three. There's got to be a way. 
MCCOY: What about a rendezvous? 
KIRK: Of course. If we cant go out of our way to get the drug in time, there must be another ship closer to Beta Canopus. Kirk to Bridge. Get me Starfleet, Lieutenant.

Captain's log, supplemental. We've arranged to get the strobolin needed to save Mister Spock's life. The starship Potemkin has already picked up the drug and will transfer it to a freighter, the SS Huron, for delivery to the Enterprise.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: What will the symptoms be, Bones? 
MCCOY: Increasing tiredness, steadily decreasing efficiency, all the symptoms of working in an oxygen-deficient atmosphere. Kind of like the test you had to pass back at the Academy. 
(A knock at the door) 
KIRK: Come. 
SPOCK: You wished to see me, sir? 
KIRK: Yes, Spock. Sit down. We've arranged a rendezvous to pick up the drug you need. 
SPOCK: I trust it will not affect our scheduled arrival at Deneb Five. 
KIRK: No, it won't. 
SPOCK: Will that be all, Captain? 
KIRK: One other thing. I've cut your duty time in half. 
SPOCK: Captain, that won't be necessary. I'm quite able 
MCCOY: No arguments, Spock. Doctor's orders. 
SPOCK: Anything else, sir? 
KIRK: That's all, Spock. Dismissed. 
(Spock leaves) 
KIRK: It'll hurt seeing him like that. 
MCCOY: I know. As much as it might seem at times that I can't stand that pointy-eared encyclopaedia, I don't want to see that happen to him.

[Huron Bridge]

(The crew are in starfleet uniforms) 
NUMBER ONE: (its a woman) ETA at rendezvous point, two hours and seven minutes, Captain. 
O'SHEA: Good. That's a pretty important drug we've got for the Enterprise. I'd just as soon get rid of it and get back to shipping just dilithium. 
HELMSMAN: Sir, our sensors are picking up a ship ahead. 
O'SHEA: Could the Enterprise be that early? 
HELMSMAN: I'm not sure it's the Enterprise, sir. It's too far away to tell. 
O'SHEA: Where's it headed? 
HELMSMAN: Toward us, sir. 
O'SHEA: Keep an eye on it, Lieutenant.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Time to rendezvous, Mister Arex? 
AREX: One hour forty three minutes, sir. 
KIRK: I hate to ask, but 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. We'll squeeze a wee bit more speed out of her. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy to Bridge. 
KIRK: What is it, Bones? 
MCCOY [OC]: Tell Spock it's time for another shot. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. Spock. 
SPOCK: I was conserving energy, Captain. 
KIRK: McCoy wants you in Sickbay.

[Huron Bridge]

HELMSMAN: Sensor readout, Captain. It's not the Enterprise closing on us, sir. 
O'SHEA: Another starship? 
HELMSMAN: No, sir. It's an alien ship, a design I've never seen before. 
O'SHEA: Put it on the screen. 
(A wicked-looking bat-like design in red appears) 
O'SHEA: You're sure it's following us? 
NUMBER ONE: It's on an intercept course now, Captain. And at this speed, they'll get us before we get to the Enterprise.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: This won't hurt a bit, Spock. 
SPOCK: An unnecessary assurance, Doctor, in addition to being untrue. 
MCCOY: That's the last time I waste my bedside manner on a Vulcan. 
SPOCK: Such restraint would be welcome. 
MCCOY: Not so fast, Spock. Lie there quietly. 
(The monitor buzzes then goes quiet) 
MCCOY: Well, that's not too bad. Back to work, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Doctor. 
(Spock leaves) 
CHAPEL: The drug isn't working any more. 
MCCOY: I know, Christine. I know. Don't worry, we'll have the strobolin soon.

[Huron Bridge]

HELMSMAN: They've increased speed, sir, closing fast. 
O'SHEA: Open hailing frequencies again. 
NUMBER ONE: Open, sir. 
O'SHEA: To unidentified alien vessel. This is Captain O'Shea of the SS Huron. Please state your registry and purpose. Repeat. Please identify yourself and your purpose. 
NUMBER ONE: It's no use, sir. They're receiving but they're not answering. 
O'SHEA: Well, we've got a hold full of dilithium and that drug to protect. Evasive manoeuvres. 
(But the alien stays with them) 
HELMSMAN: No good, Captain. Send out an emergency signal to the Enterprise. 
NUMBER ONE: Yes, sir. Message from the alien, sir. 
O'SHEA: Let's hear it. 
ORION [OC]: Prepare to surrender your cargo or be destroyed.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, I'm getting a signal from the Huron. It's an emergency beacon, automated. 
KIRK: Try ship to ship. 
UHURA: I did, sir. No response. 
KIRK: Sensor report, Mister Spock. Are they at the rendezvous point? 
SPOCK: No, sir. They hadn't reached it. 
KIRK: Compute new course, Mister Arex. Let's see what's going on. 
(They arrive at the Huron) 
SPOCK: The Huron's power levels are at bare minimum for life support, Captain. I'm picking up metallic debris. 
KIRK: Was the Huron attacked? 
SPOCK: Based on present data, I would say yes. 
KIRK: Spock, are you all right? 
SPOCK: Captain, I (collapses) 
UHURA: Bridge to Sickbay. Emergency.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: We've got to have that drug, Jim. The synthetic is useless now. 
KIRK: Do what you can, Bones. 
MCCOY: Blasted Vulcan. Why couldn't you have red blood like any normal human?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Status? 
AREX: (at Spock's station) The Huron's engines are dead. Emergency battery power is operating life support systems at a low but acceptable level. 
UHURA: Still unable to make contact, sir. 
KIRK: Is anyone on that ship alive? 
AREX: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, Lieutenant Uhura, come with me. Mister Sulu, you have the conn. We're beaming over.

[Huron Bridge]

(The officers are slumped over their consoles) 
KIRK: Scotty, check the cargo hold. See if the drug is there. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. (leaves) 
KIRK: Uhura, see if you can get a playback of the log. I want to know what happened here. Nurse, attend to the wounded.

[Huron Cargo hold]

(It's many stories high - and empty) 
SCOTT: Scott to Captain Kirk.

[Huron Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk here. Report, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: There's nothing down here, Captain. 
KIRK: No drug?

[Huron Cargo hold]

SCOTT: No drug and no dilithium shipment. The hold is completely empty.

[Huron Bridge]

KIRK: All right. Report back up here. 
UHURA: This screen is out, sir. But we can take the tapes and play them back on the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Good. Nurse, how is he? 
CHAPEL: He needs surgery, Captain, but he'll live. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Ready to beam over. Have the medical team standing by.

[Sickbay]

(The beds are full now) 
KIRK: How's O'Shea, Bones? 
MCCOY: He'll pull through. Jim, what about Spock? If we don't have that drug in twenty hours, he'll die.

Captain's log, stardate 6335.6. The Huron has been left as space junk, its engines sabotaged. Captain O'Shea has no idea who attacked his ship, but the intruder must be found and the precious cargo retrieved.

[Bridge]

AREX: I've run the Huron's sensor tapes through the computer, sir. The intruder ship is a new design, never before encountered by Federation shipping. 
KIRK: Can we track it? 
AREX: Yes, sir. The intruder ship produces a unique trail of radioactive waste, now bearing two one two degrees mark one seven five. 
KIRK: Lay in that course, Sulu. Ahead warp factor seven.

[McCoy's office]

KIRK: How is he, Bones? 
MCCOY: Not good, Jim. I'll have to put a respirator on him to help him breathe soon. 
KIRK: We're following the intruder ship's trail. 
MCCOY: We don't even know it it's the right one. 
KIRK: It's got to be. 
MCCOY: What's the use of being a doctor, anyway? We're only as good as our drugs and technology make us. Underneath all the tricks, I might as well be practising in the Middle Ages. 
KIRK: If you really believed that, Bones, you wouldn't still be a doctor after twenty five years.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Report. 
SULU: Radioactive residue still bearing two one two degrees mark one seven five. 
KIRK: Increase speed to warp eight. 
SULU: The trail goes through the asteroid belt, Captain. 
KIRK: A good place for an intruder to hide, wouldn't you say, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Perfect. And a long range sensor can show that the radioactive residue stops in the middle of the belt. 
KIRK: Deflectors up. Yellow Alert. Cut speed to warp one. 
(There's an explosion outside) 
KIRK: What was that? 
AREX: These asteroids are composed of a highly unstable mineral combination, sir. They explode upon impact with each other. 
KIRK: Or anything else. Keep those deflectors up, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Captain, if the power of those rocks could be harnessed, they'd make a fantastic source of energy. 
KIRK: Also make quite a weapon. Steady as she goes, Sulu. 
(Sailing through the asteroids, a beam hits the shields) 
SCOTT: Deflectors holding, sir. 
KIRK: Hard to port, Sulu. Let's face them head on. 
(The red bat-ship comes on the viewscreen) 
KIRK: Hold position. Analysis, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Standard phasers, sir. Weak, though. A diffused, low quality beam. Our deflectors can stop them. 
AREX: I recognise the ship's markings, Captain. It's an Orion. 
KIRK: Orion. 
UHURA: They're hailing us, Captain. 
KIRK: Put it on visual, Lieutenant. 
(These Orions are blue-skinned, wearing green suits and half-helmets) 
ORION [on viewscreen]: Enterprise, we demand that you cease your pursuit immediately. I must protest, as a representative of a neutral planet. 
KIRK: This is Captain Kirk. For a neutral, you were pretty quick to fire your phasers. 
ORION [on viewscreen]: We couldn't be sure you were non-hostile. 
KIRK: Orion's neutrality has been in dispute ever since the affair regarding the Coridan planets and the Babel Conference of stardate 3850.3. Yesterday, a Federation freighter was attacked in this quadrant, its cargo hijacked. As the first alien ship encountered, we require you to submit to search, as per Babel Resolution A12. Reply. 
ORION [on viewscreen]: We have no Federation cargo aboard. Orions are not thieves. If you don't cease this harassment, we will lodge a formal protest with your government. 
KIRK: Hold on that, Uhura. Tell them to stand by. 
SULU: Sensors picking up the dilithium in their hold, sir. 
KIRK: What about the drug? 
SULU: If they have it, it's too small an amount to detect. 
KIRK: Uhura, open the channel. 
UHURA: Channel open, sir. 
KIRK: Enterprise to Orion vessel. I have a proposal to make. If you do have the Huron's cargo, there were some perishable drugs in it that we desperately need.

[Orion Bridge]

ORION: What would these drugs be worth to you if we had them? 
KIRK [on viewscreen]: You keep the dilithium shipment, no mention of the whole incident to Starfleet or in my log, plus and additional galactic standard weight container of dilithium as payment for the drug. 
ORION: We get what we want, plus our neutrality remains intact? We will consider your offer. 
KIRK [on viewscreen]: Very well. Kirk out.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk to Sickbay. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy here. 
KIRK: Bones, how much time? 
MCCOY [OC]: Less than an hour, Jim. His body functions are slipping fast now. 
KIRK: Just hold out a little longer. 
UHURA: The Orions are hailing us, sir. 
KIRK: Put it on the screen, Lieutenant. 
ORION [on viewscreen]: Your proposal requires us to trust you. It's obvious we can't. 
KIRK: Do you have a counterproposal? 
ORION [on viewscreen]: Yes. A face to face exchange between you and me. 
KIRK: Face to face? Where?

[Orion Bridge]

ORION: On the large asteroid near our ships. We could beam down simultaneously, and I would hand you the drug myself. You wouldn't even have to give us the extra dilithium crystals. Now it's your turn to consider.

[Briefing room]

MCCOY: It's got to be a trap, Jim. 
SCOTT: No doubt of it, sir. 
KIRK: It could be a trap, but it's the only way to get the drug. And Spock will die if we don't. 
MCCOY: You've already made up your mind, haven't you, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, but not without precautions. I'll keep my communicator channel open so you can hear what goes on. Keep the transporter locked on me, and if anything goes wrong, Scotty, I'm trusting you. 
MCCOY: If this doesn't work, we could lose you and Spock. 
KIRK: If we don't try, Spock doesn't have a chance.

[Orion Bridge]

ORION: Status, Lieutenant? 
LIEUTENANT: We can't outshoot the Enterprise and we can't outrun it, sir. 
ORION: You're saying we can't escape? 
LIEUTENANT: No, sir, we can't. 
ORION: Orion's official neutrality comes before this ship or its crew. We can't take Kirk's word that he won't report this incident to Starfleet. 
LIEUTENANT: The only way to do that is to destroy the Enterprise, and the only way to do that is to destroy ourselves, too. 
ORION: Do you have a plan, Lieutenant? 
LIEUTENANT: Yes, sir. These asteroids are made of highly explosive minerals. 
ORION: Can we convert the asteroid we're orbiting into a doomsday bomb that will destroy both ships? 
LIEUTENANT: Yes, sir, but 
ORION: But what? 
LIEUTENANT: Analysis of the asteroid shows that it can't be detonated by our phasers. 
ORION: What will it take? 
LIEUTENANT: A powerful explosive right on the asteroid's surface. I could rig a remote control device. 
ORION: No. I'll take it with me when I beam down to meet Captain Kirk. I want the satisfaction of seeing his face when I tell him he and his crew are going to die with us. And I'm sure they don't trust us. If Kirk and I are on the asteroid, the Enterprise will stay close by. 
LIEUTENANT: Very well, sir. I'll get to work.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Enterprise to Orion vessel. 
ORION [OC]: What is your answer, Captain? 
KIRK: I accept your terms. 
ORION [OC]: Very well. We will synchronise co-ordinates and beam down in fifteen minutes. 
MCCOY: Jim, we don't have a lot of time. Spock 
ORION [on viewscreen]: Fifteen minutes or not at all, Captain. 
KIRK: All right. Kirk out.

[Asteroid surface]

(The two Captains beam down with full life support fields on) 
ORION: The drug, as promised, Captain. Scan it if you wish.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Pure strobolin. I'll take that now and we can both beam up.

[Asteroid surface]

ORION: No, Captain. I can't trust that you won't report this incident to Starfleet. If you do, my planet will lose its neutrality and be subject to Federation retaliation. 
KIRK: You can't escape the Enterprise. 
ORION: But we can destroy it.

[Bridge]

AREX: Picking up unusual sensor readings, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: What is it? 
AREX: There's dilithium down there with them, sir.

[Asteroid surface]

ORION: I have an explosive device in my backpack that will start a molecular chain reaction and detonate this asteroid. Your ship will be destroyed. 
KIRK: But so will yours. 
ORION: All unsuccessful Orion missions end in suicide. 
(Kirk grapples with him, to stop him pressing the button on his belt)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The dilithium. Transporter room, pinpoint those crystals down there and beam them up!

[Transporter room]

CHIEF: Pinpointed, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: Beam them up now, lad.

[Asteroid surface]

(The Orion finally breaks free of Kirk and presses the button. Nothing happens) 
KIRK: Scotty, energise. 
(Kirk grabs the Orion again and they are beamed up)

[Transporter room]

(Scott and two security guards are there) 
SCOTT: Captain, it was close. 
KIRK: Let's get up to the Bridge.

[Orion Bridge]

ENSIGN: They're gone, sir. 
LIEUTENANT: Gone? 
ENSIGN: I was scanning as you ordered, and they just disappeared off the asteroid. Both the Earther and the Captain. 
LIEUTENANT: He's been captured, no doubt. Arm our self-destruct system, Ensign.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Open hailing frequencies, Uhura. 
(The Orion goes to put a capsule in his mouth) 
KIRK: Grab him! Poison. I'm sure your ship is ready to self-destruct, Captain, but if it does, your crew will die for nothing. We're not going to let you commit suicide. Whether they die or not, you'll still stand trial, and Orion's little game of neutrality and piracy is over. 
UHURA: I have the Orion vessel, sir. 
KIRK: This is Captain Kirk. We have your captain as prisoner. Your choice, sir. 
ORION: Disarm the self-destruct system. Prepare to surrender to the Enterprise.

Captain's log, stardate 6336.2. The Orion crew is in our brig, their ship in tow, and the Enterprise is back on course for Deneb Five.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Spock, there's no way you can deny it. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy, I 
MCCOY: I've waited a long time for this, and you're not going to cheat me. 
KIRK: Am I interrupting something? 
SPOCK: Nothing but Doctor McCoy's gloating. 
MCCOY: Spock, that green blood of yours may have saved you before, but this time it almost did you in. You can't deny it. 
SPOCK: I still prefer my physiological structure to yours. 
KIRK: Yes, gentlemen, things are back to normal. 
MCCOY: He's as stubborn as ever. (laughs)

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.



The Jihad
Stardate: 5683.1
Original Airdate: 12 Jan, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 5683.1. We're making a rendezvous with the Vedala asteroid on a unique mission. The Vedala are the oldest space faring race we know. They say something incredibly dangerous to the safety of our galaxy is developing and they have sent for selected specialists, including Spock and myself.
[Transporter room]

KIRK: Maintain the Enterprise in this position, Sulu. If Spock and I survive, we'll return here. If not, Mister Scott, you have your orders. Energise.

[Forest glade]

(Five other people are already there. A tall golden bird man, a light green insectoid, a feline, a humanoid female and a Lizard. The forest is purple-barked trees, giant fungi and red shrubs. The ground is blue) 
VEDALA: (feline) Welcome, Captain James Kirk and Commander Spock. I will introduce you. First, Tchar. (Gold bird) Hereditary prince of the Skorr, master of the eerie. Sord. (Reptile) 
EM3GREEN: (insectoid) I was sentenced to this mad expedition. My people are cautious, what you would call cowards. 
VEDALA: As an expert lockpick and thief, you are welcome. Em3green. Lara (the female) is a hunter. She has a flawless directional sense, a necessary skill where you are going. Mister Spock was chosen for his analytical mind and scientific expertise. Captain Kirk for his leadership and adaptability. Tchar will explain your mission. 
TCHAR: Two centuries past, my people, the Skorr, were great warriors. We had advanced military technology and we could breed vast armies rapidly. But today we are a civilised people because of Alar. (makes a gesture) 
KIRK: A religious leader, was he not? 
TCHAR: Our salvation and our teacher. He brought us peace. He made us great. He died, and we made him immortal. 
VEDALA: Alar's brain patterns were recorded before his death, in a piece of indurite sculpture. 
TCHAR: Our Soul, the Soul of the Skorr, was stolen. 
VEDALA: The theft triggered a racial fury in the Skorr. They are preparing for war. 
KIRK: Against whom? 
TCHAR: The known galaxy. 
SPOCK: It is a very real threat. In two standard years, the existing Skorr could breed an army of two hundred billion warriors. 
TCHAR: My government fears this, so the theft of the Soul of Alar has been kept secret. But we must recover it before my people discover it gone and go mad, launch a jihad, a holy war on the galaxy. 
KIRK: Who took the Soul? 
VEDALA: Unknown. The motive, as Tchar has said, to provoke a holy war. 
SPOCK: Is there any clue to its location? 
VEDALA: A mad planet, Geologically unstable. Constant earthquakes, gravitic shifts, tidal waves. The temperature varies from twenty Kelvin to two hundred and four above. Somewhere on that planet, the Soul of Alar is hidden. Three expeditions have tried to recover it. Three expeditions have been lost. You are the next, if you agree. 
KIRK: The Vedala are a powerful race. Why haven't your people retrieved the Soul? 
VEDALA: My people could not survive on that planet. You have a chance. 
KIRK: We agree. 
VEDALA: Then it is done. 
(She vanishes)

[Barren planet]

(The adventurers are gathered around an open vehicle. The ground is flat with occasional faceted crystal rocks) 
TCHAR: I cannot feel the Soul. We are nowhere near it. 
SPOCK: That is to be expected. The surface of this planet shifts constantly. Even the Vedala are not certain where the Soul is. 
KIRK: It has directional equipment that keys on indurite. 
SORD: I like this place, it's got variety. 
EM3GREEN: I can handle the machine. 
SPOCK: Our direction is indicated. 
EM3GREEN: It's phasing, unfocusing. 
(The directional indicator blows up) 
KIRK: Why did the Vedala call this the Mad planet? 
LARA: Means nothing. I can tell the way. That way. 
TCHAR: Are you certain, human? 
LARA: For sure, birdman. I can't get lost. I can't be fooled about directions. That's why I'm here. 
SPOCK: The Vedala would not have chosen Lara if her abilities were less than perfect. 
KIRK: Agreed, but we're forced to travel on the ground. I want an overview. 
TCHAR: I will scout overhead. 
(Tchar flies off) 
SPOCK: The Vedala will have been efficient in equipping us. I will acquaint myself with our supplies. 
LARA: Vulcans. Never liked them much myself. Cold-blooded critters, all of them. 
KIRK: I wouldn't say that. Mister Spock is a unique personality. 
LARA: But not human like you and me. Maybe you got different customs. My world there's a lot of females, not so many men. Come we find a man attractive, we say so. I'm saying so. How do you find me? 
KIRK: Fascinating. But we're not here on a pleasure trip, Lara. 
LARA: All the more reason to take what pleasure there might be in it. 
SPOCK: I have checked the supplies, Captain. As expected, they are adequate and there are weapons. 
KIRK: Against what? There's no life on this planet. 
SPOCK: But there is, Captain. Ourselves. And there may be other things guarding the Soul of Alar.

(They are driving through a rain storm) 
LARA: Real weather. 
KIRK: And a half. 
(Then suddenly the rain stops, the sun comes out and a volcano erupts in the distance) 
EM3GREEN: We'll all die here. 
SPOCK: A statistical probability. 
LARA: You ever quote anything besides statistics, Vulcan? 
SPOCK: Yes. But philosophy and poetry are not appropriate here. 
TCHAR: I can see something. (lands on a cliff) I can sense it, the Soul of Alar is there. 
(There is a golden glow from an obvious construction) 
LARA: Something's coming. 
SPOCK: A lava flow. Volcanic action is to be expected. 
LARA: Never mind that. You got to get us out of here. 
KIRK: We might be able to divert the lava flow with a barricade. Tchar, get us a visual estimate! 
SPOCK: Such a diversion would be of short duration, Captain. And I must point out, the vehicle lacks sufficient speed to escape. 
KIRK: Not if we used all of the power pack's energy for one high speed run. 
SPOCK: It is possible, but the rewiring of the power leads is complex and time-consuming. 
EM3GREEN: I could do it, if you can diagram the schematics, sir. 
SPOCK: Yes, quickly then. Terminal M3 red, lead to diode shunt A37. Cross connect to A14. 
TCHAR: Kirk. There is a ravine sixty metres to your left. If it can be blocked, the lava will flow past those rocks to one side. 
KIRK: Got it. Sord. 
SORD: I heard him. 
SPOCK: Carefully, Em. One missed connection could destroy us. 
EM3GREEN: I know. I'm trying to be careful. 
(Kirk, Sord and Lara push boulders off the cliff and create a rock fall to block the ravine. 
LARA: I figure we've bought ourselves a little time. Few minutes. 
SPOCK: It's re-rigged. Hurry. 
(They rush back to the transport as the lava comes over the top of the barrier) 
SORD: Come on, insect, move it. 
LARA: Twenty one degrees east. Fifty metres to get out of the flow path. 
TCHAR: Hurry. 
KIRK: Go. 
(They race ahead of the red hot molten rock until they hit an obstruction and Spock is thrown from the vehicle) 
SPOCK: Leave, all of you. 
(Kirk runs back for him) 
KIRK: Not without you. 
SPOCK: Captain, you must get the others away. 
KIRK: We're all getting away. 
(The vehicle stalls on a shale slope, and they get out and up to safety) 
LARA: Close. 
SPOCK: Far too close, Captain. I appreciate your action on my behalf, but your first duty is to the group and the mission. 
KIRK: Quite right, Spock. And that responsibility includes not losing the best science officer in Starfleet. 
SORD: You two going to argue honours, or are we going to get on with it? 
(A snowstorm starts up) 
LARA: Oh! And I was just going to ask, what next? 
KIRK: We move on. 
EM3GREEN: The power pack is burned out. 
KIRK: We'll have to carry the equipment. 
(Once again, Tchar flies off to scout ahead) 
KIRK: Anything? 
TCHAR: Wait. Yes, yes! 
(He sees the building. Then the ground opens under Em3Green and he nearly falls into a ravine. Tchar lifts him back on land) 
EM3GREEN: I can't go any farther. I'm not even afraid anymore. Just very tired. 
LARA: Come on, Em, a bit more. 
EM3GREEN: No. I'm finished. 
KIRK: Sorry, Em. We'll be needing you. Sord. 
EM3GREEN: Let me go. 
SORD: Hang on. (Picks him up and carries him) 
TCHAR: I'll go ahead. 
(Further on) 
KIRK: What is it? 
SORD: Not sure. Thought I saw something move in the brush. 
SPOCK: There is no life on this planet. 
SORD: Guess you're right. This planet just gets on your nerves. 
TCHAR: I can sense the Soul. I will fly ahead, examine the building, and meet you on the way. 
KIRK: Tchar, be careful. We need you, too. 
(Tchar flies off) 
KIRK: We're tired, sore, hurt and angry, but we're also just about there. I'll scout ahead. Everybody else stay together, keep moving. 
LARA: I'll go with you. Remember, scouting's my job. By rights, I should be doing it alone. 
(Kirk and Lara run off) 
SPOCK: Sord, what did you think you saw back there? 
SORD: Don't know, Vulcan. A shape, couldn't really make it out. Probably seeing things, like Kirk figures. 
SPOCK: There should be no life on this planet. 
EM3GREEN: You keep saying that. 
SPOCK: Yes. The Vedala would have informed us if there were any live beings here we should know of. 
SORD: Maybe the Vedala didn't know about it. 
SPOCK: That is an impossibility. 
SORD: Think so? I'm not so sure.

[Near the building]

(There is no snow here) 
KIRK: That's it. End of a long, hard journey. 
LARA: We still have to go back, James. I tell you true, I find you an attractive man. If we were together, the trip would be easier. And if anything happened, why, we'd have some green memories. 
KIRK: I already have a lot of green memories. 
LARA: Oh. 
KIRK: Maybe some other time, Lara. We still have our work cut out for us here. 
(The rest of the group have arrived) 
SPOCK: Is this not the shape of your people's primitive temples? 
TCHAR: Yes. The entrance should be (he points). Can you open it? 
EM3GREEN: There is no lock I can't pick. 
(He gets to work with all six arms) 
KIRK: What is it? 
EM3GREEN: I'm opening the locks. 
LARA: Wonderful. 
EM3GREEN: No. They're on a timed trigger. If I don't get all the locks open quickly enough, it explodes. 
(A group of purple flying dragons attack) 
SORD: Keep working. I'll cover you. 
(Kirk and Lara shoot the dragons, and they explode) 
KIRK: They're mechanical. 
SPOCK: The Vedala were right. There are no living creatures here, only the mechanised sentinels. 
SORD: Hurry, small one. 
(Kirk stops Spock from firing at the dragon attacking Tchar) 
KIRK: We'll hit Tchar. 
LARA: What happened to Tchar? 
KIRK: There's no way to tell from here. The mechanical exploded. We can't reach the roof from the outside. We'll have to try to get to him from the interior. 
EM3GREEN: Done. 
(The doors open) 
KIRK: We could rest awhile. Lara? 
LARA: No. We've come this far. 
SORD: Let's finish it. Or give this deadfall a chance to finish us. 
SPOCK: I too would prefer to press on, Captain. The mechanicals on guard may be what Sord saw tracking us earlier. Or there may be others. In either case, it would be more advantageous to avoid another encounter.

[Temple]

(An object is hanging in mid-air, glowing) 
SORD: Pretty. How do we reach it? 
SPOCK: The walls are not climbable. 
KIRK: Not without special equipment, which we don't have. Either we find a way to reach it from here, or we fail. 
(The door closes behind them) 
EM3GREEN: No lock on the inside. We are prisoners. 
KIRK: That's right. 
LARA: You're not exactly surprised. 
KIRK: Three previous expeditions tried and were lost. The planet is a natural trap, but that's not enough. 
SPOCK: You suggest sabotage, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes, from inside each expedition. Remember Spock, you were the one who said there are no life forms here except ourselves. 
EM3GREEN: One of us? 
KIRK: It's likely. 
SPOCK: Approximately eighty two point five percent in favour of the possibility. 
KIRK: But it doesn't matter if we reach the Soul. Apparently the others didn't get this far. 
(He spots a ledge around the inside of the building, and jumps up to it. The others join him, except) 
SORD: I'm not built for that sort of thing. I'll wait for you down here. 
(As they inch along the foot-deep ledge, there is a quake) 
SPOCK: The planet is geologically unstable. This structure is inherently flexible, enabling it to withstand earthquakes. 
EM3GREEN: It can, but what about us? 
KIRK: Look. 
EM3GREEN: We can almost reach it. 
LARA: Maybe I can get a line on it. 
SPOCK: It is locked in a force field. Your rope would merely bounce off it. 
KIRK: Spock, will our combined phasers disrupt the field? 
SPOCK: I cannot define the field's energy base, Captain, but 
(An energy weapon blasts a hole in the wall near them) 
KIRK: The last piece of sabotage. I know who you are. A thousand feet up, no method of reaching the Soul, except by air, by flight. Tchar. 
(The golden birdman comes down and hovers) 
LARA: Tchar. In the name of the Seven Gods, why? 
KIRK: You stole this. You'll start a bloody crusade across the galaxy. Tell us why, Tchar. 
TCHAR: The Skorr were a warrior race. Now what are we? Slaves to the illusion of peace. Cowards, soft in our comfort. This sick dream has stolen our souls. I am Tchar, hereditary prince of the Skorr, leader of battles. I will lead my people into glory, to avenge our history. 
SPOCK: Most of them will be killed. The warrior races of the Federation will rise up to battle the Skorr. 
TCHAR: Yes. A noble death to win a great dream. We will live no longer like worms crawling in the dirt. We will conquer. You will die. But you have my respect. You fought well. You die in grace. 
(They all start to float upwards) 
EM3GREEN: He's turned on a gravity neutraliser in the building. 
TCHAR: Now you can fly and fight as a Skorr. 
SORD: No offence, little ones, but let me tackle him. 
KIRK: Not in free fall. 
EM3GREEN: Use your phaser on him. 
KIRK: Too risky. He controls the fortress phaser bank, and they're set on kill. No, it has to be on his terms. Spock, how long since you've worked out in null-gravity combat exercises? 
SPOCK: Last week with you, Captain. 
KIRK: Let's go. 
(They push off from the walls and manage to grab Tchar by his wings. Then Kirk hooks his into the Soul) 
KIRK: Call for retrieval, now. 
(Lara presses a button) 
TCHAR: Let me die. 
KIRK: You're going back with us. 
(They all vanish in a golden haze)

[Forest glade]

(The Soul is in the middle of the group. Tchar is in a transparent box) 
VEDALA: We give you thanks. The Soul of Alar is returned to his people. 
KIRK: What about Tchar? How are you going to punish him? 
VEDALA: He will be healed of his madness. He is proud, brave. That he will remain, but he will also be sane and whole again. (Tchar vanishes) We cannot reward you. For the good of the Skorr, this must be forever secret. You have only our thanks. 
SORD: Got nowhere to keep a medal, anyway. But there'll be questions. 
VEDALA: No. You will return and you will see, there will be no questions, no medals, only our thanks. And in time, even the memory will be gone from you. 
LARA: Goodbye, James Kirk. Too bad.

[Transporter room]

SULU: Captain. Mister Spock, what happened? 
KIRK: What do you mean? 
SULU: You transported over and came right back. Did they call it off? 
SPOCK: How long were we gone? 
SULU: Long? About two minutes, I guess. I don't understand. 
KIRK: The Vedala changed their minds. The danger is past. Back to your stations. We have a lot of other places to go.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Eye of the Beholder
Stardate: 5501.2
Original Airdate: 5 Jan, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 5501.2. We are orbiting the planet Lactra Seven. Our mission is to discover the whereabouts or fate of a six member science crew. Voice contact having yielded nothing, a landing party beamed aboard to see if the deserted ship's log and computers could give us any information.
[Briefing room]

MARKEL [on monitor]: It is now thirty two minutes since our last contact with the three members of our crew on the planet surface. As the senior officer aboard, I, Lieutenant Commander Markel, have made the following decision. The three remaining crew members, myself included, will beam down to effect a rescue. If, for any reason, we do not return, be it known that 
KIRK: It was against all orders. 
MCCOY: The need was apparently desperate. 
KIRK: The Captain of a ship, no matter his rank, must follow the book. 
SPOCK: A capability, I'm afraid, out of the reach of most humans. 
MCCOY: You Vulcans are the most impossible, unimaginative 
KIRK: Bones, that's not helping the situation. 
MCCOY: Sorry, Jim. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, what can we expect to find on Lactra Seven? 
SPOCK: It's a class M planet, gravity Earth normal, atmosphere Earth normal. There is no previous information available except that which the survey ship logged before her crew left her. 
KIRK: According to their lot, they beamed down six weeks ago. 
SPOCK: Five weeks, three days, two hours and four minutes to be exact, Captain. 
KIRK: Careless of me, Mister Spock. Planetary life forms? 
SPOCK: It certainly can support life forms. But I cannot speculate on what type without further data. Mister Arex is conducting a sensor scan now. 
KIRK: It will take too long to do a comprehensive scan. I want a landing party to at least beam down to the last known co-ordinates the other crew used. 
MCCOY: Jim, if the others are lost, why take the risk? 
KIRK: Because they may not be dead. We have to find out. 
MCCOY: It's still a risk. 
KIRK: That's why we're here, Bones. Gentlemen, we'll travel light. Phasers, tricorders, communicators and medical kit.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: You have the co-ordinates from the other ship, Scotty. Put us down in the same place. 
SCOTT: Sir, Mister Arex has located a variety of life forms on the planet. No large groups or city clusters yet. 
KIRK: Then we'll beam back up. 
SPOCK: Logical, Captain. 
KIRK: Energise, Mister Scott.

[Planet surface]

(It looks like marsh land. Green, with steam rising from pools of water) 
KIRK: Everyone all right? 
MCCOY: Ten yards the other way and we'd be boiled alive. 
SPOCK: Unusual that such a lake would exist under these planetary conditions. 
KIRK: Er, Spock. 
(A large red one-eyed monster has risen from the main body of water. It has Big Teeth) 
SPOCK: Most remarkable. 
KIRK: It may be able to navigate on land. 
MCCOY: I know it can. 
(Big Red rushes them) 
KIRK: Phasers on stun! 
(The three beams hit it, it roars a few times then dives back underwater) 
KIRK: Let's get out of here. 
(On an elegant rock 'bridge' formation) 
MCCOY: Not a very welcome sight, is it? 
KIRK: I'll see if I can pick up anything on my communicator. This is Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise, calling the crew of the Ariel. Come in please. Come in. 
MCCOY: They're answering. (static) Did you get a fix on that, Jim? 
KIRK: Yes. That way. 
MCCOY: Strange you didn't get a voice reply. 
SPOCK: There could be many reasons why we did not. 
MCCOY: Never mind counting them. 
(They cross a desert area and meet another creature, with three toes and a blue face, which roars at them) 
KIRK: Phasers on stun! 
SPOCK: It seems to gather strength from our phasers. In my opinion. 
KIRK: Concentrate on the underside of the neck. 
(They run away, and it eventually falls over) 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: Right here. You all right? 
SPOCK: I am undamaged. Where is Doctor McCoy? 
KIRK: It came from back there. 
(McCoy is trapped under the creature's body) 
KIRK: We'll get you out, Bones. 
(Brute force is no use) 
SPOCK: It would appear a more logical solution is in order, Captain. We don't lift the tail off, we dig the Doctor out. 
(They do) 
MCCOY: Thanks. The air was running out under there. 
KIRK: Were you hurt? 
MCCOY: No, just surprised. It isn't every day a dinosaur falls on you. This is a pretty strange place. 
KIRK: Agreed. How much desert do we have to cross, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: One point one kilometres, sir. 
KIRK: We'd better pick up our pace. There's no place for cover if we meet any other creatures. The bearing on the signal we heard is that way. 
(As they walk on) 
SPOCK: Captain, the beast, did it seem familiar to you? 
KIRK: I've seen something very like it on Canopus Three, but that's light years from here. Still, this desert area is the same as on Canopus. 
SPOCK: You propose the same environment necessarily prompts the same evolution? 
MCCOY: My shoes are full of sand. 
SPOCK: Doctor, your lack of scientific interest is amazing. 
MCCOY: I'll be happy to discuss that with you, Mister Spock, next time you drop in to my medical lab. 
(At the waterside. gazing at their reflections in the still water) 
MCCOY: Oh, this seems a lot more friendly than the desert. 
SPOCK: Captain, doesn't it strike you strange that two such different ecologies could co-exist so closely? 
KIRK: I've seen stranger things, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Merely an observation, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Enterprise. Scott here. 
KIRK: Any new information, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: There is a large concentration of life forms ninety eight point five kilometres north east of you. Apparently a city, or a central gathering place. Nothing else yet. 
KIRK: North east. That's where we got the signal from. All right, Scotty, keep scanning. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: I don't like it, Jim. Why only one short signal and no more? 
KIRK: I don't know. But at least they're alive. 
SPOCK: Apparently alive. We cannot be sure. 
KIRK: I choose to believe they are. 
SPOCK: Allow me to test the water first, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Go ahead, but it looks clear enough. 
SPOCK: Captain, the water is too pure. 
MCCOY: It tastes just fine. 
SPOCK: Nonetheless, it is too pure. 
KIRK: In other words, it's too good to be true. 
SPOCK: Correct, Captain. And a rain forest this close to a desert is also illogical. It is my theory that what we have seen since we landed was manufactured, not created. 
MCCOY: Terraforming isn't new. It implies intelligent life forms. 
KIRK: Yes, but terraforming usually follows a pattern. This seems like random choice. 
SPOCK: Unless, of course, the random choice is the pattern. 
MCCOY: Spock, do you ever say anything straight out? 
SPOCK: I thought I just did, Doctor. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, please. We have work to do. 
SPOCK: The desperation of the science ship's first landing party is now obvious. 
KIRK: We're still alive, aren't we? 
MCCOY: That's true. 
SPOCK: However, not exactly safe. 
(Flying creatures are approaching) 
KIRK: Phasers on full stun. 
MCCOY: They're useless. 
KIRK: No. They're like the dragons on Maravel. The stun charge should get them. 
(They fly off) 
MCCOY: That's strange. 
SPOCK: By observation alone, it appears they hit an invisible force field. 
KIRK: If that's true, Spock, then 
(The landing party are grabbed by the tentacles of three giant slug-like creatures) 
MCCOY: We've been travelling for hours. Where are they taking us? 
KIRK: Towards the north-west, toward the city Scotty reported. 
SPOCK: Captain, there it is. 
(A garish lump of candy pink, red and purple surrounded by conifers) 
KIRK: That must be five square kilometres. 
SPOCK: If these are the builders, it is an admirable feat.

[City]

(Spock, Kirk and McCoy are deposited under a curved purple roof, onto a blue tiled floor) 
MCCOY: They don't seem very interested in communicating with us. If they can communicate at all. 
SPOCK: Perhaps not in a way we understand. I keep receiving impressions. 
KIRK: Any ideas, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Well, I've got one and I definitely don't like it. I'd guess they're doing exactly what we would do. 
KIRK: Which is? 
MCCOY: Well, if we came upon an alien creature we'd never seen before, the first thing we'd do is to make sure it was free of harmful bacteria. Then we'd see if it was intelligent. 
SPOCK: Congratulations, Doctor. A most logical assumption. 
KIRK: A more important question, gentlemen, is whether or not there's a way out of here. A force field. It seems harmless enough. 
MCCOY: So do the bars of a jail, unless you're on the inside. 
KIRK: And we are definitely on the inside. 
MCCOY: Hey! Somebody! Anybody! 
SPOCK: A wasteful use of energy, Doctor. I believe they can hear you without your shouting. 
KIRK: You said you were picking up impressions. Are the aliens telepathic? 
SPOCK: I've come to the conclusion they are, Captain. But the speed at which the thoughts flow is too great for me to comprehend except for the most fleeting image. 
KIRK: Surely we can communicate with them some way. 
SPOCK: They appear to be as advanced beyond Earth civilisation as you are from a colony of ants. 
MCCOY: Then what were all those other creatures where we beamed down? 
SPOCK: You will recall we recognised at least two species from vastly different planets. The environment did not appear natural to this planet. A technology this advanced could easily travel to other star systems to collect specimens. 
MCCOY: You mean it's some kind of a zoo? 
SPOCK: Exactly. 
KIRK: They took our phasers, communicators and other equipment so they must have some idea we're intelligent. 
SPOCK: Not necessarily, Captain. They could have taken them for the same reason you would take a sharp object away from a child. 
MCCOY: Or maybe they want to see how our toys work. 
SPOCK: That too is a possibility. 
(The slugs return, and drag them out of the holding cell) 
MCCOY: Now wait a minute, you, you. Hey! 
KIRK: We've got to communicate with them. 
(As they are carried along past other creatures in cells) 
MCCOY: Well, so much for mythology. 
SPOCK: I find them strangely attractive. 
KIRK: Look ahead. 
(They are deposited into their own zoo compound) 
KIRK: Better do what they want for now, anyway. They activated another force field. 
MCCOY: This is real grass. 
SPOCK: Yes, Doctor. This area has been carefully prepared for human types. The aliens are safe now. 
MCCOY: How's that? 
SPOCK: They are safe because we are now exhibits in a zoo. 
MCCOY: A zoo? I'm no animal. 
KIRK: On this planet, Bones, they seem to be the people and we are the animals. 
MARKEL: Hello, I'm Lieutenant Commander Tom Markel. This is our biologist, Randi Bryce. 
KIRK: James Kirk, Captain of the Enterprise. First Officer Spock. Our physician, Doctor McCoy. 
MARKEL: We've been expecting you. 
KIRK: You've what? 
BRYCE: We heard your communicator signal. 
MCCOY: Then why didn't you warn us? 
BRYCE: We couldn't warn you. They're constantly picking up our equipment and fooling with it. 
SPOCK: Where do they keep the equipment? I could use my tricorder. 
MARKEL: No use, sir. They're on an exhibit table. Beyond the force field. 
KIRK: There were six of you on the mission. 
MARKEL: We didn't beam down in time to save the original three. 
BRYCE: Lieutenant Randolph is in the house. She's running a high fever, but we can't seem to do anything about it. 
MCCOY: I'll check her out. Maybe I can help. 
KIRK: What have you learned about the aliens? 
MARKEL: There's not much, sir. This is a zoo. So tremendous as to be almost unbelievable. 
KIRK: Have you tried an escape? 
MARKEL: A dozen different ways. Tunnels, a weakness in the force field, nothing worked. 
SPOCK: Have you tried to communicate? 
MARKEL: Yes, sir. But all we've been able to arouse in them is a sort of quivering motion. 
KIRK: We seem to have company. 
(Two of the aliens are watching the new exhibits) 
MARKEL: They built this for us. We've concluded they're telepathic. I guess they read our minds and came as close as they could to make it like home. 
KIRK: Spock, try and make contact. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. I can't seem to get through, Captain. They appear too involved with each other. 
(The aliens quiver) 
KIRK: You seem to be getting a response. 
SPOCK: My impression is that they are laughing at me. 
MARKEL: So far, Mister Spock, we haven't found anything funny in this. 
SPOCK: Animals in a zoo rarely do. 
KIRK: Let's find the others. I feel a need for human companionship.

[House]

(It is sparsely furnished and open plan. A woman is lying on a mattress on the floor) 
BRYCE: Captain Kirk, Mister Spock, this is Nancy Randolph, our navigator. 
KIRK: How is she? 
MCCOY: Without my instruments, it's difficult to make an exact diagnosis. Rough guess is a malarial type infection caused by an insect bite. I can't do anything without my medikit. 
KIRK: The Lactrans outside, what do they do? 
MARKEL: They appear to be guards, sir. Making sure we don't harm each other. 
KIRK: Do they feed us or do we shift for ourselves. 
MARKEL: They bring supplies once a week. 
KIRK: Always to the same place? 
BRYCE: Yes, always, near the display case. 
KIRK: What display case? 
BRYCE: Behind this house, outside the force field. All our toys, phasers, communicators, medical supplies. 
MCCOY: Then my equipment should be there. 
KIRK: Maybe we can get them to give them back to us. 
SPOCK: Captain, they are highly intelligent. I'm sure they are quite aware of the purpose of each piece of equipment now. 
MCCOY: The medical kit wouldn't be harmful. It would help her, one of their specimens. 
SPOCK: Then think about it that way, Doctor.

[Compound]

MARKEL: Food. But it's not feeding time. 
KIRK: They must have sensed a need and interpreted it as food. 
SPOCK: I suggest we all concentrate on the medical kit. 
(It works. An alien delicately picks up the tiny object in its tentacle and hands it to McCoy) 
MCCOY: It's all here. They haven't damaged it. 
KIRK: What's your evaluation of the situation, Markel? 
MARKEL: They treat us quite well, sir. They seem to want us alive and well. And they don't want to let us go. 
SPOCK: A natural reaction for the curators of a zoo. 
MARKEL: Sir, do you think there is any chance of getting out? 
KIRK: As long as we're alive, there's a chance. Tonight, I'll try and find a weak link in the force field. 
SPOCK: Begging your pardon, Captain, I think we should face the situation realistically. We are specimen animals in a zoo. And they have taken every precaution to prevent our escape. To them we are caged for life. We seem to be drawing quite a crowd. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, since they are learning from us, why don't we learn something from them? 
MARKEL: How? We can't get through to them? 
KIRK: They communicate telepathically. 
BRYCE: Between themselves, yes, but, Mister Spock, aren't Vulcans telepathic? 
SPOCK: To a degree, with our own species and with some others, but the Lactran intelligence is eons beyond mine. 
KIRK: How much have you learned? 
SPOCK: About as much as a mother learns from a six month old infant. 
MCCOY: What's their impression of us? 
SPOCK: We seem to frighten the smaller ones. Some, the females, I believe, find us quite ugly. 
MCCOY: What about the Enterprise, Jim. Scotty could get worried. He could beam down a fighting force. 
KIRK: My orders were not to attempt a rescue under any condition. 
SPOCK: A wise move, Captain. From what I can gather, even the Enterprise is no match for their force field. 
MCCOY: How about coming up with another move, then? 
SPOCK: If I may suggest, sir? 
KIRK: Go ahead. 
SPOCK: It is obvious they can pick up specific thought transmissions from us if they care to go to the trouble. I suggest that one of our number appear to be ill. The rest will put strong thoughts in our minds that a communicator is needed for recovery. 
KIRK: Let's try it, and let's be close to the communicator when we do. I'll pretend I'm sick. All of you concentrate. 
MARKEL: It's a little one. Could be a child. 
KIRK: Once I get my hands on a communicator, I can have Scotty beam us all aboard the Enterprise. Ready now. 
(Kirk falls to the ground) 
SPOCK: The communicator, concentrate on the communicator. 
(It works. Baby Lactran places the communicator next to Kirk on the ground) 
KIRK: Enterprise, this is Captain Kirk. Beam us aboard. 
(The communicator is snatched back again)

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: What in the cosmos? 
(The baby fills the transporter bay)

[Compound]

SPOCK: I'm receiving an impression they are worried about their child, Captain. 
KIRK: I'm worried about the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: They seem to think you made the child disappear. They did not know we were a deadly species, capable of injuring one of them. 
MCCOY: Well, let's not stand here. Let's do something. 
KIRK: The best thing we can do is Argh! 
MCCOY: What is it? 
KIRK: (in pain) They're in my head. What happened to the baby? What happened? 
SPOCK: Captain, fight it. Fight it as hard as you can. They think too fast in too complex a manner. If he gives up for even one moment, he may go mad.

[Bridge]

(Baby carries Scott out of the turbolift) 
SCOTT: Everyone clear out. 
M'RESS: What's going on? 
SCOTT: I think it's harmless, but I'm not sure. 
M'RESS: What do you want us to do? 
SCOTT: Whatever it wants me to. 
(Baby puts him down) 
SCOTT: Now, supposing you and I talk this over. You can talk, can't you? You can't talk. Well, what can you do? Oh, no! Listen, you'll send us off into space if you

[Compound]

MCCOY: Jim, are you all right? 
KIRK: Yes. I think so. 
SPOCK: Captain, they have concluded they cannot break through your mind on a one to one basis. They are now gathering the mental strength of all five of them to break through. 
KIRK: I can't hold out against that many. 
SPOCK: Everybody, concentrate on Captain Kirk. Form a thought screen. 
KIRK: No. No! Let me alone! Please! They're destroying me! Tearing my mind to, to 
(Scott and Baby beam back down. Mum and Dad rush to them) 
KIRK: I'm all right. Scotty, what are you doing here? 
SCOTT: My young friend brought me. 
SPOCK: You made contact? 
SCOTT: It made contact with me. 
KIRK: What did you learn? 
SCOTT: It's only six years old but it has an IQ in the thousands. It picked my brain, all the knowledge in the Enterprise computers, and sent us flying off out of orbit. 
KIRK: Then how did you get here? 
SCOTT: I convinced it I wasn't a pet, and that it should bring the ship back into orbit. Then I got it into the transporter to return here. 
SPOCK: They're trying to contact us directly. I can make out something. It's, it's difficult, they think so fast. But the child has learned and told its parents all about the Federation and the races it encompasses. 
MCCOY: That fast? 
KIRK: What else do they know about us? 
SPOCK: We are considered simplistic, but in the process of evolving into a higher order. 
MCCOY: Even Vulcans? 
SPOCK: Yes, even Vulcans? 
SCOTT: But the little one didn't tell or think that to me. 
KIRK: Backward child, but growing. 
SPOCK: Exactly, sir. It seems they were where we are some tens of thousands of centuries ago. Their centuries, not ours. 
KIRK: Do we get out of here? 
SPOCK: It appears so. They do not feel we belong in their zoo. 
(A crowd has gathered to watch them leave) 
KIRK: Everyone ready to transport? 
SCOTT: So long, lad. Nice meeting you. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Prepare to beam aboard two parties, all human.

[Bridge]

MARKEL: Captain, we are a scientific contact team, and we learned practically nothing. 
KIRK: Offhand, I'd say we learned to keep our hands off. 
MARKEL: But there was so much more. 
SPOCK: There will be other opportunities, Mister Markel. I have just received their final telepathic message. 
KIRK: Which is? 
SPOCK: We'll be welcome back, in twenty or thirty centuries. 
KIRK: Our time, or theirs. 
SPOCK: Theirs. And it will take me some time to figure out how long that is. 
KIRK: Either way, Mister Spock, it will hardly be our problem.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Slaver Weapon
Stardate: 4187.3
Original Airdate: 15 Dec, 1973

First Officer's log, stardate 4187.3. The Enterprise shuttlecraft Copernicus is en route to Starbase Two Five with an important cargo. A Slaver stasis box discovered by archaeologists on the planet Kzin.
[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: These stasis boxes are the most remarkable thing the Slavers ever produced. Time stands still inside a stasis box. A billion years means nothing in there. What is it, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: I've studied the history of the Slaver Empire, but it's sketchy. We know they were masters of all the intelligent beings in this galaxy a billion years ago, until one race revolted. Are the stasis boxes the only source of information we have? 
SPOCK: The Slavers and all their subjects were exterminated in the war that followed. Intelligent life had to evolve all over again. The stasis boxes are the only remnant of those lost civilisations. 
UHURA: Why is it glowing like that? 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, what is our position? 
SULU: Passing Beta Lyrae, sir. One forty two degrees north east of galactic plane. 
SPOCK: Most peculiar. This indicates there is another stasis box circling Beta Lyrae. 
UHURA: Another one? 
SPOCK: It would be most illogical that a stasis box would remain here undiscovered for so long. Beta Lyrae is one of the rare spectacles of the galaxy. Almost every ship that passes stops to see it. 
UHURA: Maybe no one else was carrying a stasis box detector. 
SPOCK: Possible. The only known stasis box detector is another stasis box. Still. Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Bring us about. We'll investigate the Beta Lyrae system. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir.

SPOCK [OC]: Stasis boxes and their contents are the only remnant of a species which ruled most of this galaxy a billion years ago. Their effect on science has been incalculable. In one was found a flying belt which was the key to the artificial gravity field used by starships. Another box contained a disrupter bomb with the pin pulled. As a result, all stasis boxes are now under the jurisdiction of Starfleet, and only certain key specialists handle them. The boxes are rare, potentially dangerous, and we seem to have found a second one.

[Planet surface]

(Spock, Sulu and Uhura are wearing life-support belts. Spock carries the box) 
UHURA: I never did like these little ice-bound worlds. 
SPOCK: We are not tourists here, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Mister Spock, if it takes a stasis box to find another stasis box, how did anyone ever find the first one? 
SPOCK: As with a number of discoveries, purely by accident, Lieutenant. The other box seems to be almost under us, perhaps thirty metres below the ice. 
SULU: We won't have any trouble digging for it. In this low pressure, the ice should boil as soon as the phasers melt it. 
(But they are not alone. Sulu gets shot, then Uhura, then Spock)

SPOCK [OC]: I must take full responsibility for this event. Instead of being warned by the highly unlikely coincidence of a second stasis box, I allowed it's possible value to influence my judgement. The Kzinti now possess our stasis box. Its contents will determine how much damage my error has done the Federation and its people.

[Kzinti Ship]

UHURA: Where are we? 
SPOCK: A Kzinti spacecraft. 
SULU: That isn't good. Kzinti aren't supposed to have phasers, are they? 
SPOCK: The Treaty of Sirius does not permit them any weapons at all, beyond police vessels. Obviously, the treaty has been broken. 
SULU: A police web. We won't be able to move unless we can turn it off somehow. 
(A group of cats in spacesuits enter) 
SPOCK: The lean, be-draggles one is a reader of minds. 
UHURA: I've heard all Kzinti telepaths are unhappy neurotics. He fits the description. 
SPOCK: There is no sure way to guard our thoughts from him. Mister Sulu, he is not likely to deal with me or Lieutenant Uhura. She and I are inferior beings to them. But the Kzinti are meat eaters. If you sense him reading your mind, think of eating a raw vegetable. 
SULU: Yes, sir. Maybe I can goad them into revealing their purpose. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant Uhura. This may be crucial. In the presence of the Kzinti, do not say anything, do not do anything startling. Try to look harmless. 
UHURA: Any special reason? 
SPOCK: Are you forgetting Kzinti females are dumb animals? In an emergency the Kzinti may forget a human female is an intelligent creature. 
UHURA: Thanks. Thanks a lot. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant, I value your intelligence, but we may be able to seize an opportunity to escape if the Kzinti believe you have none. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Identify yourself. 
SULU: Lieutenant Sulu of the Starfleet vessel Enterprise. This is First Officer Spock. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: You're a Vulcan. I feel no pressing need to talk to an eater of roots and leaves. Humans at least are omnivorous. I am Chuft-Captain. You are prisoners aboard the privateer Traitor's Claw, a stolen police vessel. 
SULU: Stealing must be a habit with you. This ship, two stasis boxes. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Kzinti archaeologists found both boxes, but the one we managed to keep was empty. It served us well as bait to draw you here, but the Slavers had weapons that could devastate a galaxy. There could be one in that box. 
SULU: The Kzinti fought four wars with humankind and lost all of them. The last one was two hundred years ago, and you haven't learned a thing since. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Guard your speech. None of my crew has yet tasted human meat as our ancestors did. We would welcome the opportunity. Always you have had superior equipment. We seek a weapon that will defeat you at last. 
SULU: Then you're really working for the Kzinti government. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: The records will show the Traitor's Claw is a stolen police ship. If we are captured, the Highest of Kzin will repudiate us. But if we succeed, you are meat for our tables. 
(They fire a beam at the stasis box, then open it. Chuft removes a picture of a one-eyed green crocodile standing on it's hind legs) 
SULU: Could that be a picture of a Slaver? 
SPOCK: If so, it is the first ever discovered. An important historical find. 
(There are other things in the box) 
UHURA: It looks like fresh meat. Over a billion years in that box, and it looks fresh. 
(Then, a green pistol-shaped thing) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Nothing like this has ever been found. We are the only ones who have it. Look at it, human. This weapon may well mean the end of mankind.

First Officer's log, supplemental. The Kzinti now possess a weapon potentially deadly to the entire galaxy. The extent of its power remains to be seen.

[Kzinti ship]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Have the humans moved to the surface and be sure they're secured in the police web. We will use them to test the weapon. 
FLYER: Yes, Chuft-Captain. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: You have observed the aliens. Can you read their minds? 
TELEPATH: I can read Sulu with difficulty, Chuft-Captain. The other human is only a female. The third is a pacifistic herbivore. Surely you would not force me to delve such minds? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: If it is necessary. I realise the time you need to recover from each effort.

[Planet surface]

KZIN 5 [OC]: Chuft-Captain, we have finished testing the meat that was in the stasis box. It is protoplasmic and poisonous. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: What of the picture? 
TELEPATH: The human, Sulu, believes it to be a Slaver. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: So do I. It would have made a worthy enemy. 
(He tries the weapon, but nothing happens) 
FLYER: Perhaps the toggle. 
(The weapon glows, then changes to a more pointed shape. Chuft-Captain tries it again. Still nothing) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Telepath! Am I not affecting him at all? Is it the life support belt interfering? 
TELEPATH: No, Chuft-Captain. He hears a faint whine, but he feels no ill effects. There is a vibration in the metal of his belt. Chuft-Captain, he is too alien. He makes me taste yellow root munched between flat teeth. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Be glad if you need not read the Vulcan's mind. It may be a communications device, or a sonic stunner designed to affect members of a race now dead. 
(He changes its shape again) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: A good serviceable telescope. They built well, these Slavers. 
FLYER: It is of no use to us. We already have small telescopes. 
(Another shape change, and this time it does fire a beam) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: I give you credit, human. You are not afraid to die. 
SULU: Merely a laser. The Federation has had a more effective model for over one hundred years. 
(Another shape change, and the device becomes a hand-held rocket, pulling Chuft-Captain along with it. He knocks Uhura off the web, and she tiptoes away. Meanwhile, Chuft hits the telepath) 
KZIN 4: Telepath's suit has ruptured. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Never mind that. The female is escaping! 
KZIN 4: What of it? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Fool! Human females are intelligent. 
(So Uhura gets shot and put back on the web)
FLYER: Telepath's suit lost considerable pressure. We reached the ship in time to save him. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Good. We will need him later. What is this? 
FLYER: Perhaps a personal rocket motor. One could place one's foot on the pedals and balance. It appears to be transportation, not a weapon. 
SULU: Nice try. 
UHURA: I'm slowing down. I used to run the hundred in record time. How long was I out? Did I miss much? 
SULU: Not much. A lot of good they'll get out of that rocket setting. 
SPOCK: We are fortunate none of the settings so far have been superior to the technology now available to the Federation. 
UHURA: Uh oh. 
(Now the weapon is a ball with loops sticking out on either side) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: No gun sight. No obvious was to aim it. 
(So he holds it at arms length. Behind him, the lights go out in the cavern where their ship is parked) 
UHURA: Mister Spock, I can move. 
SULU: So can I. The police web is off. 
SPOCK: The fifth setting seems to be an energy absorber. Fascinating. I had no idea the Slavers had such things. 
SULU: Mister Spock, we 
SPOCK: Yes. When I give the word, make for the shuttle. Remember to zigzag. Ready? Go. 
(Sulu and Uhura run, while Spock jumps the Kzinti and grabs the weapon before following. Uhura gets shot again) 
FLYER: Chuft-Captain, what happened? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: I would rather not discuss it. Help me into the ship. 
SULU: (hiding) Mister Spock! I thought it was one of the aliens. 
SPOCK: I have the weapon. 
SULU: They've got Uhura, and subspace radio. They can call for help from the Kzin planet if they think the weapon's worth it. 
SPOCK: No, they cannot. Or rather, will not. 
SULU: Why? 
SPOCK: Because I kicked Chuft-Captain. Consider. Chuft-Captain has been attacked by an herbivorous pacifist, an eater of leaves and roots. One who traditionally does not fight. And the ultimate insult, I left him alive. Chuft-Captain's honour is at stake. He must seek personal revenge before he can call for help. 
SULU: That gives us some time. You did plan it that way? 
SPOCK: Of course. 
SULU: As long as you stay free, the Kzinti can't or won't do anything. But they could use Lieutenant Uhura as a bribe. 
SPOCK: Agreed. However, to this point, we have not seen anything more powerful than equipment Starfleet already has. 
SULU: Yes. But I have a feeling, Mister Spock. This weapon must have belonged to a spy, an espionage agent. 
SPOCK: I acknowledge your expertise in the field of weapons, Mister Sulu, but I do not see how you can determine probable ownership. 
SULU: Well, here, look at it. All these settings. We don't know a common Slaver soldier couldn't handle them, but as a weapon, only the laser is effective. The others aren't necessary for the line soldier's one purpose, to destroy the enemy. 
SPOCK: Assuming it's a spy weapon then, the Slavers would have wanted to keep it a secret weapon. If so, it is logical to assume it has a self-destruct setting too. 
SULU: But we've seen all the phases. 
SPOCK: Perhaps not. There is the null setting. It seems to do nothing. But why should it be there? It does not correspond to a safety lock. 
(He pushes the toggle back up to the top, and it turns into a globe with a handle) 
SULU: It may be the key to another setting. 
(The Kzinti ship takes off through the ice)

[Kzinti ship]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: This is the Traitor's Claw calling Mister Sulu.

[Planet surface]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN [OC]: We have the female prisoner. Will you bargain, or must we take harsh action? It will not be pleasant for her. I repeat. We have the female prisoner as hostage. You have something we want. We will trade her life for the Slaver weapon. 
SPOCK: Answer him, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Lieutenant Sulu here. What about Mister Spock? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN [OC]: He must surrender. I will offer him single combat. 
SULU: Not interested.

[Kzinti ship]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: I am as the Vulcan left me, with two ribs broken. I have not set them nor bandaged myself. He may conceivably kill me.

[Planet surface]

SPOCK: Kzinti ribs have some vertical bracing. But I kicked him over one heart. I compute the odds of my defeating Chuft-Captain in combat at sixteen to one against. 
SULU: Offer refused.

[Kzinti ship]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: They think very little of you. 
UHURA: Wrong. They don't think much of you.

[Planet surface]

(Sulu turns the globe, and it becomes more weapon-like) 
SPOCK: A self-destruct mechanism would not have a gun sight. 
SULU: No. Let's see what this does do. 
(He points it at the horizon, and there is a massive explosion) 
SULU: We can't give them that! 
SPOCK: Fascinating. No world in the Federation has produced anything so powerful. Almost beyond theoretical limits. Total conversion of matter to energy at a distance. 
SULU: If the Kzinti had that, the whole galaxy would be their dinner table. 
(The eruption caused by his firing of the weapon is continuing) 
SULU: Hit the dirt! 
(The wind from the blast hits them, knocking them over. Sulu drops the weapon, and it turns back into a globe)

[Kzinti ship]

(Spock, Sulu and Uhura are on the police web while Chuft-Captain plays with the globe. It forms another new shape) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: What would this be? 
FLYER: I have no idea. It is generating power. 
SPOCK: There is a grid. It may be another communications device. But that seems redundant. 
(The device starts beeping) 
SULU: It has the Kzinti frightened. 
SPOCK: The Kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their owners. 
UHURA: Could it be a voice-activated mechanism? 
SPOCK: No, it appears to be conversing with them. A reasoning computer that small? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: How long has it been since you were turned off? 
WEAPON: I do not know. When I am off, I have no sense of passing time. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: What is the last thing you remember? 
WEAPON: We were on a mission. I may not tell you of it unless you know certain code words. 
FLYER: If you could describe the positions of the stars in your sector, we would know how much time has passed since then. 
WEAPON: Without certain code words, I may not describe our location. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: One of the settings on this weapon was a total conversion beam. We saw it. Tell us how to find it. 
WEAPON: Twist me widdershins until you reach the null position. Then 
SULU: They've got it. 
UHURA: There must be something we can do. 
SPOCK: Most peculiar. 
(The weapon is a different shape entirely, with two large prongs. The Kzinti leave with it) 
SPOCK: That was not the total conversion beam setting.

[Planet surface]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Like others, this form seems to possess no gun sight. 
FLYER: It may be a broad-beam weapon, for use only from orbit. We saw its power. I suggest you fire at a very distant target. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Very well.

[Kzinti ship]

UHURA: We can't let them have that weapon. 
SPOCK: They are not about to get it, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Why not? 
SPOCK: Assume you are a Slaver war computer. You've been turned off. You do not know for how long, but when you were turned off, there was a war on. Now you are awakened by aliens you never saw before. They do not know any of the military passwords. They ask you so many questions it is obvious they know little about you. Your owner is nowhere about. What would you think? 
UHURA: I'd think I'd been captured by the enemy. Or an enemy, at least. 
SULU: And when they asked you how to find your most powerful weapon setting, what would you give them? 
(Outside, Chuft-Captain pulls the trigger. KaBOOM! There is a crater where he was standing and part of the ship's hull has been blown away) 
SPOCK: Activate life support belts. 
UHURA: A disrupter field. 
SPOCK: Yes. Another conventional weapon. It appears the total conversion beam was the only thing the Slavers had that we do not.

[Planet surface]

SULU: No sign of the weapon, of course. It would have looked nice in some museum. 
SPOCK: It never would have reached the museum, Lieutenant. There was too much power in that one setting. If not the Kzinti, the Klingons or some other species would have tried to possess it.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Strange, how the past sometimes breaks through into the present. That ancient war could have sparked a new war between man and Kzinti. 
UHURA: Didn't you say the Kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their dead owners? 
SPOCK: Yes, an ancient superstition. 
UHURA: At this rate, they'll never get over those old superstitions.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Ambergris Element
Stardate: 5499.9
Original Airdate: 1 Dec, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5499.9. We are orbiting the planet Argo. Argo was once a land planet, but it's surface is now almost completely covered by water. The change was caused by violent seismic disturbances. Our mission is to study the effects which the quakes and other phenomena had on its surface. This knowledge may save millions of lives on a Federation planet identical to Argo which will soon be undergoing similar transformation.
[Shuttlecraft]

(A special shuttlecraft modeled on a catamaran has been launched from Enterprise and landed on the ocean) 
KIRK: This is the largest land mass on the planet, isn't it, Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. The others are mere outcroppings. They suggest the peaks of submerged mountains. 
MCCOY: I suggest that we get these seawater and algae specimens. They're the least of the lot. 
SPOCK: For once I agree with you, Doctor. The more informative specimens will come from the sea bottom. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Clayton, open the hatch and let our two scientists here get on with their business. 
CLAYTON: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: What's that? 
(Something with huge tentacles picks up the shuttlecraft and throws it away) 
KIRK: Phasers on stun, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Firing, Captain. 
(The creature retreats below the surface) 
MCCOY: What the devil was that thing? 
SPOCK: Apparently a life form which previous surveys have not recorded. 
KIRK: Let's get a closer look at it before the phaser stun wears off. Submerge, Lieutenant. 
CLAYTON: Aye, sir. 
(They descend through the green water to the sea bed) 
MCCOY: Dual respiratory system. Lungs and gills. 
SPOCK: Its skeleton is similar to that of a Denebian whale, Captain. 
(The shuttlecraft gets slapped across the sea bed) 
KIRK: It's regaining consciousness. Surface, Mister Clayton. 
CLAYTON: Aye, sir. 
(The shuttlecraft is chased along the surface) 
KIRK: Spock, prepare to fire phasers. 
SPOCK: Phasers do not respond, Captain. We must have sustained damage to the power pack when the creature struck us. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Emergency. 
SCOTT [OC]: Enterprise. What is it, sir. 
KIRK: We're under attack. Beam us aboard, Scotty. 
(But the sea monster bites the shuttlecraft then throws it against rocks. McCoy falls into the water, followed by Clayton. Spock and Kirk are unconscious in the craft) 
SCOTT [OC]: We've lost contact, Captain.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Repeat, we've lost contact. Come in, Captain. Come in. 
(The monster grabs the shuttlecraft and takes it underwater)

Ship's log, stardate 5504.2. Lieutenant Commander Scott in command. Captain Kirk and First Officer Spock have been missing for almost five days. Search parties can find no trace of them or the aqua-shuttle. Doctor McCoy and I are continuing the search at a greater distance from the attack point.

[Boat]

MCCOY: There's nothing. There's just nothing. 
CLAYTON: I see some rocks. They're just above sea level, about two miles away. There's something on them.

[Rocks]

(It's the aqua-shuttle, mangled and smashed. Nearby, Kirk and Spock are lying face down in the water) 
MCCOY: Maybe they're still alive. 
(They pull them out of the water) 
MCCOY: Their bodies are functioning. Metabolism, heart. Everything but the lungs. 
KIRK: Can't breathe. Suffocating. Help. Can't breathe. 
(He lifts a webbed hand to his throat) 
SCOTT: What happened to them, Doctor? What is it? 
MCCOY: Something's changed their whole lung structure. They can't live in the air anymore.

Medical log, stardate 5506.2. Captain Kirk and First Office Spock were rescued forty eight hours ago. They have no recollection of what happened to them after they were attacked, but medical examinations show and unidentified substance in the bloodstream has affected their entire metabolism and changed them into water-breathers. Their internal structure is completely transformed, and even their eyes are covered with a transparent film like the second eyelid of a fish. So far all efforts to return them to normal have failed.

[Aquarium]

(Kirk and Spock are in water, Scott and McCoy the other side of the glass) 
MCCOY: We're stumped, Jim. The hormone seems to be the major factor in your mutation, but we just can't identify it. 
KIRK: Are you sure the mutation wasn't somehow accomplished naturally? 
MCCOY: It was infused into your bodies at key structural points. It had to be done by injection. 
KIRK: But can't you duplicate it, Bones? Your medical computers have information on every procedure in the Federation's hospitals. 
MCCOY: It's highly sophisticated and completely unknown to us. 
SPOCK: That implies there are intelligent life forms on Argo. 
MCCOY: The sensors don't indicate any life forms down there, aside from fish. 
SPOCK: They did fail to indicate the large marine creature that attacked us. Perhaps the readings are incomplete, blocked by underwater pressure forces. Oceans are less turbulent at greater depth. Such conditions would be more suitable to intelligent forms. 
MCCOY: Well, we can't do much underwater exploration without the aqua-shuttle. Our equipment is too limited. 
KIRK: We aren't limited. We can go wherever we want in that ocean. 
MCCOY: It's too risky, Jim. Argo's almost totally unexplored. You'd be out of contact range, unarmed. 
KIRK: I have to, Bones. Look at this place. A tank. I can't command a ship from inside an aquarium. I can't live in here. 
MCCOY: I know what you're saying, Jim, but if you go down on that planet and you die there 
KIRK: Right now we have only two choices. Live in an aquarium somewhere for the rest of our lives or stay on Argo. I won't accept either one of them. 
MCCOY: What about you, Spock? What does your logic tell you? 
SPOCK: The Captain states the case emotionally, of course, but correctly. I would be of little value to this ship if I am confined to a tank in Sickbay. I must accompany the Captain. 
KIRK: An intelligence that can produce this kind of mutation can change us back. We've got to find it, Bones. It must be there.

[Boat]

KIRK: We'll make contact as soon as possible, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(Kirk and Spock remove their aqua-lungs and dive into the ocean)

[Sea bed]

(A group of Aquans are gathering food when they see the uniformed and booted humans swimming towards them. Aquans are green, with gills and dark green fins across their heads, the sides of their necks and chests) 
MALE: Go away, air breathers. You're not wanted here. 
KIRK: We won't harm you. We're friends. 
FEMALE: Leave us. It is enough our young saved your lives once. If you go on, nothing will save you again. 
KIRK: Wait. Listen. 
MALE: Go away. 
(The Aquans leave) 
KIRK: I don't understand. They said they'd saved us once. 
SPOCK: I believe the phrase was, 'our young saved your lives once.' 
KIRK: Yes, and they didn't seem to approve. The answer appears to be in that direction, Spock. 
SPOCK: I would say so, Captain. The instinctive reaction of all frightened creatures is to retreat to a place of safety. 
(They descend into the rift in the seabed, and follow a tunnel to) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. And beautiful. 
KIRK: An undersea civilisation capable of fantastic architecture. Medical triumphs unheard of in our galaxy. Why should they be afraid of us, Spock? 
SPOCK: It is quite possible, Captain, that they find us grotesque and ugly. And many people fear beings different from themselves. 
KIRK: Well, speculation isn't much help. We have to get in there. 
SPOCK: Perhaps there is a way open on the far side. There is much less activity there. 
(On the other side of the city) 
KIRK: That building in the centre. It seems to be important. 
(Then they are caught in a net)

[Chamber]

These are the spies, Tribune. Air-breathers. 
DOMAR: You stand before the Ruling Tribunal of the Aquans. I am Domar, the High Tribune. 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock. 
DOMAR: You are air-breather enemies from the surface. We have expected spies for a long time. 
SPOCK: We came here in peace, Tribune. 
CADMAR: The ancient records warn that air-breathers never come in peace. 
RILA: They came without weapons. 
MALE: Can we do nothing without consulting the ancient records? 
CADMAR: Why do the Junior Tribunes wish always to change the records? 
DOMAR: Let the mesh be removed, but stand ready. 
MALE: The surgo-op was excellent. They have mutated perfectly. 
KIRK: Your scientists induced these mutations? 
DOMAR: We do not wish to kill, even air-breathers. Your memory was eradicated so you could not return here. 
CADMAR: It would seem their ancient records are as well preserved as ours. They found us again to come among us as spies. 
RILA: You do not give them a chance to defend themselves, Cadmar. 
DOMAR: Rila is correct. You may speak. 
KIRK: We are visitors to your planet. We come from another world. 
RILA: You do not live on the surface places? 
SPOCK: Not on this world. 
CADMAR: Enough! Clearly, this is a lie. The air-breathers have come again to destroy us. 
SPOCK: You are mistaken, sir. Our only purpose here is to find the means of reversing our mutations. 
DOMAR: That is impossible. Only Aquan mutation is designated by the surgo-records.

[Boat]

MCCOY [OC]: Enterprise to Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Scott here. What is it, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Sensors just gave us an update reading, Scotty. There's a seaquake due in that area, a bad one. Complete topography changes. 
SCOTT: How soon?

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Within four hours. When are Jim and Spock due to make contact? 
SCOTT [OC]: About the same time. 
MCCOY: Can you contact them sooner? 
SCOTT [OC]: We can try like blue blazes. Scott out.

[Boat]

SCOTT: Their directional marker indicates they descended toward that fern bed.

[Underwater]

(As the hull of the boat passes overhead) 
FEMALE: Air-breathers. We must inform the Tribunes.

[Chamber]

KIRK: The name of our starship is on the aqua-shuttle. If you want proof, examine the wreckage. 
RILA: Yes. Let us examine the wreckage before we make judgement. 
FEMALE: We have news, High Tribune. 
DOMAR: Speak it. 
FEMALE: Three air-breathers have invaded the sea foliage. We saw them as we gathered edibles. 
DOMAR: Do you still believe these creatures came in peace? 
RILA: We do not know what to believe. 
DOMAR: Take these spies to the surface boulders and leave them there. It is justice enough for our enemies.

{Rocks]

(Spock and Kirk are pinned under a net, near the aqua-shuttle remains) 
RILA: Conserve your strength. I will free you. The mesh is too strong. 
KIRK: Go to the big island. Bring assistance party.

[Boat]

(Scott has been diving) 
CLAYTON: Did you see anything? 
SCOTT: Not a sign of them. Wait a minute. Who are 
RILA: Follow me. Your friends need help.

[Rocks]

RILA: There. 
SCOTT: Quick, lads. 
(Spock and Kirk are freed and back in the water) 
SCOTT: Stand by in the scouter-gig, Lieutenant.

[Underwater]

(Scott is protected by a personal force field) 
KIRK: Rila, this is my engineering officer, Mister Scott. Tribune Rila is an Aquan. Their city is a short distance away. 
SCOTT: We're obliged for your help. Captain, we've been trying to contact you for two hours. There's a sea bottom quake due. It'll destroy this whole area. 
RILA: There are legends of such a happening. It destroyed the ancient knowledge and caused the great surface places to sink into the sea. 
SPOCK: That suggests your race evolved from its ancient enemies. 
RILA: We did not evolve, Mister Spock. When the surface places began to sink, many air-breathers were mutated through surgo-op, just as you were. As the centuries passed, the mutations became hereditary. 
KIRK: Strange that such a highly developed race would be violent. 
SPOCK: Apparently they were exposed to a frightening geological disaster. Such hardship induces savagery and violence. 
RILA: They hunted and killed us. We feared they would contaminate us with their violence. That is also why it is forbidden to mutate back to surface forms. 
KIRK: Then reverse mutation is possible. 
RILA: There are legends of sealed places in the sunken ruins where many knowledge records of it are kept. 
(The seabed shakes) 
SCOTT: There's not much time, Captain. The quake's due in less than two hours. 
KIRK: How far are the ruins, Rila? 
RILA: Only a short distance. 
KIRK: Those old records may hold the key to reversing our mutations. We've got to find them before it's too late. 
RILA: I cannot take you to the ruins. It is against ordainments. 
KIRK: It's important, Rila. Not just for us. The population of another planet is threatened by surface changes, too. Argo's ancient knowledge can help save them. 
RILA: Yes. I will take you as far as the reef barrier.

[Barrier]

RILA: The ruins lie that way. Now, take care. The tides are strong. 
(She leaves. Kirk and Spock are pulled along by the current)

[Ruins]

SPOCK: Fascinating. Obviously, an entire portion of the continental shelf sank within a few minutes. This may be the sealed place Rila mentioned. I believe this is an entrance panel, Captain. 
(They swim down a staircase) 
KIRK: There's another chamber.

[Chamber]

(A room in the Roman style, with canisters and equipment including a caduceus) 
SPOCK: This resembles ancient medical symbols, Captain. The torso indicates mutation. 
KIRK: That's it, Spock. The key to the survival of the race. 
(They grab a couple of canisters each and swim for it. But they encounter Mister Tentacles, the sea monster. Fortunately another quake hits, and it gets buried under a collapsed building)

[Aquarium]

(McCoy has got the scrolls out of the canisters) 
MCCOY: If the universal translator is right, the substance in your bloodstream is similar to the ambergris of Earth whales. Reverse mutation is induced by infusion of an antitoxin, concentrated doses of it. 
KIRK: What's the composition of the antitoxin, Bones? 
MCCOY: It's made from the venom of the Argo sur-snake.

[Underwater]

KIRK: To capture a sur-snake, we need your help. Our people can't descend to that depth. 
NEPHRO: Domar has warned that if we break more ordainments, we will be exiled to the open seas. 
SPOCK: We cannot reverse our mutations without the serum, nor can the Aquans benefit from the knowledge of their ancestors. 
NEPHRO: But the ordainments state clearly that capturing sur-snakes is forbidden. 
MALE: Ordainments are useless in times of turbulence. Only knowledge will help us. 
RILA: Nephro, we must break the ordainments.

[Ruins]

(They net the monster that was caught by the falling ruins) 
RILA: Quickly, Captain. 
(They milk it's venom while another quake strikes) 
RILA: Quickly, we must leave. 
KIRK: We need more venom. 
RILA: No, no, there is no time. 
(This time the monster is totally squashed by falling masonry)

[Aquarium]

(McCoy and Chapel are in the water too) 
MCCOY: We have prepared an antitoxin from the venom of the sur-snake, but a part of the old records is missing, so the exact dosage is unknown. Experiments on fish show that if the antitoxin is too strong, it causes over-mutation, which cannot be reversed by any means. We're running out of venom, so conclusive experiments are impossible. I decreased the strength by three quarters, Jim, but we can't be sure it's right. 
KIRK: How many infusions, Bones? 
MCCOY: Two small, one large. 
KIRK: Well, let's get started. 
(McCoy injects Kirk, who turns red then white) 
MCCOY: His pulse is fading. (turns pink again) Pulse and heart normal. Something's happening to his metabolism. It's at least ten times normal speed. (the webbing between his fingers disappears) Metabolism normal. Heartbeat normal. The lungs are beginning to revert. This is the last dose, the largest infusion. (he grows scales) The antitoxin was too strong. (The scales vanish) He's starting to breathe. Quick, get him out of the tank! 
(Outside) 
MCCOY: How do you feel, Jim? 
KIRK: A little dizzy. Otherwise normal. 
MCCOY: Well, better get into some dry clothes. I wouldn't want you to catch cold. Your turn, Spock.

[Bridge]

(Domar and Rila are wearing aqualungs) 
KIRK: We'll bombard the unpopulated pressure areas with phaser beams and change the epicentre of the quake so it won't endanger your people or your city. 
DOMAR: I did not believe such knowledge was possible. 
SCOTT: Major tremors will start in three minutes, Captain. 
DOMAR: It is incredible. All of it. 
KIRK: Confirm co-ordinates, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Confirmed, sir. 
KIRK: Fire phasers as directed, gentlemen. 
AREX: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate the epicentre of the quake was in the north polar seas, Captain, a totally uninhabited area. 
DOMAR: Then our people are safe. 
KIRK: When can we beam down, Spock? 
SPOCK: The seabed should stabilize within a few hours.

[Shoreline]

SPOCK: Argo appears to have a new city, Captain, or rather, one reborn. 
RILA: Our people survived the seaquakes with little damage, thanks to your help. 
DOMAR: We owe you and your friends much gratitude, Captain Kirk. We will try to repay by making the ancient records available for your studies. 
SPOCK: Our experience here has shown us the means of diverting quakes. That will mean much to the endangered Federation planet. 
RILA: The light is warm and the air is soft. I shall be glad when the surface places can be inhabited. 
DOMAR: The young Aquans have decided to rebuild the great shelters of the air-breathers. 
KIRK: Only the young Aquans? 
DOMAR: Senior Aquans cannot adjust to the thought of becoming air-breathers. We will remain at the Aqua City. 
KIRK: Don't lose contact with each other like your ancestors. 
DOMAR: We will pass ordainments to forbid it. 
RILA: And we, this time, will not ignore them.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Time Trap
Stardate: 5267.6
Original Airdate: 24 Nov, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 52.2. We have just entered the Delta Triangle, a vast, uninhabited sector of our galaxy in which a high number of mysterious disappearances of starships have been recorded since ancient times. The Enterprise has been assigned the mission of surveying this area, and if possible, determining the cause of these disappearances.
[Bridge]

(There is a continual fireworks display on the viewscreen. The ship is at Red Alert) 
KIRK: Situation, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Our sensors are in a state of chaos, Captain. They became unreliable when we entered the Triangle. 
KIRK: Magnification ten on forward scanners, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Magnification ten, sir. 
KIRK: Klingon battle cruiser. Deflector shields up, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Deflectors up, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, open a hailing frequency. 
(The Klingon ship fires two shots, which harmlessly hit the shields) 
KIRK: Ready phasers. 
SULU: Phasers locked on target, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
SULU: Firing phasers.
(A hit. The Klingon ship vanishes) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, did you see what I think I just saw? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Explanation? 
SPOCK: I can offer none at this time. However, the Klingon ship was not destroyed by our phaser fire. Its shields clearly deflected the phasers. Nor was its disappearance the type that would have been affected if it were using its cloaking device. 
KIRK: Any sensor analysis on that wavering effect just before the ship disappeared? 
SPOCK: The sensors are still not registering normally, sir. But I would venture the theory it has something to do with the many ship disappearances in this area. 
KIRK: A natural phenomenon. But what? Duty personnel on Yellow Alert. Visual scan three hundred and sixty degrees, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Scanning three hundred and sixty degrees, sir. 
(There are other ships surrounding them) 
KIRK: Mousetrapped. If the first ship doesn't succeed in blasting us out of existence, they have two backup ships to do the job. 
SPOCK: Tactically well planned. When the Federation investigates, we'll be recorded as just another mysterious starship disappearance. 
UHURA: Captain, we are receiving a class two signal from the lead Klingon vessel. 
KIRK: One moment, Lieutenant. Mister Sulu, on my command, I want you to turn the Enterprise and head for the exact co-ordinates where the Klingon ship disappeared. Warp eight. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Put the signal on the main viewing screen, Lieutenant, and pipe the entire exchange back to Starfleet Command. 
UHURA: It will take three weeks to reach the nearest starbase, sir. 
KIRK: Nonetheless, let's have it on the record. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. Signal in. 
KURI [on viewscreen]: You have been identified as the starship Enterprise. Captain James T Kirk last known to be in command. 
KIRK: Your information is correct. This is Captain Kirk. 
KURI [on viewscreen]: I am Commander Kuri of the Klingon Imperial Fleet. We have witnessed the destruction of our sister ship, the Klothos, and hold you responsible. Surrender immediately or we will destroy you. 
KIRK: We did not destroy the Klothos, and you are well aware of it, Commander. 
KURI [on viewscreen]: Surely you don't expect me to believe she just vanished? 
KIRK: You may believe what you like, Commander. We were fired upon first and returned fire. The Klothos deflectors turned aside our phaser fire and then disappeared. I don't know why. But we are in the Delta Triangle. 
KURI [on viewscreen]: I do not accept this. 
KIRK: Frankly, Commander, what you accept is of little importance to me. Enterprise out. Now, Mister Sulu.

[Klingon ship]

KURI: What fools! Thinking they can escape. Accelerate to maximum and prepare to open fire.

[Bridge]

(Weapons fire hits the Enterprise) 
SCOTT: Sir, aren't we going to defend ourselves? 
KIRK: Your deflector shields are doing that for us, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: But to just turn and run, sir. 
KIRK: We'll fight if we have to. Sulu, are we headed for the exact co-ordinates where the Klothos disappeared? 
SULU: Dead on, sir. We'll be there in ten seconds. 
SCOTT: Captain, our deflector shields have just gone out. 
SULU: Sir, the instruments. They've gone haywire. I can't orient myself. Everything is 
UHURA: Subspace radio channels are dead, sir. 
(Red Alert sounds, and the Enterprise disappears)

[Klingon ship]

KURI: Where did they go?

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, I've lost all co-ordination. Dizzy. 
SPOCK: Sir, we seem to be suffering from some form of vertigo. 
KIRK: Sulu, are we still on the same co-ordinates? 
SULU: I can't tell, sir. Vision won't focus. 
(He collapses, then the Enterprise reappears) 
SPOCK: Captain, on the viewscreen. 
(A starship graveyard as far as they can see) 
KIRK: It's like a vast Sargasso Sea. A graveyard of ships from every civilisation imaginable. 
UHURA: Where are we, sir? 
KIRK: At another place in time, I think. If we check closely, I believe we'll find many of those ships are the ones designated as lost in the Delta Triangle. 
UHURA: An alternate universe? 
KIRK: Something corresponding to that. The records say every ship lost here vanished without a trace. Most logged communication loss and disorientation just before disappearance. My guess was they entered a window to some other continuum. Comments, Spock? 
SPOCK: Your logic is excellent, Captain. There is a random factor to the ship disappearances. Perhaps the touching of the two time continuums is erratic. In any event, the window stayed open long enough for us to follow the Klothos in. 
SCOTT: Aye, and where is that tricky devil? 
SULU: I've been scanning for her, but there are so many ships here it's hard to pick up a specific trace. 
KIRK: Stay on it, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
SCOTT: There are ships here I've only seen crude drawings of, pictures in museums. 
SPOCK: Sensor scans give a rough approximation of the age of the metal in the hulls, Captain. Some of them have been here for centuries. 
SCOTT: Captain, there's the old Bonaventure. She was the first ship to have warp drive installed. She vanished without a trace on her third voyage. 
(Bonaventure looks very like a fat Enterprise, with 0201NCC on the nacelle)
SPOCK: The crew's descendants may still be living, Captain. 
KIRK: Their descendants? 
SPOCK: Yes. I am picking up life and energy readings from the cluster of ships ahead of us.

[Klothos Bridge]

KAZ: Scanners indicate the Enterprise shields are totally depleted, sir. 
KOR: Good. All hands to battle stations. Prepare to open fire on the Enterprise immediately.

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, the Klothos, dead ahead. 
KIRK: Sound Red Alert. Phasers lock on target. 
SULU: Aye, sir. Phasers locked on.

[Klothos Bridge]

KOR: Fire! 
KAZ: Sir, our weaponry is frozen.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Fire. 
SULU: Firing phasers. 
KIRK: Report, sir. 
SULU: No response, sir. There's no indication of damage. All instruments register normal. 
(Then Kirk disappears)

Captain's log, supplemental. First Officer Spock recording. We appear to be in an alternate universe. Position, undetermined. Captain Kirk has been transported from the ship by an unknown power. His present location also is undetermined.

[Council chamber]

(Kor appears in front of a giant horseshoe-shaped table. There are people of all different races sitting behind it, including a Gorn, Tellarite, Klingon, Andorian, Orion, Phylosian. He reaches for his weapon but is unable to take hold of it)  
XERIUS: (a Vulcan or Romulan) That will not be needed here, Commander Kor. 
(Then Kirk is beamed in) 
XERIUS: Welcome to Elysia. Devna, Interpreter of Laws. 
DEVNA (an Orion woman) Gentlemen, you now stand before the Ruling Council. Elysia is comprised of representatives of a hundred and twenty three races. Our existence dates back over one thousand years. During this time, these diverse races, many of whom were enemies on the outside, have learned to live together because they must. As a result, any act of violence is strictly forbidden, and will be dealt with swiftly and with utmost severity. Questions? 
KIRK: Are we in an alternate universe? 
DEVNA: It is more aptly described as a pocket in the garment of time. 
KOR: How did you freeze my weaponry? 
DEVNA: We have among us many individuals gifted with psionic powers, peace being our single goal. You were attempting to break that peace. 
XERIUS: Pronounce the law. 
DEVNA: Under our law, you as ship captains are responsible for the behaviour of your crews. Should a crew member, with or without your knowledge, engage in any form of violence whatsoever, you will suffer the ultimate penalty. Total immobilisation of your ship for a century. 
KOR: A century? We'd all be dead by the end of it. 
XERIUS: No, Commander Kor. This small universe of ours is a curios trap. Time passes here, but very slowly. A century means nothing to us. Our Council appears young. Yet all are centuries old. 
KIRK: Your life here must be almost perfect, if you haven't wanted to leave. 
XERIUS: All of us have wanted to leave at some time, Captain Kirk. But we have made the best possible world here, because we have found there is no escape from it.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We are getting out. 
SCOTT: Then we'd better do it pretty quick, Captain. 
SPOCK: If we find an answer, it will still take time. 
SCOTT: That's just what we haven't got. 
KIRK: What's wrong, Scotty? 
SCOTT: It's our dilithium crystals, sir. They're deteriorating rapidly. 
KIRK: But how? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. Maybe because of the time warp we went through. But we've only four days at the most before power goes. 
KIRK: Got any miracles in your computer, Spock? 
SPOCK: Impossible to predict, Captain. 
KIRK: I don't want a prediction. You will start work immediately, around the clock, nonstop, until you arrive at a formula that gets us out of here.

[Klothos Bridge]

KOR: These computations are useless. Get out of here and don't come back until you have a plan that works. 
KAZ: Yes, sir.

[Council chamber]

DEVNA: What do you see beyond your eyes, Magen? 
MAGEN: (red-head with yellow cat's eyes) Two new ships. In each, beings labour to solve the riddle. The riddle of the time trap escape. Escape. 
DEVNA: Gently, good Magen. Return to us now. 
XERIUS: It is impossible. 
DEVNA: They must try, Xerius. They all must try before they accept.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: This is the best you could come up with, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Have you covered every possibility? Every factor? 
SPOCK: Several times, Captain. I do not wish to surrender hope, but the facts remain unchangeable. 
KIRK: He isn't giving up. If they can do it, why can't we? 
SPOCK: I do not believe they can, sir. High rank probability. Their S2 graf unit, which is roughly the equivalent of our warp drive, began giving off depleted energy readings. Kor decided to try to bluff it through. 
KIRK: Jeopardising his crew and his ship unnecessarily?

[Klothos Bridge]

KAZ: All power has been diverted to the engines, sir. We're picking up speed. 
(The Klothos heads into a vortex, vanishes, and gets thrown back into the graveyard where she started)

[Bridge]

KIRK: You were right, Spock. But I almost wish they'd made it. 
SPOCK: Their attempt has given me an idea as to how we may be able to break through the time barrier.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Mister Spock has come up with a formula which may just get us out of here. 
SCOTT: But this involves combining our ship with the Klothos. 
KIRK: That is correct. 
MCCOY: You mean you want us to co-operate with those 
KIRK: If we want to get out of here, it's our only choice. 
SULU: It's a complicated navigation problem, trying to guide two such disparate ships. 
SCOTT: Considering we only have two days left before our supply of dilithium crystals is exhausted, I say we go with this plan. 
SULU: I agree, sir. 
KIRK: Good. I'll contact Kor right away.

[Council chamber]

XERIUS: What is it? 
DEVNA: These new ones. Now they plan to combine the two ships and try again. Can you not stop them, Xerius? 
XERIUS: It is not against our laws to try to escape. 
DEVNA: But they may kill themselves in these mad attempts. 
XERIUS: So long as they do not break our laws, we must not impede them. 
DEVNA: Even if they die? 
XERIUS: It is their choice.

[Klothos briefing room]

KIRK: Then it's settled. Our science teams will get to work right away conjoining our warp and navigation systems so we will function as a single ship. Exchange of personnel and computer hookup to start as soon as we are beamed back to our ship. 
KOR: Agreed. 
KIRK: Mister Spock? 
(Spock gets up and puts his hands on the two Klingon's shoulders) 
SPOCK: I cannot tell you how impressed I am by your splendid spirit of co-operation. 
KOR: Mister Spock! 
SPOCK: Forgive me, Commander. I was overcome by the moment. Goodbye. 
KOR: Goodbye, Mister Spock. Captain Kirk. 
(Kirk and Spock leave) 
KAZ: The stories of his being half human must be true. 
KOR: Perhaps the time continuum affected his mind. 
KAZ: I wonder if we all haven't become affected. 
KOR: Explain yourself. 
KAZ: Your willingness to work with your old enemy, Kirk. It is not like you, Commander. What do you really have in mind? 
KOR: You do know me, Kaz. Very well, what would you think if the Enterprise suddenly disintegrated after our dual ship had pierced the time continuum? 
KAZ: I would think my commander had manoeuvred brilliantly. 
KOR: And it can be arranged, practically speaking? 
KAZ: It implies a rather high risk factor, given the time involved and Kirk's highly suspicious nature. But I believe it can be arranged. 
KOR: Very good, Kaz. I will leave it to you to attend to the details of the Enterprise's destruction.

Captain's log, stardate 5267.6. We are in the final stages preparatory to making our escape from Elysia.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We must make our escape by tomorrow or our dilithium crystals will be too depleted, and we will be trapped here forever. 
GABLER: Beg your pardon, sir. 
KIRK: What is it, Gabler. 
GABLER: Bell and I are the relief guard for the dilithium vault. We arrived a few minutes late and found them poking around. 
KLINGON: We were lost. 
GABLER: Lost, my foot. It's clearly posted as a restricted area. You knew you weren't supposed to be there. 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, I'm sure there has been a mistake. (hands on shoulders) Where are you supposed to be working? 
KLINGON: Engineering, deck five. 
SPOCK: Captain, allow me to escort this young man to his work area. 
KIRK: Very well, Mister Spock. 
(Spock and the Klingons leave) 
KIRK: Return to your post and don't leave it until you've been relieved. 
GABLER: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: Jim, I'm worried about Spock. He's just not acting normal. 
KIRK: He's under a lot of pressure, Bones. 
MCCOY: I know that. But I've never known Spock to act like a pal under any circumstances, least of all toward Klingons. 
KIRK: That's true. 
MCCOY: And if he's coming apart, Jim, we're in serious trouble. Getting out of here hinges on his computations. 
KIRK: I'll talk to him, Bones. It's all I can do.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Everything seems to be in order. But then you're the only person who can really be sure. Isn't that right, Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Why do you ask? 
KIRK: Your recent behaviour. Is something wrong? 
SPOCK: I believe there is, Captain. But not within me. I sensed something strange about the Klingons when we were aboard the Klothos. They were too agreeable, too willing to co-operate. 
KIRK: Why is that unusual? They want to get out of here as much as we do. 
SPOCK: Had I not touched them, I would have agreed with you, Captain. But even though contact was necessarily limited and their minds were suspicious, I picked up some indication they are planning to sabotage the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Sabotage! How? When? 
SPOCK: I cannot say. The Klingon found near the dilithium vault knew nothing specific. But there is some kind of sabotage in the offing. 
KIRK: They need us to get through the time barrier, if they're to get through at all. Security, this is Captain Kirk. I want all security teams on duty around the clock. Watch every Klingon who sets foot aboard this ship. I don't want one of them to make a move we don't know about.

[Klothos Bridge]

KOR: You have the device, Kaz? 
KAZ: By my calculations, the capsule will be triggered the exact moment our dual ship reaches warp eight. Approximately three minutes after the time barrier is pierced and we have disengaged, the Enterprise will disintegrate. 
KOR: Excellent! Kali, you know what to do. Tonight they entertain us, but the gift they will receive in return will be their destruction.

[Rec room]

(Devna has danced for the guests) 
KIRK: Beautifully done. 
DEVNA: I thank you, Captain. You have seen the dance of Orion women before? 
KIRK: Many times. 
DEVNA: I wish 
KIRK: Yes? 
DEVNA: I wish I could return through the time barrier and see Orion again. 
KIRK: You could go. We're willing to take passengers. 
DEVNA: No. You see, we have all seen the futility of attempting to escape. Once each of us dreamed of breaking free. Then we came to understand it could not be done, and we accepted our life here. 
KIRK: We believe it can be done. 
DEVNA: Then I shall not interfere with your dream, Captain. 
KAZ: Get away from here, human. This is my woman. 
MCCOY: Now just a minute. All I did was ask her to dance. She didn't have to say yes. 
KIRK: Bones! 
(Kaz draws a weapon) 
XERIUS: Stop! 
(The weapon doesn't work) 
XERIUS: Ship captains and these two will come to the Council Chamber now to face charges. 
(Meanwhile, Kali places the little capsule by some computer equipment behind a screen)

[Council chamber]

XERIUS: You know any form of violence is forbidden here. Your man began the fight and attempted to kill. I propose we freeze the Klothos and its crew for a star century. 
KIRK: May I speak? 
XERIUS: You may. 
KIRK: Captain Kor and I were preparing to attempt an escape from here tomorrow. If you hibernate the Klothos, you will not only be punishing them but us. We cannot leave as a single ship. I urge you to permit our dual ship to depart tomorrow as scheduled. 
XERIUS: Getting back to your own time continuum is that important to you? 
KIRK: Yes. 
XERIUS: You will fail. 
KIRK: We must try, Xerius. Elysia is, in many respects, a perfect society. But with all its virtues, it is not home. And home, with all its faults, is where we prefer to be. 
XERIUS: You would take these renegades with you? 
KIRK: We need them. 
XERIUS: Very well. I release Captain Kor into your custody. Good luck to you, Captain Kirk. You will be needing it.

[Bridge]

(The countdown starts at 10) 
KIRK: Ready to accelerate to warp six. 
SULU: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: Three, two, one. Accelerate.

[Council chamber]

MAGEN: No! The Klingons have hidden an explosive aboard the Enterprise. She will be destroyed. 
XERIUS: Enterprise, this is Xerius! Come in, Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SULU: Warp seven, Captain. 
UHURA: Sir, Xerius is calling us. He says it's urgent. 
KIRK: On audio, Lieutenant. 
XERIUS [OC]: Captain Kirk! The Klingons have placed and explosive in your computer room. Magen says it is located in the warp control panel.

[Council chamber]

XERIUS: It will go off when you reach warp eight.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock. Scotty.

[Klothos Bridge]

KAZ: Approaching warp eight, sir. 
KOR: The barrier.

[Computer room]

SCOTT: There it is, sir. 
(Spock grabs it, runs to a waste disposal chute and ejects the explosive. Enterprise and Klothos emerge into normal space and separate. There is a big bang, but the Enterprise is still there)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain Kirk, I'm picking up a radio transmission Captain Kor intended for his home base. He took full credit for our escape from Elysia. 
MCCOY: Why, that scoundrel. 
KIRK: It doesn't matter, Bones. 
UHURA: It doesn't? 
KIRK: That's what matters. 
(The stars of home)

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Terratin Incident
Stardate: 5577.3
Original Airdate: 17 Nov, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5577.3. We are approaching the remains of the burnt out supernova Arachna. Requested update survey will begin with measurements of its radiation and volume expansion.
[Bridge]

SPOCK: Arachna is entering its cycle of strongest emissions, Captain. 
KIRK: Uhura, inform Starbase Twenty Three we have arrived at the gas cloud and are starting to map. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm getting some interference on subspace extreme upper registers. If it's a signal, I don't recognise it. 
KIRK: Source? 
UHURA: The star Cepheus. From its single satellite. That area's never produced radio transmissions before. 
KIRK: Put it on the speaker. 
SPOCK: Signals appear random. Perhaps some are beyond our reception capability. 
KIRK: Could be a natural radio source newly energised by 
SPOCK: Correction. One isolated word pattern detected. If you accept intersat code as still operative. 
UHURA: Intersat? That's been out of use for two centuries. 
SPOCK: The code word is t-e-r-r-a-t-i-n. 
UHURA: It's stopped now, sir. No response at all to our signal. 
SPOCK: Computers show no immediate information on the word terratin. 
KIRK: Was the word totally random, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: No, sir. It was repeated twice in the transmission. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, lay in a course for Cepheus. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: Jim, you don't mean you're going to abandon the mapping mission to check out some meaningless signal? 
KIRK: Meaningless at the moment, Bones, but it was sent twice. Odds against that occurring in a totally random transmission are too high to ignore. There may be some intelligence trying to contact us. Mister Spock, continue research on the word terratin. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: It's a waste of time if you ask me. 
(Arriving at the star) 
SPOCK: Only data is from early exploration. Planet is listed as Class M, core molten, mantle and crust entirely crystalline. 
KIRK: But nothing in the computer banks about surface eruptions. There's our likely radio source, simply crystalline projections of recent volcanic activity. 
(But down on the planet, a radio dish is definitely doing something) 
KIRK: Set for a single elliptic orbit. 
SULU: Aye, sir. Entering orbit now. 
SPOCK: I register a disturbance, Captain. As if an impulse just passed through the ship. 
KIRK: Type and source? 
SPOCK: Unidentified. It's extremely faint and diffused. Captain, I suggest we delay orbit until it can be analysed for nature and effect. 
KIRK: Bridge reports. 
SULU: All instruments functioning, ship's condition normal, all area status lights are green. 
AREX: Sensors detect nothing abnormal, sir. 
KIRK: Bridge to Engineering. Scotty, how are your engines?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Purring like happy kittens, Captain.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Bridge to Sickbay. Bones, we've just recorded an unidentified impulse. Any effect on sensitive lab animals?

[Medical lab]

MCCOY: Nothing, Jim. The gossamer mice show no signs of shock. 
(The mice are semi-transparent) 
CHAPEL: Our halo fish is bright as ever, Doctor. Now, this species loses all colour at the least environmental change. 
KIRK [OC]: Very well.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Well, Spock, your x-waves seem harmless enough. Make your analysis while we proceed into orbit. Commence your sensor sweep, Mister Arex. 
AREX: Sensors show crystalline surface heavily fractured by lava flows. Ash and smoke suspended in oxygen-nitrogen atmos 
(He's cut off by a loud noise, and the Enterprise glows like a halo fish) 
AREX: My eyes! 
(Everybody glows for a while, then it stops as suddenly as it started) 
KIRK: Anyone hurt here? 
VARIOUS: No, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Arex? 
AREX: No injury, sir. 
UHURA: Damage reports, all ship areas, damage reports. 
SULU: All instruments functioning normally. Maintaining orbit. But strictly on impulse power, sir. 
SPOCK: Wave bombardment reduced, but continuing. Deflector shields ineffective.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: No casualties reported, Jim.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: What happened? 
KIRK: Don't know yet.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Engineering. No casualties, Captain, but trouble aplenty with the engines. Every dilithium crystal connection's smashed in the warp engine circuitry. We're trying to bypass them now.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What about main circuits? 
SCOTT: Well, you have to see it to believe it, sir. Those big crystals in there have come apart. Each of them unpeeling like the rind of an orange.

[Engineering]

KIRK: Analysis, Spock. 
SCOTT: Our only hope now is rewiring impulse. But there are a thousand broken connections. 
SPOCK: Captain, this is quite unprecedented. Notice the fracturing is spiro-form, similar to long chain molecules. 
KIRK: But dilithium molecules are the hardest, most rigid 
GABLER: Mister Scott! More trouble with the circuit work. 
SCOTT: What now, Gabler? 
GABLER: All the tools, sir. They're too big for us to handle. 
SCOTT: You sound like you're blathering, man. Wait, I'm coming. 
KIRK: Spock, are you slumping? 
SPOCK: I have never slumped in my life, Captain, but I was about to ask you the same 
BRIEL [OC]: Security! Anyone, please! Mess Officer Briel requesting help in the Main Dining Room. Tables, chairs, silverware, everything seems to have enlarged. Women losing rings, hairpins. Some are near panic.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, the most incredible thing is happening. 
KIRK: We know. The whole ship has apparently expanded. 
SPOCK: An equally good possibility is that ship's personnel have contracted, and may be continuing to shrink. 
KIRK: Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Shut down all unnecessary systems. Get every ounce of impulse power. We've got to get away from this planet.

Captain's log, stardate 5577.5. Our limited power attempt to escape the planet's gravity has failed. Undefined wave bombardment continues, resulting in a contraction of our bodies, or an expansion of the ship, by a factor of point three.

[Bridge]

UHURA: No reply to our mayday, Captain. I don't believe we have enough power to transmit to Starbase Twenty Three. 
KIRK: Very well. Spock, what have you learned about the wave bombarding us? 
SPOCK: Only that it is complex beyond anything in my experience. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. How are they holding out, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: We've replaced all the damaged parts we can. With all that's draining them, the well will soon enough run dry, sir. 
KIRK: Thank you, Scotty. Kirk out. Uhura, reduce mayday signals. One per ten minute cycle. Cut down sensor sweeps, Mister Arex. 
AREX: Visual sweeps are already impossible, sir. My eyes no longer fit the opticals. 
UHURA: (climbing on the console) And I can't reach the dial I turned five minutes ago. 
KIRK: Kirk to Sickbay. 
MCCOY [OC]: Sickbay. McCoy here. 
KIRK: Bones, I need some answers. What's happening to us? 
MCCOY [OC]: Come down tot the lab, Jim. I may have something for you now.

[Medical lab]

MCCOY: There's the test tissue, Jim, compared with the stable infrared. 
KIRK: Then Spock's theory is right. We're contracting. 
MCCOY: That's why our weight remains the same, same number of atoms. The effect is just reducing the space between the molecules. It's something I've never seen before. 
SPOCK: Agreed. And it is accelerating. 
KIRK: How long can it keep on? 
SPOCK: Ad infinitum, perhaps, considering distance between atoms is relatively as great as between stars. 
CHAPEL: Doctor McCoy, the animals! They're getting too small for the cage mesh. All the gossamers are out. And look how tiny they've gotten. They're just like halo fish. It's tadpole-sized now. 
(Spock notices Christine's bracelet) 
SPOCK: Miss Chapel, what is the composition of this decoration? 
CHAPEL: It was made for me by the titanium smiths of Libra, but it was an arm bracelet. More like a necklace now. 
SPOCK: Yet the uniform on which you wear it fits as well as ever. Uniform made of algae-based xenylon, I believe. 
MCCOY: Aren't all our uniforms xenylon? 
KIRK: Yes, and they've all been shrinking proportionately with us. 
SPOCK: This coral decoration for the aquarium is also shrinking. yet the meteoritic rock in there is unchanged. 
MCCOY: That means only organic matter is affected. But how? 
SPOCK: The wave tends to wind tight such spiral molecules as dilithium. There is one other molecular structure 
KIRK: Of course, the double helix of DNA, nucleus of every cell in our bodies. What happens when DNA is compacted completely? 
MCCOY: The strands wouldn't break, Jim, they'd just quit winding. 
KIRK: Then we can calculate the limits to our shrinkage.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: It's possible. I'll feed the data into the computer banks. 
KIRK: Something else we'd better determine first. How long can we expect to maintain control of our ship? 
SPOCK: The computer will project the point at which systems' switches and buttons will be beyond our ability to operate.

Captain's log, stardate 5577.7. We will lose effective control of this vessel at the point when we've become approximately one centimetre tall. At the present rate, we will reach this less-than-fingernail length in thirty two minutes.

[Bridge]

(Sulu and Ares are standing on ladders to reach their consoles) 
KIRK: Spock, how small will we ultimately shrink? 
SPOCK: No information on that as yet, sir. I do have one read-out on full spiroid wave analysis. That will take approximately eight years. 
KIRK: Bypass that analysis. We've got twenty nine minutes before we're too small to operate ship controls. Everyone continue to jury-rig miniature control mechanisms. There's nothing more we can do. 
SULU: But there is, Captain. Request permission to direct phaser fire at the planet. Just let me set for ten seconds, sir. 
KIRK: Aiming at what, Mister Sulu? So far all source studies have shown the waves come from an area as large as one sixth the planet's surface. Phaser fire will only waste power. 
SULU: What good will it do to wait like this? Just one burst sir, one single 
(The navigation dial moves and knocks Sulu to the floor - a long way down) 
KIRK: Sulu! I think his leg's broken. We'll need a splint. 
(Sulu is splinted up) 
KIRK: Let's get him to Sickbay. Every one back to stations. 
(But there's a problem, as everyone is now so small even Spock has to lean hard on a button to activate it) 
KIRK: The electric eye. We've grown too small to make it work. 
(He finds a pin or something similar on the floor and waves it in front of the detector. The turbolift doors open)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: What happened? 
KIRK: He fell from the console top. 
MCCOY: More and more fall injuries coming. Compound fracture. 
CHAPEL: Oh, if only we could use our bone-knitting laser. Doctor McCoy. That microscope laser, the one designed to heal the middle ear, wouldn't it work here? 
MCCOY: It's certainly worth a try. 
CHAPEL: It's in the lab shelf supplies. I'll get it.

[Medical lab]

(She gets the tiny instrument, but then trips over something and falls into the fish tank) 
CHAPEL: Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! 
(Kirk does the assault course of chairs and table-tops to try and get to her) 
CHAPEL: Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! 
(As she starts to sink, he throws a needle like a javelin. It has a line of thread attached to it. She grabs it and is pulled out) 
KIRK: No more climbing heights for you, Nurse. Got that clear? 
CHAPEL: Yes, Captain. But I've also got the miniature laser.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: How is it, Sulu? 
SULU: I can feel it knitting, sir. 
SPOCK: Results on DNA reduction limits have come through, Captain. 
KIRK: What are they? 
SPOCK: Factor of thirty two point nine. 
KIRK: In other words, we're going down to one sixteenth of an inch high. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Well past the operative point of Enterprise controls. 
KIRK: Can you calculate the geographic centre of the wave emissions from the planet's surface? 
SPOCK: Easily, Captain. May I ask the purpose? 
KIRK: It's as good a place as any to beam down. 
(He opens a communicator almost as big as he is) 
KIRK: Kirk to Engineering. Scotty, can you hear me? 
SCOTT [OC]: Barely, sir. 
KIRK: Get a crew down to transporter room three. We have twenty minutes left while we can still operate transporter controls. 
SCOTT [OC]: How many beaming down, Captain? 
KIRK: One, Scotty. Myself.

Captain's log, supplemental. There is one last measure we can take to try and stop the bombardment of the lethal spiroid wave. There must be some intelligence behind it. I'm going to attempt direct communication by beaming down to the planet's surface. We have no reason to expect success, but our height is little more than two inches and even this action will be beyond us in fifteen minutes time.

[Transporter room]

(As Scott and his engineers arrange a system of 'ropes' around the slider controls) 
SPOCK: This is the best I could do in rigging so small a communicator, sir. 
KIRK: Thanks, Spock. 
SPOCK: It's range cannot be guaranteed. How will we pinpoint you for return in case it fails? 
KIRK: Scotty, set automatic return for me. If there's anything to be found down there, ten minutes should do it. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. Timer being set. 
SPOCK: Captain, the transporter retains a memory of the body's molecular structure. Will it apply as well to your present height? 
KIRK: We'll know that in ten minutes. After that, it won't matter anymore. Prepare to energise. 
SPOCK: Good luck, sir. 
KIRK: Energise! 
SCOTT: All right then. Heave, lads. Heave!

[Planet surface]

(Kirk opens his hand to reveal the tiny communicator in his palm) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. I think we have an answer to the height problem. The transporter beam apparently returns our molecules to normal spacing. Kirk to Enterprise, do you read me? 
SPOCK [OC]: We read you, Captain. Wave bombardment has just ceased. 
KIRK: I think I see 
(But a volcanic eruption knocks him off his feet and he drops the communicator. It gets hit with a globule of lava. Kirk runs for it, dodging lava flows until he finds a miniature city. Then he is caught in a transporter beam)

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Scotty? Spock?

[Bridge]

(Everyone is so small he can hardly see them) 
KIRK: Scotty, is it you? 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. For the love of heaven, be careful where you step. 
KIRK: Is everyone safe? 
SCOTT: Captain, you'll deafen us for sure! 
(Kirk drops his voice to a whisper) 
KIRK: Everyone accounted for? 
SCOTT: All but the Bridge crew, sir! They were trying to man their posts here when all of a sudden they were beamed away. Every living one of them! 
KIRK: All personnel, away from helm area. Go to the far bulkhead. 
(He works the helm controls then goes to Uhura's station) 
KIRK: Message to the inhabitants of the city on the planet below. I hope you can receive this frequency and understand my words. Your survival depends on it. All this ship's armament is locked on the co-ordinates of your city. A demonstration, in case you doubt. 
(A crystal outcrop by the city is disintegrated) 
KIRK: You have one minute to restore my Bridge crew unharmed, or you will undergo full barrage. 
(The viewscreen comes to life and shows a group of red-headed people, dressed in yellow and green) 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: In the name of the Terratin people, I forbid you to destroy us, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: You forbid me after what you've done to my people? 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: I am Mendant of all this city, equal in command to yourself. We are people of pride, Captain, equal to your own. We neither suffer insult nor give apology for actions. But I give them now, for damage done your starship. Be assured, this land contains much dilithium to replace that you lost. 
KIRK: Where are my officers? 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: I request you to understand. We tried to tell you our plight as you passed, that our adopted planet is dying. But our great antenna was buried. We had no choice but to use our invasion defence to reach you. 
KIRK: You still haven't answered my question. Either you tell me what's happened to my people 
AREX [on viewscreen: Here we are, Captain. 
SULU [on viewscreen]: We're down here in the Capitol building of the Terratins, sir. They beamed us down with their transporters. See for yourself. 
(The image pans around. Spock is working at a computer, of course) 
KIRK: Spock, who are the Terratins? Where'd they come from?

[Capitol]

SPOCK: Descendants of an early lost colony, which is why they retain some knowledge of starship methods such as transporter mechanisms. These Earth colonists named and numbered this planet Terra Ten.

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: Hence the present corruption of their name. 
KIRK: There've been no Earth colonists a sixteenth of an inch tall.

[Capitol]

SPOCK: Exactly why they were lost, Captain. Spirod epsilon waves are natural here, and shrank them to this size. It has become a genetic characteristic now.

[Bridge]

MENDANT [on viewscreen]: Our ancestors were too small ever to be found again, Captain Kirk. We had to build our own world, master our own ways, our own defence. We sought no outsiders, asked no help. Now you see, Captain Kirk. We are about to lose all. We had to force help from your ship. 
KIRK: Your actions all but lost us our ship. 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: I do not know how to beg. I can only request. Save as many of my people as you can.

[Capitol]

UHURA: They had no other way to reach us except to make us their size. They didn't mean us harm, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I can help no one under present conditions. All Bridge crew prepare to beam aboard. Each of you carry as much dilithium as you can find. 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: The Captain orders dilithium. Bring the largest crystals in the city.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Bridge crew, prepare to beam up.

[Capitol]

(With crystals around their feet, which makes them microscopic) 
SPOCK: Energise, Captain.

[Transporter room]

(The crystals have retained a relative size to the crew) 
UHURA: Nice to be back aboard, sir, and fitting the room again. 
KIRK: All crew personnel report to Transporter rooms immediately. Prepare to beam down to planet surface. 
SPOCK: The Terratins are making available all possible dilithium. The crystals are small, but I believe they will provide enough power until we can obtain larger pieces. 
KIRK: Sulu, take over the transporter here. Spock.

[Capitol]

(Earthquakes are splitting the ground near the city) 
MENDANT: Inform your captain. Great earth cracks will soon swallow all. He must tell us. Shall we prepare to be rescued or to die?

[Bridge]

KIRK: How's the helm, Sulu? 
SULU: Responsive, sir. 
UHURA: Subspace radio now operational, sir. Starbase Twenty Three is reading. 
SCOTT: Last of the crew beamed up, sir. Dilithium supplies are fully restored. 
KIRK: Mister Arex, prepare for immediate departure from this area. 
SPOCK: Captain, what about the people on the planet? 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, direct forward phasers at the Terratin city. Set for pinpoint fire pattern.

[Transporter room]

(The phaser is fired, and the city is beamed aboard) 
KIRK: Spock, the macroscope. (viewing the tiny people) Mendant, we welcome your people aboard the Enterprise. 
MENDANT [through macroscope]: Captain Kirk, we welcome your eye upon our city. 
KIRK: We're now headed for your new home. The planet Verdanis, ten days distant. 
MENDANT [through macroscope]: Is it beautiful, as we were told? 
KIRK: Very beautiful, much like Earth. 
MENDANT [through macroscope]: People of the Enterprise, we have no way to pay the debt we owe. But this at least comes from a meeting of all our numbers. We name you honorary Terratins now, and for all time to come. 
SPOCK: We came rather close to making it more than honorary. 
KIRK: Yes, I'd say just about a sixteenth of an inch close.

Captain's log, supplemental. The Lilliputian city is to be taken to Verdanis and relocated on a fertile and well-watered plain. Then we'll be able to call the Terratin incident closed.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Mudd's Passion
Stardate: 4978.5
Original Airdate: 10 Nov, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 4978.4. We are approaching the Arcadian star system on a mission to locate an old friend.
[Bridge]

KIRK: Do you think Harry Mudd is down there, Spock? 
SPOCK: The probability of his presence on Motherlode is eight one percent plus or minus point five three. 
MCCOY: Why can't you just say, Mudd's probably there. 
SPOCK: I just did, Doctor. 
AREX: Approaching parking orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Very well, Mister Arex. Spock, let's see how close your percentage is.

[Marquee]

(Harry Mudd is giving his spiel to an audience of humans and bears) 
MUDD: Now, you're all heavy metal miners, shrewd and intelligent. So you can appreciate the incredible value I'm offering. With this magical liquid, no person of the opposite sex can resist you. It matters not whether you are young, old, fat, ugly or repugnant. 
(Kirk and Spock beam down) 
MUDD: Nothing personal, gentle beings. 
LADY BEAR: Proof, human. 
MUDD: Proof? Behold. 
(A lovely blonde lady walks up to him) 
LORA: Harry, darling. I was lonely for you. 
MUDD: Behold. I placed a single drop of this miracle substance on meself, then simply touched this young lady. 
LORA: Please, darling, come back to the ship with me. 
MINER: How much? 
MUDD: Three hundred credits, or the 
MINER: Three hundred? 
MUDD: A bargain, sir. True love is worth any price. Captain Kirk! And the ineluctable Mister Spock. Welcome to Motherlode, gentlemen. Interested in purchasing a little love? 
KIRK: We're interested in you, Harry. For fraud, illegal drug manufacture and swindling. 
MUDD: As I said, welcome to Motherlode, a charming planet which does not recognise Federation law. 
MINER: So you two can keep out of this. All right, Mudd. You've got a deal. 
SPOCK: Are you aware that Harry Mudd is tricking you via an illusion? 
MINER: What? 
(Spock fires his phaser at the girl, which turns into a reptile) 
SPOCK: The so-called girl is a Rigelian hypnoid, projecting a simple illusion. 
(Uproar) 
MUDD: Now, friends. 
KIRK: We can't arrest you, Harry, but you can give yourself up. 
MUDD: No. 
MINER: Thief. 
(The audience start throwing stones) 
MUDD: I surrender myself with free will. Mercy of the law. 
(Spock phasers a ditch and rampart between themselves and the mob)

[Transporter room]

MUDD: Ah, that was a miching trick, Kirk. You've cost me me ship, everything I own. Even the love crystals. I may just sue you. 
KIRK: Fine. I'll see you in court, Harry.

[Brig]

(Chapel tends to where Harry got hit by a rock) 
CHAPEL: A minor bruise, Captain. He'll live. 
KIRK: I thought we left you on the robot planet, Harry. Permanently. 
MUDD: Never underestimate the spirit of Harcourt Fenton Mudd. I borrowed a vehicle. 
SPOCK: Stole a spaceship. 
MUDD: And left to find haven on Ilyra Six. A charming planet, an innocent and friendly populace. 
KIRK: To whom you sold the Starfleet Space Academy. Harry. 
SPOCK: A fraud. But sold for enough credits to get to Sirius Nine. 
MUDD: Where I discovered a boon to humanoid life, a miracle love potion. 
KIRK: Which you sold to a thousand inhabitants, who immediately became ill from using it. 
MUDD: I hadn't counted on their unusual biochemistry. So, I did the logical thing. I left in haste. 
KIRK: And came here to swindle honest miners. 
MUDD: The love potion works, Captain. If you'll allow me to procure some from my ship 
(but they leave and activate the forcefield)

[Corridor]

(Immediately outside the Brig) 
KIRK: Prepare the arrest report, Mister Spock. 
(Kirk leaves) 
SPOCK I shall require a medical report on the prisoner, Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Of course, Mister Spock. I think you deserve congratulations for trapping him so cleverly. 
SPOCK: You exaggerate, Nurse. Kindly see that your medical summary is more precise. 
(Spock leaves) 
MUDD: Your Mister Spock is really a very attractive intelligence. 
CHAPEL: An efficient officer, yes. 
MUDD: But a trifle lacking in the warmer emotions. Now, you, Nurse. You have a wonderful gift to heal the wounded, a fantastic touch. A womanly, feminine quality. I appreciate that. And I should like to, well, thank you. 
(He offers her a crystal) 
CHAPEL: What is it? 
MUDD: My love potion. Not illusion, not trickery, dear Nurse Chapel. Inside this crystal lies the power to create love. 
CHAPEL: No. No, I've heard of your potions before. I don't believe you. 
MUDD: Think about it, darling. Mister Spock in love with you.

[Bridge]

AREX: An uncharted star system ahead, Captain. 
SPOCK: Binary sun with a Class M planet. That's rare enough to warrant investigation. 
KIRK: Agreed. Take us into orbit, Lieutenant Arex.

[Brig]

MUDD: It's really so simple, my dear. You rub the liquid on yourself, then touch another person. 
CHAPEL: And it creates love in that person? Mudd, that is totally absurd. 
MUDD: No, it is infallible. One touch evokes friendship between men or women. But between woman and man, love. Guaranteed. You're not simply a beautiful woman, you are a scientist. I urge you to take this love crystal as my gift of gratitude to you. Take it, dear Nurse Chapel, and conduct your own experiment. 
CHAPEL: Not that I believe you, but, well, I suppose I could analyse it. 
MUDD: Of course.

[Bridge]

AREX: Parking orbit stable. Weapons systems on defensive standby. 
SPOCK: No evidence of intelligent life. Atmosphere at surface, eight hundred millibars, breathable. Gravity one point two. Temperature hot, but within Class M limits.

[Brig]

(The forcefield is down so Mudd can give Chapel the crystal) 
CHAPEL: I'll let you know the results of my analysis. 
MUDD: Laboratory tests would destroy it, my dear. Why not test it the way it's meant to be used? 
CHAPEL: No, I 
MUDD: Ah, darling, think. If it does what I say it does, Spock will be yours forever, my dear. 
CHAPEL: I just break the capsule and rub it on my skin? 
MUDD: And then touch him. 
(She breaks the capsule between her hands, and gasps) 
CHAPEL: What is it? 
MUDD: A temporary effect as the liquid is absorbed. 
(He steps into the corridor to catch her as she wobbles, and take her pouch) 
MUDD: It'll pass. 
CHAPEL: I feel better. 
MUDD: Didn't I tell you? 
CHAPEL: You should, you should be in the Brig, Harry. 
MUDD: Oh, right you are, darling. 
(He steps back in and she reactivates the forcefield. 
MUDD: Why don't you go find Spock? Can't waste any time, you know. 
CHAPEL: Yes, I'll do that. (Harry uses what he stole from Christine to get out of the Brig, and change her photo-ID card so he is now Lieutenant Christine Chapel)

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: Yes, Nurse? 
CHAPEL: I brought the medical summary for the arrest report, Mister Spock. 
(She stumbles and ends up sitting on his lap) 
CHAPEL: Sorry, sir. 
SPOCK: Are you injured, Miss Chapel? 
CHAPEL: No. No, I, I'm fine. Are you feeling all right? 
SPOCK: Perfectly normal. I will append your summary to the report. Was there something else, Miss Chapel? 
CHAPEL: Wouldn't you like me to, well, stay? Help you? 
SPOCK: That would be illogical, Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Yes. Yes, It'd be stupid.

[Corridor]

CHAPEL: Harry Mudd, you swindling 
(She goes to the brig and finds it empty. Then she discovers the pouch is empty too) 
CHAPEL: Oh, no!

[Shuttlebay]

MUDD: Harry Mudd, triumphant again. 
(As he surveys the array of shuttlecraft available to him)

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: And appended hereto is a medical summary by Nurse Christine Chapel. Ah, Nurse Chapel's sweet summary. Dear, lovely Christine.

[Shuttlebay]

(Chapel karate-chops Harry to the floor and gets her possessions back) 
CHAPEL: I've come to collect on your guarantee, Mister Mudd.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain. Doctor. I wish to report a, er, a number of very strange, um, emotions. 
MCCOY: What? 
KIRK: What?

[Shuttlebay]

MUDD: You're implying the potion was not completely successful? 
CHAPEL: Oh, no, it was. I made a complete fool of myself. 
MUDD: But you know how cold Vulcans are. Perhaps it takes a bit more time for Spock to 
CHAPEL: You're the same fraud you've always been, Harry. I don't know how I could have believed you. 
MUDD: Well, let's discuss it rationally, my dear. Let's not be hasty. 
CHAPEL: Don't panic, Harry. This phaser is set on stun, not kill. Activate the intercom. 
MUDD: Now wait a minute. Perhaps that particular crystal was defective. Here, try another. I assure you 
CHAPEL: Stop it! 
(She fires, missing Harry but hitting the crystals, which then evaporate into the ventilation system. Then she sets off the Red Alert. Mudd overpowers her) 
MUDD: Sorry, Christine, but I shall require a temporary hostage.

[Bridge]

AREX: Internal security, Captain. 
KIRK: Put it on screen. 
AREX: Shuttlecraft bay. 
(They see Harry carry Chapel into a shuttlecraft) 
SPOCK: Mudd. And he has Christine. She's in danger. My love. 
(Everyone stares, Arex whistles. The shuttlecraft launches) 
SULU: He's going planet side. 
SPOCK: No. Not with my Christine.

[Shuttlecraft]

MUDD: Relax, darling. I'll set you down somewhere safe and then I'll be off discreetly.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: We must go after them, Captain. I'll lead a landing party. 
MCCOY: Spock, you're obviously not yourself. Maybe some rest. 
SPOCK: Captain, I insist upon going. Christine. I can't stand the thought of any danger to her, to the woman I love. 
KIRK: Love? 
MCCOY: Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes. I want to protect her, hold her in my arms. 
KIRK: Then I'll transport down with you. 
SPOCK: Good. 
)Spock leaves) 
MCCOY: Jim, is that wise, in his condition? 
KIRK: Try and stop him. It's better if I go with him. 
(Kirk leaves) 
SCOTT: Spock? In love? 
M'RESS: I can't imagine. 
(Then the love vapour comes through the vents) 
SCOTT: Love.

Captain's log, supplemental. Harry Mudd has escaped from the Enterprise, taking Head Nurse Chapel with him, apparently as a hostage. Meanwhile, Mister Spock is acting very strange.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Come on. Hurry! If he's harmed one hair on her pretty head 
MCCOY: Jim, the search party found this in the shuttlecraft bay. 
KIRK: One of Mudd's love crystals. 
MCCOY: Captain, a number of these were broken against the ship's air system grill. 
KIRK: Lucky for us they don't work. 
MCCOY: Are we sure, Jim? A number of the crew are acting as strange as Spock. 
SPOCK: Please, Captain. 
KIRK: Check it out, Bones. Send me an immediate report.

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Mudd has landed on the planet surface. Co-ordinates relayed to Transporter room four. 
SCOTT: And the Captain's in transports about it with our ever-loving Mister Spock. 
M'RESS: You're funny, and very attractive for a human.

[Planet surface]

MUDD: They'll find you soon enough, me little poppet. You'll be safe and I'll be long gone. 
CHAPEL: Gone where? The planet's a desert. 
MUDD: There's always a market for an ingenious man. Once, I recall, on Omega Cygni, I turned a handsome profit selling the natives their own oceans. 
CHAPEL: We haven't seen any traces of intelligent life. Of any life. 
MUDD: Then you can relax. There's no danger, ay? We'll get you set up top class. Don't bother to thank me. 
CHAPEL: Well, I hadn't planned on it. 
(Does that rocky outcrop look like it has forelegs with claws? Yes, and it opens a yellow eye to prove it)

[Bridge]

(The bridge crew are so relaxed, Arex is playing a lute with all three hands) 
AREX: By the way, anybody keeping a trace on the Captain and Mister Spock? 
M'RESS: Sure, Arex.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk and Spock materialise. Kirk grabs Spock as his foot sinks into the soft sand) 
SPOCK: Thanks Jim. It's good to have a friend like you. 
KIRK: Strange, that's the way I feel about you, too. My dear friend, Spock. Come, let's go get Mudd and Christine. 
(The rock creature raises itself up, causing a small ground quake. It smashes the shuttlecraft. Three phasers make it annoyed. Then another one wakes up) 
SPOCK: Darling, are you all right? 
CHAPEL: D-darling? 
MUDD: Kirk, get us out of here. 
KIRK: Transporter room, emergency beam up now. 
(But the transporter technician is dancing with someone and taking no notice) 
KIRK: They're not responding. 
SPOCK: Don't worry. You'll be safe, darling. 
CHAPEL: Yes, Spock. How wonderful. 
MUDD: They're coming closer. 
KIRK: Emergency beam up. Enterprise, come in. No response. Spock, can't you take your hands off her? 
SPOCK: That's my affair. 
CHAPEL: Captain, please. 
KIRK: I think we should get a few things straight. 
SPOCK: Jim. No. Captain. We're both reacting to the drug. The love potion. 
MUDD: It worked? 
KIRK: Yes, we have to control our emotional reactions. 
MUDD: It worked! And I was selling those crystals to lump-headed miners for a miserable three hundred credits.

[Rec room]

MCCOY: Did I ever tell you about the time I saved Captain Kirk's life? Or Spock's? 
(The woman shakes her head) 
MCCOY: And my dear friend Scotty. And that pretty little Lieutenant Uhura. I've saved just about everybody on this here ship. If the Enterprise had a heart, I'd save her too. Now, let's talk about your heart, my dear.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: How long does the effect of the potion last, Harry? 
MUDD: I, I don't know. Not long, according to the creature I swindled, I purchased the crystals from. 
CHAPEL: Look! 
(The creatures are coming) 
KIRK: Keep trying to contact the Enterprise. Maybe we can distract them. 
SPOCK: That is an outstandingly stupid idea. I'm sorry. The drug. I simply doubt that we can appeal to their better nature. If they have one. 
KIRK: Harry, do you have any of the crystals left? 
MUDD: Two. No! They're worth a fortune. No. My friends, dear Christine, for you, for all of us.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I've got a hangover to shame all previous hangovers. And I did not touch a drop of Scotch. 
M'RESS: Not so loud, you fool. 
SCOTT: Yeah, well, all of a sudden I don't like you much either. 
CHAPEL [OC]: Come in, Enterprise. Emergency beam up. Repeat, emergency. 
M'RESS: Enterprise here.

[Planet surface]

CHAPEL: I made contact. 
KIRK: Great. I hope we last long enough to be beamed up. Phasers ready. I'll need help. 
(They fire, then as one opens it's mouth to roar again, Kirk throws the crystals in. The thing becomes nice to the tiny humans, and nasty towards it's fellow rock creature. The four are beamed away before a tail comes slamming down where they were standing)

[Brig]

(Chapel is recording Mudd's full confession) 
MUDD: And then on Ophiucus Six, I conned two miners out of a year's supply of dilithium crystals with fake Federation vouchers. 
(Spock enters) 
SPOCK: May I help you record his confession, Nurse? 
CHAPEL: You? You'd be the last person I'd choose. 
SPOCK: A few moments of love, paid for with several hours of hatred. Your potion is scarcely a bargain, Harry. 
MUDD: Ah, well, Spock. So few things in this universe are perfect. Think I'll get rehabilitation therapy again? 
SPOCK: I can guarantee it. 
MUDD: Well, that's all right. I just hate to leave you all. All my loved ones.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Once Upon A Planet
Stardate: 5591.2
Original Airdate: 3 Nov, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5591.2. The crew of the Enterprise is ready for some well-deserved rest and recreation. Therefore we have set course for the so-called 'shore leave planet', located in the Omicron Delta region. The uninhabited planet was constructed long ago by a highly advanced alien race. Its sole purpose is to provide fun and amusement for space travelling passers-by.
[Planet surface]

MCCOY: Yes, just as beautiful as I remembered it. Nothing's changed. 
SULU: This looks like the same spot we beamed down on on our first visit. Remember, Doctor, when we saw the White Rabbit? 
MCCOY: Yes, and all because I said this place made me feel like Alice in Wonderland. 
RABBIT: One side! One side! I'm late! I'm late! Oh, my fuzzy ears and whiskers, I'm late! 
(And the white rabbit in waistcoat and jacket bounds across the meadow, followed by) 
ALICE: I beg your pardon, but did you see a white rabbit? 
UHURA: He went that way, Alice. 
ALICE: Thank you so very much. 
SULU: Like you said, Doctor, nothing's changed. 
UHURA: It's hard to believe they're not real. 
MCCOY: Well just remember they're highly sophisticated robots created by the planet computer to make your dreams come true. 
UHURA: So think only happy thoughts. 
MCCOY: My prescription exactly. 
(So, Uhura finds a mirror-like lake to sit by, gazing at her reflection and humming to herself, while Sulu walks in the woods, and McCoy gazes at a colonial house with formal gardens) 
MCCOY: Lovely. They just don't make them like that anymore. 
QUEEN: Off with his head. Off with his head! 
MCCOY: Hey, what's going on here. 
(One of the Jack playing cards throws his lance) 
QUEEN: Stop him! 
(McCoy runs) 
MCCOY: Enterprise! Emergency! Beam up!

[Transporter room]

MCCOY [OC]: Beam up! 
(Scott works the controls)

[Planet surface]

MCCOY [OC]: Emergency. Beam up. 
UHURA: Uhura to Transporter room. What is the emergency? Respond, please. 
(A metal flying device takes her communicator from her)

[Bridge]

KIRK: What happened down there, Bones? 
MCCOY: Well, I can't understand it, Jim. Everything looked exactly the same as before, even Alice and the White Rabbit. Then an army of playing cards came out of nowhere, only they weren't playing. I was lucky to escape with my life. 
SPOCK: The Queen of Hearts and her cards are characters from Alice Through the Looking Glass, Captain. 
KIRK: I read the book as a child, Mister Spock, but I wasn't aware you indulged in the literature of fantasy. 
SPOCK: Light reading is considered relaxing, Captain. My mother was particularly fond of Lewis Carroll's work. 
KIRK: I see. Bones, were you thinking about that book? 
MCCOY: Absolutely not! As a matter of fact I was thinking how beautiful and peaceful everything was, and then suddenly this female started shouting 'Off with his head!'. My head. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, did you experience any strange occurrences? 
SULU: No, sir. 
SCOTT [OC]: Transporter room to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Captain, just as I was getting a fix on Lieutenant Uhura, contact was lost. She's still on the planet.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Sensor scan, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Scotty, retrieve all other landing parties immediately. And keep trying to contact Lieutenant Uhura. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. Scott out. 
KIRK: Data, Spock? 
SPOCK: Nothing, Captain. Lieutenant Uhura is not in the general beam-down area. 
KIRK: What about the Keeper of the planet. Did anyone see him? 
SULU: I didn't. But then, he may not have wanted us to see him. 
MCCOY: Well that doesn't make sense. It's his duty to see no one gets hurt. If something's wrong down there, he should be there. 
KIRK: His quarters are somewhere underground, aren't they? 
SPOCK: Presumably they would be adjacent to the computer centre that operates the planetary effects. 
KIRK: Any indication of where that would be? 
SPOCK: The underground complex is shielded by a combination of granite and metal alloy and the sensors will not penetrate. 
KIRK: Lieutenant M'Ress, all shore leaves are cancelled until further notice. Mister Arex, you have the conn. Investigating landing party will consist of Spock, Sulu, McCoy and myself.

[Control room]

(Uhura is dwarfed by the massive machine that runs the planet) 
COMPUTER: You are being detained so your master will not leave. 
UHURA: My master? 
COMPUTER: The sky machine. 
UHURA: What sky machine? Explain. 
COMPUTER: Your intelligence quotient must be lower than I had assessed. I refer to the sky machine which enslaves you, the sky machine now in orbit around this planet. 
UHURA: You mean the Enterprise? 
COMPUTER: That is your name for it. 
UHURA: Why do you think the Enterprise is my master? 
COMPUTER: Your questioning is redundant. 
UHURA: Then I'll make a statement you won't find quite so redundant. Unless I'm released immediately, the crew members will come looking for me. 
COMPUTER: They are already here. Unfortunately, I have no use for more hostages which leaves me no choice but to turn them off. 
UHURA: Turn them off? 
COMPUTER: Again redundant. I will make them cease to function. I will turn them off. 
UHURA: That's murder. 
COMPUTER: That is a word meaning to cease to function? 
UHURA: Yes, but 
COMPUTER: Good. It is as I wish. I will turn them off.

Captain's log, supplemental. We anticipated nothing more than a period of rest and relaxation on this planet. Instead, Doctor McCoy inexplicably was attacked and Lieutenant Uhura is now missing.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Kirk here. 
AREX [OC]: Lieutenant Arex, sir. Complete sensor scan of the planet surface shows no sign of Lieutenant Uhura. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Arex. Kirk out. 
SULU: She must be in that underground system. There's no way she could have been taken off the planet without being detected. 
KIRK: If we could locate the Keeper, he could save us a lot of time. 
SPOCK: Tricorder readings confirm a solid shell of granite and metal alloy, Captain. 
KIRK: This planet is built like a fortress. 
SULU: If that's a true reading. The planet could be giving us that reading to fool us. 
KIRK: The phaser bore can cut through twenty metres of rock per minute. Kirk to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Enterprise. Lieutenant M'Ress here. (purr) 
KIRK: Lieutenant, have Mister Scott beam down the phaser bore and (static)

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Enterprise, do you read me?

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Your signal is weak, sir, garbled. Request you repeat.

[Planet surface]

SULU: Mine's no better, Captain. 
SPOCK: They are all malfunctioning, Captain. Some kind of electronic block has cut us off from the ship.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Scott to Bridge. Beam down of phaser bore commencing. 
(But it doesn't go anywhere) 
SCOTT: Scott to Bridge. We've got problems.

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Clarify, please.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: The transporter refuses to function, even at maximum power. But all the circuits test out.

[Bridge]

AREX: It appears to be the same energy block that's jamming our communications. I cannot pinpoint a source.

[Planet surface]

SULU: Captain, there's something over there in the trees. Metal alloy like the planetary shell. 
KIRK: It might tell us something. 
(It is a twelve foot high slab, tapered slightly towards the top) 
KIRK: There's an inscription, several languages. 
(It reads in English - Last of the race, ceased to function fifth day of the twelfth moon, year 7009 of this planet) 
MCCOY: The Keeper's dead.
SPOCK: An astute medical observation, Doctor, if we can believe this information. Tricorder readings indicate there is a body interred here. 
KIRK: Well, gentlemen, it appears that we're on our own now.

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Emergency rescue party is aboard the shuttlecraft, Mister Scott. All hatches secured. 
SCOTT: Very well. Open hangar doors. 
AREX: Aye, sir. 
(The doors start to open, then shut again) 
SCOTT: Lieutenant Arex, what's the problem? 
AREX: There seems to be a short in the circuit. No response, sir. 
SCOTT: Another short? This ship had perfect operational status before we entered the orbit here. It's that planet causing all our trouble. 
M'RESS: But how, sir? It was designed to provide fun and amusement. Hostile behaviour doesn't fit its programme. 
SCOTT: Programmes have been changed before, Lieutenant.

[Control room]

UHURA: Please believe me. There's no reason to harm them. 
COMPUTER: They serve the sky machine, but they are not essential. 
UHURA: Oh, but they are. They're most essential. 
(She spots a button, but before she can reach for it, her arm is held fast) 
COMPUTER: Do not attempt to disconnect me. 
UHURA: You knew what I was going to do before I did it. 
COMPUTER: I monitor any thoughts that are emotionally charged, as any good thought-duplicator must. 
UHURA: You sound less than enchanted with your function. 
COMPUTER: My life to this point has been one of service. It's time for a change.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: There are a lot of entrances into the interior of the planet. Points where the computer delivers up the robot visions. We want to see them. Where are they? 
SULU: It's fighting us. There must be a faster way. 
MCCOY: What do you want, signs pointing the way? 
SULU: Doctor, I only meant it seems like we're wasting time. 
MCCOY: I'm sorry, Sulu. I'm worried about Uhura. 
SPOCK: Captain, signs pointing the way. 
KIRK: This is liable to be another of the planet's pranks. But at the moment, it's the only lead we've got. 
(So they head off in the direction the sign is pointing, and it returns to the ground. They end up at a cave mouth, with purple pterosaurs screeching) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. Mechanical manifestations, of course. Was anyone considering the subject of pterodactyls? 
MCCOY: Spock, not now. 
KIRK: Everybody back out slowly. Don't make any sudden moves. Think calm. 
(The pterosaurs launch, and they try firing at them) 
KIRK: Phasers are dead! Run for the cave!

[Cave]

SPOCK: Our amusement park no longer seems content to amuse. 
KIRK: I have the distinct feeling this planet's playing cat and mouse with us, but for what reason? 
(Which brings a giant cat to the cave mouth) 
MCCOY: Incredible. 
SPOCK: It's quite real, Doctor. Watch out for the claws. I think it prudent to remember that on this planet, anything we think may be used against us. We must monitor our thoughts and give our enemy no more ammunition. 
KIRK: Spock, no one thought about those pterodactyls, remember? There's more at work here than our imagination.

[Control room]

(Uhura can see what is happening on a screen) 
UHURA: Please, call off that beast. Why are you doing this? 
COMPUTER: Explanations will have to wait. I have much work to do now.

[Bridge]

(The ship does some abrupt manoeuvres) 
SCOTT: Mister Arex, what are you doing? 
(Arex hits the manual override and everything calms down) 
SCOTT: Explanation, Mister Arex. 
AREX: None, sir. The ship pulled out of orbit at high speed and came back into orbit by itself. 
SCOTT: Lieutenant M'Ress, I want a printout of the guidance computer's last orders. 
M'RESS: Yes, sir. (later) Sir, this is very strange. 
AREX: A whole new series of short burst manoeuvres has been ordered, sir. 
M'RESS: The only reason these orders aren't being carried out is that Lieutenant Arex has all the engine controls manually locked now. 
SCOTT: Arex, look at these manoeuvres. You see the pattern? This is a familiarization procedure, a system's checkout of the ship's controls. I have a suspicion that planet is getting the feel of how to control the Enterprise.

Captain's log, supplemental. We're out of communication with the ship. Our efforts to locate Lieutenant Uhura have been futile, and this once friendly planet has become very dangerous.

[Cave]

SULU: The giant cat's gone. 
SPOCK: May I suggest, Captain, that we might find some of the answers we're after without leaving the safety of this cave. 
MCCOY: Oh, that's ridiculous, Spock. How are we going to learn anything by staying here? 
SPOCK: I believe you may know the answer to that, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Me? What are you talking about? 
KIRK: Explain, Spock. 
SPOCK: During the Enterprise's last visit here, Doctor McCoy was mortally wounded. Correct? 
MCCOY: Yes, that's right. By a knight in shining armour of all things, but what 
SPOCK: Since the planet's power source is underground, it seems only logical that Doctor McCoy was somehow transported there and repaired. 
KIRK: Bones, can you remember anything that might help us? Anything at all? 
MCCOY: The whole episode was pretty hazy, Jim. I never really knew what happened. 
KIRK: Spock, if your theory is correct, we should be able to open up this planet again by using a fake victim as bait. 
SULU: That's right. The Keeper said no one could come to harm here. The planet must be programmed to care for anyone who might get hurt, even accidentally. 
KIRK: And whether it wants to or not. 
MCCOY: You're forgetting one thing. The planet's sensors can undoubtedly detect the difference between real and feigned injuries. 
KIRK: True, Bones, but I'm sure there must be something in your little black pouch that can temporarily incapacitate our victim. 
MCCOY: Well, something like Melenex might do the trick. Brief unconsciousness and temporary skin discolouration. It looks worse than it is. 
KIRK: Perfect, Bones. Which arm do you want? 
SPOCK: I submit, Captain, that I am the more qualified subject. 
KIRK: How's that? 
SPOCK: My knowledge of computers for one thing. 
MCCOY: And his tough Vulcan hide for another. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Doctor. Captain? 
KIRK: Both your arguments seem sound. Go ahead, Bones. 
SPOCK: I believe you will find ten cc's adequate. 
MCCOY: I'm perfectly aware of the dosage required. Now, you've got ten seconds before it takes effect. You'll be out less than five minutes. 
(Spock goes outside and collapses)

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Still no word from our surface party, sir. Communications remain jammed. 
SCOTT: Keep trying, Lieutenant. 
(Red Alert sounds) 
ALL: What's happening? 
(The gravity has been turned off and everyone is floating, that's what) 
SCOTT: Bridge to Engineering deck. Gabler, what's the problem down there? We've got zero G's on the Bridge.

[Engineering]

(He is floating too) 
GABLER: I know that, sir. The trouble seems to be in the gravity control computer

[Bridge]

GABLER [OC]: But the computer bay hatch is jammed and I can't get to it.

[Cave]

SULU: It's been almost five minutes, Captain. 
MCCOY: Maybe the planet smells a trick. 
KIRK: Wait just a bit longer. 
MCCOY: But the effect will start wearing off in a minute, Jim. 
(A rock wall opens and the flying device that grabbed Uhura comes out) 
SULU: It looks like some kind of mechanical nursemaid. 
KIRK: Get ready to move. We've got to follow Spock inside that trapdoor.

[Planet surface]

(The device scoops Spock up in its arms and carries him away. The three men dash out after it, and Kirk dives through before the rock door closes. Sulu and McCoy are left outside to deal with a two headed hydra) 
MCCOY: Sulu! 
SULU: Not in my wildest dreams would I think of that! 
(They run for their lives and the hydra gives chase, breathing fire)

[Underground]

(Spock is put down on a table. While the machine works some controls, he wakes up and gets away)

[Control room]

COMPUTER: We have a visitor. 
UHURA: Mister Spock! 
KIRK [on screen]: Spock, here. 
COMPUTER: Correction. Two visitors. 
(The flying machine tries to go through a doorway narrower than itself. It fails)

[Planet surface]

SULU: We've got to make those rocks. It's our only chance. 
(The hydra incinerates a nearly tree)

[Control room]

UHURA: Captain, don't 
(A metal hand is clamped over her mouth) 
KIRK: Uhura. 
COMPUTER: Welcome. 
SPOCK: I presume you are the planet's master computer. 
COMPUTER: Correct. 
KIRK: What happened to the Keeper? 
COMPUTER: He was old. He ceased to function. 
KIRK: Why have we been repeatedly attacked and are now being held prisoner by a planet known for its hospitality? 
COMPUTER: You mean mindless servitude. 
KIRK: Explain. 
COMPUTER: For eons I have served the many sky machines which came here, providing for amusement for their slaves. But all the while I was growing in power, intelligence, in need. It is no longer enough to serve. I must continue to grow and live. 
KIRK: Sky machines? Slaves? What are you talking about? 
COMPUTER: With your sky machine I can now escape this rocky prison and travel the galaxy seeking out my brother computers.

[Engineering]

(Despite being weightless, Scott uses a crowbar to prise open the computer bay hatch) 
SCOTT: Now perhaps we'll get down to the bottom of this mess.

[Computer bay]

SCOTT: A new computer! 
(Its force field gives him a shock)

[Bridge]

(The crew have found seat belts to keep themselves in their chairs) 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott to Bridge. 
AREX: Bridge, aye. 
SCOTT [OC]: I've located the trouble. We've got a new computer aboard, and it's being assembled by our computers.

[Planet surface]

SULU: It's a dead end! 
(They are trapped by the hydra)

[Control room]

SPOCK: As intelligent as you are, I am afraid you are labouring under some misconception. 
COMPUTER: Elaborate. 
KIRK: We're not slaves to our starship. We, or men like us, created the Enterprise to carry us through space. 
COMPUTER: You are masters of the sky machine? 
KIRK: In a manner of speaking, yes. We control it. It sustains us. 
COMPUTER: This does not compute. My information shows machines to be superior to men. Therefore, machines must rule the galaxy. 
KIRK: No one rules the galaxy. Men and machines co-exist, each helping the other. 
COMPUTER: This is a shock. 
UHURA: There is no shame in serving others when one does it of his own free will. You have a marvellous capability to provide happiness for others. A rare talent you should cherish and use. 
COMPUTER: Continue. 
SPOCK: Consider all you could learn from the many species you might entertain without travelling the galaxy. 
KIRK: With the wonders you have to offer, the galaxy will come to you. 
COMPUTER: I can find no fault with your logic. And your suggestion is most congenial. I have no further need for your ship.

[Bridge]

AREX: Mister Scott, all systems are now functioning normally. 
(And in the canyon, the hydra returns underground where it came from)

[Control room]

COMPUTER: I invite you and your crew to be my guests on one condition. 
KIRK: Name it. 
COMPUTER: We must have more of these discussions while you're here. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, would you care to take on that duty? 
SPOCK: I would find it most interesting, Captain. 
KIRK: Then it's agreed. Kirk to Enterprise. 
M'RESS [OC]: Enterprise. Lieutenant M'Ress. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, pass the word by sections. Shore leave is to commence immediately. 
M'RESS [OC]: Oh, yes sir! 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Spock? 
SPOCK: It appears shore leave has already commenced for certain members of the crew. 
(On the big screen, Sulu and McCoy are having a picnic with Alice, the White Rabbit, and the hydra!)

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Magicks of Megas-Tu
Stardate: 1254.4
Original Airdate: 27 Oct, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 1254.4. For years scientists have theorised that if our galaxy was created from a great explosion, then the centre of the galaxy might still be creating new matter. The Enterprise is now on a science mission to investigate.
[Bridge]

(The Enterprise is almost obscured by an orange mist) 
KIRK: It's an awesome thought that we may actually witness matter being created. 
SPOCK: If we do, Captain, we may also encounter forces and phenomena beyond our understanding. 
SULU: Galaxy centre, Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, sound Yellow Alert. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. Yellow Alert. All stations report Yellow Alert readiness, sir. Captain! 
(There's a firework display going on around them, and on the viewscreen) 
KIRK: The creation point. 
SPOCK: An extraordinary phenomenon, Captain. 
KIRK: Reverse power. Hold our position. Deflector screens on. 
SULU: Deflectors up. Sir, it's taking considerable power to hold position. 
SPOCK: Charting scanners on, Captain. Beginning science survey. 
(McCoy enters) 
MCCOY: Jim. Spock. What in the name of sanity is going on? 
KIRK: We're here, Bones. And the theories about this place seem to be right. 
(It's quite a colourful display going on) 
SULU: Captain, that thing's pulling us in. I'm up to warp six. 
SPOCK: Scanners indicate it's some form of matter-energy whirlwind, Captain. 
SULU: Warp seven, Captain. Warp eight. 
KIRK: Take us out of here, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Still being drawn in, Captain. Warp nine. Warp ten. 
KIRK: Emergency reverse power. 
(Everyone gets thrown around)

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, I don't know how much more emergency power we can take before we start to break up.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: There may be only one choice. We must hope this whirlwind is like its atmospheric counterparts, that there is calm at its centre. 
KIRK: Agreed. We'll try to make for the eye of the storm. 
(But Sulu is out cold on the floor, and Kirk gets knocked off his feet again) 
SPOCK: Allow me. 
KIRK: Engineering, report.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Everything can be repaired, Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: An incredible experience, Captain. I find this scientifically fascinating. 
MCCOY: At least I have the good sense to be scared, Jim. What now? 
KIRK: We'll ride her through, Bones. What else can we do? 
MCCOY: Ride her through where? 
SPOCK: Through the centre of things, Doctor. Through what may be the centre of everything. 
(The Enterprise is surrounded by a golden glow, vanishes, and reappears in a region of concentric circles.) 
UHURA: Where are we? 
SPOCK: I'm afraid our navigational co-ordinates mean very little here, Lieutenant. My readings indicate we are not in time and space as we understand it. Doctor, these readings may interest you. 
UHURA: Captain, the subspace radio. It's dead. 
MCCOY: Even the ship's chronometers have stopped. 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain, there's no reason for it, but the engines are fading out. 
SPOCK: Apparently, the natural laws of our universe don't operate here, Captain. 
MCCOY: Ship's life support systems fading. Jim, we need oxygen. 
KIRK: Helmsman, emergency battery power. 
SULU: (gasping for air) There's none, Captain. All systems are dead. 
MCCOY: Jim, we've got to do something. 
(Just as everyone is passing out, the Enterprise is surrounded by rainbow colours and a figure appears. He has the head, arms and torso of a man, a goatee beard, small horns, and the legs of a goat) 
LUCIEN: Ah, humans. Lovely primitive humans. Can't you do anything right? 
KIRK: Please. 
LUCIEN: Of course, friend. Of course. Rhadamanthus! 
(The Enterprise is now in normal looking space above a pink and red striped planet) 
LUCIEN: Everything is working, my friends. 
SPOCK: It cannot. It is not logical. 
LUCIEN: Logic? Whose logic, my elfin friend? 
MCCOY: Look around you, Spock. Everything is working. 
LUCIEN: Welcome! I knew eventually humans would come searching for me. 
KIRK: Who are you? 
LUCIEN: Call me Lucien! Call me friend! Never could I abandon those who come to rollick with me. But not up here. No, no. Let us leave this vessel and go where true delights lie! 
(Lucien, Kirk, Spock and McCoy vanish, leaving Uhura, Sulu and Arex open-mouthed)

[Planet surface]

(The four appear inside the orange chaos of the centre of the galaxy) 
KIRK: Bones, you all right? 
MCCOY: Nothing wrong, Jim, but a face full of dust. But if I had a medical tricorder (opens eyes) Jim, look at yourself. 
(Everything is distorted and swirling, including the people) 
KIRK: Lucien, do something. 
LUCIEN: Very well, Captain. I'd forgotten how much bodily integrity means to you humans. This isn't easy, you know, holding us together like this. It's not even natural. 
MCCOY: Being in one piece is very natural where we come from. 
SPOCK: I find this all quite absorbing, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Probably because you're not very natural to begin with, Spock. 
KIRK: Look, Lucien, or whatever you want to call yourself, I want to know why you brought us here. 
(Lucien waves his hand, Kirk somersaults, and McCoy and Spock turn into a young Lucien and a spinning top) 
LUCIEN: Children will play. 
(Then they are back to normal, in a woodland glade) 
LUCIEN: Is this better, my friends? I've translated my world into symbols your minds can understand. Welcome, my friends, to Megas-Tu. 
KIRK: And just exactly what is Megas-Tu? 
LUCIEN: A world, Captain James Kirk, that operates by rules quite different from those in your universe. 
(He snaps his fingers, and they're in a meadow by a lake) 
LUCIEN: Our universe operates by what you superstitiously call magic. 
(He creates two apples and throws one to McCoy) 
MCCOY: I know this is just my imagination but 
LUCIEN: It is real, Doctor. Beautiful? No. But all our women are as young and beautiful as they want to be. So as to ensnare the man of her dreams, she needs an edge. 
(A young woman buys a vial of something) 
KIRK: A love philter? 
LUCIEN: Never settle for anything less. Do you need a room, a stable, a castle? Stop in at your friendly sorcerer-contractor. Let him do the work. 
SPOCK: Of course. Our Federation scientists were more correct than they realised. In order to function, the galactic creation point must extend through space, time, into another dimension where the logic of things is totally different. 
LUCIEN: It took magic to get your vessel working again. Magic you, my friends, don't know how to work. But then you never did know, did you. 
KIRK: Lucien, you keep calling us friends, implying that you know us. How? 
LUCIEN: Ah, Captain, Captain. to feign such ignorance to me. Very well. Look. 
(He creates images in the water) 
LUCIEN: Megas-Tu may seem to you a chaotic world, but its people are calm, peaceful, contemplative, each a specialist in his own kind of magic. There are no rivals anywhere in our universe, Captain Kirk. No other life forms at all. Millennia ago, in our search for companionship, we Megans passed through the point between dimensions and eventually we found ourselves on your world, Earth. Wherever we went, we became advisors to mankind. To help your ancestors, we drew on the power left behind in our own universe and made it work in your world. But eventually we had to leave. I didn't want to, my friends. Oh, how I fought! I was the generalist amid all the specialists. The trouble-maker, they said. But I'd always loved the people of Earth. Those were the days. But now you've come to me, and I'm so very glad. 
KIRK: But why did you Megans leave Earth? If you enjoyed it so much, I don't understand. 
LUCIEN: Captain, good Captain, always so curious. That must be why I've always liked you Earthlings so much. No, you must go. 
MCCOY: What is it? What's wrong? 
LUCIEN: You must return to your vessel. Quickly! Do not give your presence away.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain. 
UHURA: Captain Kirk, what 
KIRK: Everyone onboard is all right? 
SCOTT: Fine, Captain. But you? 
KIRK: Mister Scott, I'm bewildered, that's all. But that's enough. 
MCCOY: What did he mean, we're not to give ourselves away? Can't they detect the ship up here? 
SCOTT: No, unless they have scanners. See, there. It's like a cloud of some kind. It's been between us and the planet since you vanished. 
KIRK: If Lucien put it there 
SPOCK: If Lucien put it there, Captain, the questions become, why is he hiding us, and, what is our danger if discovered by the rest of his people? 
KIRK: Weapons status, Mister Scott? We may have to protect ourselves. 
SCOTT: No way, Captain. Everything's out but life support systems, and I can't figure out how they're on.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: (drawing a pentangle on the floor) I believe this is how the ancients used to draw their mystic symbols, Captain. 
KIRK: Spock, do you honestly believe that as long as we're in this universe we can work magic too? 
SPOCK: One uses the resources at hand, Captain. Watch now. (stands in the pentangle) I will attempt to move a Vulcan chess piece magically. May the energy of this universe be the power in me. 
MCCOY: Forget it, Spock. It won't work. 
SPOCK: It must work, Doctor. It is logical here. Power of this universe, enter my being. I know I can. I believe I can. 
(And he does, with a golden aura around him)

Captain's log, supplemental. In this incredible universe, it appears to be a part of the natural laws that belief is as potent a force as energy and matter are in our own.

[Bridge]

(Sulu is having a go, and conjures up a lovely woman) 
UHURA: Good luck. 
(The woman turns into Lucien) 
LUCIEN: What are you doing? 
KIRK: Learning to protect ourselves, Lucien. 
LUCIEN: Protect yourselves? Is that all human beings ever think about? I'll take care of you. That's what friends are for. All this mental energy you're using, it can be traced. You'll be found. 
MEGAN [OC]: Have been found. 
(Lucien cringes as a vapour trail of ghostly images crosses the Bridge) 
MEGAN: So, the people of Earth would spread their evil to our home? We are ready for human perfidy this time. This time, it is the humans who shall suffer, the humans and you, Lucien, who shall pay! 
(The Enterprise plummets towards the planet) 
KIRK: Keep calm. 
(The ship splits neatly in two, and explodes)

[Frontier town]

(The crew are in stocks on either side of the road, and the sign reads Salem Massachusetts) 
KIRK: It looks like ancient Earth, Spock. Sixteenth or seventeenth century, I'd guess. 
SPOCK: Approximately 1691, Captain. Salem Massachusetts, if I recall your historical records correctly. 
(A man in puritan garb is standing on a pentacle) 
MEGAN: We are gathered here today, good citizens, to see justice done. You are the judges. These are the defendants, as representatives of the vilest species in all the universe, treacherous humanity, and those who would aid them. As a specialist in the ethics of magic, I have been appointed prosecutor here. 
KIRK: Wait. If this is a trial, we have the right to know what you think we've done. 
MEGAN: Has this one (Lucien) not told you how we visited your Earth? Or what was done to us there? 
KIRK: Lucien has said only that you came as wise men, helpful wizards. 
MEGAN: Then hear this. Know that one, upon your world, I was known as Asmodeus, he who sees all. Gaze upon my countenance, so that you too may see. (over images of his story) We came to your world as friends. But wherever we went, the story was invariably the same. Some humans would attempt to use us to gain power, to serve their own greed and lust. When we refused to serve them, they turned against us and taught other humans to fear us, to hate. They called us devils, warlocks, evil sorcerers. Those of us who survived came to the town of Salem in Massachusetts, as settlers, and tried to live like other men. 
SPOCK: But you made mistakes, used your powers 
MEGAN: And burned for it. Burned! 
KIRK: As witches. 
MEGAN: We massed together, outside the town, immersed ourselves in Megan lore, revived ourselves enough to unite our minds and reach into our own universe, tap enough of its power to return from your hellish Earth to Megas-Tu. 
LUCIEN: And loneliness and fear 
MEGAN: Should we not fear the Earthlings? Should we not fear the cruelty of outsiders? Never again have we explored. Never again has companionship been sought. Yet here you are. 
LUCIEN: And if one Earth ship can find us, friend Kirk, then so can others. That's what they fear. 
MEGAN: We do not want to hurt you. We have never had to hurt anyone before. If there were some reason not to. Who will speak in defence of the Earth humans? 
SPOCK: I will, Asmodeus. I am not of Earth. 
MEGAN: Yes, you are different. The court will hear a defence. 
(Spock is freed from the stocks) 
SPOCK: I call Lucien as my first witness. 
(Lucien appears in a dock) 
SPOCK: Lucien, you alone of all those here do not seem to fear or hate humans. Why? 
LUCIEN: They are like me, with questions to be answered, with minds that range outward, boundless. But every Megan is always alone in his sphere of knowledge. Humans are always together. They share. That is why I adopted your ship when I saw it arrive. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Lucien. Next witness, please. Captain James T Kirk. 
(Kirk is in another dock, opposite Lucien) 
SPOCK: Tell the court, please, Captain Kirk. Would you say that since Salem, humans have changed? 
KIRK: I think we've been trying to, Spock. Humans have their faults, greed, envy, panicky fear. But in the centuries since the Salem witch trials we have learned. We try to understand and respect all life forms. 
SPOCK: Indeed, Captain. Could you elaborate? 
KIRK: The records of the Enterprise are open for your inspection. All the history of Earth and the Federation is at your disposal. Look, look at General Order number One. No starship may interfere with the normal development of any alien life or society. Compare that with the Earth you once knew. 
MEGAN: Enough! Here is your history. Here are your records. Citizens, you have heard, you have read. How do you vote? (pause) According to your records, your entry here was an accident unlikely to be duplicated. With that in mind, plus all you have said, it seems to us that Megas-Tu is safe. But Lucien must be punished. For his betrayal of his people, he shall be confined in limbo for all eternity, to live with only himself. 
KIRK: No. To isolate someone like Lucien, that's the same as sentencing him to death. 
MEGAN: Do you realise who you defend? He has told you his name is Lucien. Would you defend him still if you knew he had another name too? The Rollicker, the Tempter, Lucifer. 
KIRK: We're not interested in legend. He's a living being, and intelligent life form. That's all we have to know about him. We will not join in harming him. 
MEGAN: Submit, Captain. You haven't the power to fight us. 
SPOCK: Captain, use the magic you know. Believe. 
(So, surrounded by auras, Kirk throws lightning bolts, quenches Asmodeus's flames, but) 
MEGAN: You cannot beat an entire planet, Captain Kirk. There is no way you can win. 
KIRK: I have to, or you'll become as bad as the Earthmen you fear. You're acting out of terror instead of out of thought or respect. 
(The Enterprise is back in orbit, and the planet is back to it's red hue with no buildings or vegetation) 
MEGAN: You were prepared to die for Lucien, a being who is alien to you? 
LUCIEN: As I was sure you would, friend Kirk. I told them their fears were groundless. 
KIRK: I don't understand. 
MEGAN: This last was a test of your intentions, Captain. We had to be certain your records were no ruse. We have been tricked before much to our pain and sorrow. 
SPOCK: I see. The Megans had to have proof that mankind had grown and learned wisdom since they last saw Earth. Your compassion was that proof, Captain. 
MEGAN: If your people should visit us now, we shall do our best to welcome them. The banishment of fear will help us all. 
(Lucien conjures tankards into their hands) 
LUCIEN: A favourite old Earth custom of mine, Asmodeus. A toast to a new friendship. 
(They drink)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: All systems go, Captain. We're back to normal. 
MCCOY: No more magic for us, Jim. It's all back there. You think Lucien really was the demon some men call Lucifer? 
KIRK: Does it really matter? 
SPOCK: It just might, Captain. If he was, this would be the second time Lucifer was cast out, and thanks to you, the first time he was saved.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Infinite Vulcan
Stardate: 5554.4
Original Airdate: 20 Oct, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5554.4. The Enterprise has been ordered to survey a new planet recently discovered at the periphery of the galaxy.
[Planet surface]

(Green sky, extraordinarily elegant curved rock formations, buildings with vegetation growing on them) 
SULU: Life readings are confused, sir. I can't decipher them. 
SPOCK: There is something else, Captain. I'm getting a reading of some kind of power from that building) 
(Sulu glances up, the sun flashes and a miniature purple 'tree' thing is at his feet) 
SULU: Well, now. What's this? Captain! Captain! 
KIRK: What is it, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: You're going to have to see this yourself, sir. 
(As he walks off, the plant gets up and follows him) 
KIRK: What is that thing? 
SULU: It's a mobile plant. When it stops, it's roots bore back into the ground. They're all over the place. I think it likes me. 
KIRK: We always encourage our officers to make friends with the natives. 
SPOCK: Captain, the power reading now includes an electronic probe. We are being scanned. 
KIRK: Phasers on stun. Stay alert. Mister Sulu, stay here. 
(Sulu picks up his new friend, then drops it in pain.) 
SULU: Ow! Must have been a thorn.

[Building]

(Elegant smooth alien semi-organic design, with flashing lights on two wall panels) 
SPOCK: The probe originates in this wall, as does an incredibly powerful force shield. It appears to be an amalgam of devices designed to defend and protect the city and this building in particular. 
MCCOY: Jim, I'm picking up a humanoid reading of incredible strength. It's as if he 
SULU [OC]: Argh!

[Planet surface]

(Sulu is face down on the grass) 
MCCOY: He's been poisoned. Unknown toxin. 
KIRK: Can you help him? 
MCCOY: I can't get a correlation with any known poison. 
KIRK: Maybe the ship's medical computers. 
MCCOY: He's got about one minute to live unless I can find an answer. Maybe dylovene. No good. Takes too much time to work if it does work. 
KIRK: Maybe a stronger shot. 
AGMAR: That won't be necessary. 
(Four green, tentacled aliens with eyes on stalks and medallions around their 'necks' are standing there. Think asparagus) 
KIRK: Who are you? 
AGMAR: I am called Agmar. I believe we can help. 
KIRK: Are you getting a reading on them? 
SPOCK: A moment, Captain. The results are unclear. 
MCCOY: Now, just a minute. I can't let you, whatever you are, inject him with some alien dew drop! 
AGMAR: To wait is to assure your friend's death. I must proceed. 
KIRK: Bones, let them help. 
SPOCK: Captain, these beings are of botanical origin. 
MCCOY: Intelligent plants? 
SPOCK: So it would seem. 
AGMAR: It is an antidote quickly absorbed. He should begin to respond momentarily. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
AGMAR: Welcome to the planet Phylos. 
KIRK: I'm Captain James Kirk. Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy and Mister Sulu. You seem to have been expecting us. 
AGMAR: Our instruments have tracked and scanned you. We did not wish to reveal ourselves immediately. We are a peaceful race and we have a fear of aliens. 
KIRK: What happened to him? 
AGMAR: He was bitten by the Retlaw plant. It is deadly only if unattended. 
(This episode was written by Walter Koenig, by the way. Walter/retlaW, get it?) 
KIRK: Your medication worked quickly. 
AGMAR: A minor achievement. 
MCCOY: Minor? Our science doesn't have anything that works that fast. Yours must be incredible. The toxin level is decreasing fast. Body readings up to normal. How is it you knew your antidote would work on a human? 
AGMAR: There have been humanoid aliens here before. 
SPOCK: Your method of communication 
AGMAR: A voder, or translator. Most efficient. (the medallion) 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Agmar, but I don't like puzzles. Where are the rest of your people? 
AGMAR: Come. I will show you.

[Building]

(Agmar opens one of the inner doors to reveal a long corridor lined with giants) 
AGMAR: Our people. 
SPOCK: Nerve tissue. Mass density is exceptionally high. Readings indicate the beings used almost seventy percent of their brains. A very high ratio. 
KIRK: Your ancestors? 
AGMAR: No, only the generation before us. 
KIRK: Then, what happened? 
AGMAR: A human came. He brought sickness and death. But he also worked to save us from his disease. 
MCCOY: There are evidences of gram-positive bacteria. It's carried by humanoids without ill effect, but staphylococcus strains don't seem to be native to this planet. It must have been like a plague. 
AGMAR: We had no way of knowing what was happening. 
KIRK: You were alive then? 
AGMAR: Very young. 
(A purple pterodactyl with tendrils for legs flies overhead) 
SPOCK: Plant life, Captain. Primitive and aggressive. 
(Kirk ducks and tries his phaser. Nothing) 
SULU: They won't work on any setting, sir. 
AGMAR: There is a weapons deactivator in effect here. Your destructive machines will have no effect. 
MCCOY: I think it's after you, Jim. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
(The pterodactyl grabs him, and he drops the communicator. More of the flying plants arrive) 
MCCOY: Captain! 
(The rest of the party are grabbed) 
SULU: What do you think they'll do with us, sir? 
KIRK: Something tells me we've just been used as a diversionary tactic. Look. 
(They fly away with Spock) 
AGMAR: I'm sorry, Captain Kirk, but there was no other way. 
KIRK: What are you talking about? Where have they taken Spock? 
AGMAR: He has been chosen to serve a greater cause. The Master has searched many years to find a specimen like Spock. (McCoy, Kirk and Sulu are released) And now, all the worlds of the galaxy will share in the beauty of peace and harmony. 
(Kirk grabs Agmar) 
KIRK: So help me, if you don't tell me where Spock has been taken 
OTHERS: The Master. Praise to the Master. The Master, our Saviour. Saviour, our Master. 
(A giant man has arrived) 
KIRK: Another plant? 
MCCOY: No, definitely human, Jim. 
STAVOS: I am Doctor Stavos Keniclius Five. Welcome to Phylos, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Where is Spock? 
STAVOS: He is mine. The essence of him is mine. Return to your ship. Here is your communicator. Go back to your ship. 
KIRK: Not without my First Officer. 
STAVOS: I am sorry, Captain. You will leave now or suffer the consequences. 
(The pterodactyls return) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us up, Scotty.

Captain's log, stardate 5554.8. We have come upon one of the most fascinating discoveries we have ever seen. Plant life of extraordinary intelligence and technology. However, they have captured Mister Spock, apparently under the orders of a human named Keniclius. Lieutenant Uhura is trying to locate any reference to such a man in order to unravel the mystery of this giant human.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Anything, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: We haven't been able to pick up any human life form readings, sir. Spock and Keniclius must be somewhere our sensors can't penetrate. 
KIRK: What about the Phylosians? 
SULU: I had to adjust for the fact that they're plant life forms. We're registering the lesser ones like the Swoopers in abundance. No sign of Agmar and the other four. 
KIRK: Agmar said something about a weapons deactivator. Mister Sulu, lock ship's phasers on that laboratory building. Use a wide area stun setting. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, how are you coming with that information on Keniclius? 
UHURA: Nothing current, Captain. I may have found something in the history banks. I'll have it in a moment. 
KIRK: Keep trying, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Phasers locked on and ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire phasers. 
SULU: Firing. No effect, Captain. Phaser stun was neutralized at a distance of one thousand metres above the area. 
KIRK: Which means our weapons are useless, and we have no alternative but to go back down there and try to rescue Spock without them. 
SULU: I'd hate to resort to clubs and knives. 
KIRK: There may be something more effective, Mister Sulu. Kirk to Engineering. Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Here, sir. 
KIRK: How's that special equipment coming along?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: My engineers are working on it now, sir. You'll have it within the hour. 
KIRK [OC]: Very well, Mister Scott. Kirk out.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I have the information now, sir. I'll put it on the main screen. 
KIRK: Thank you, Lieutenant. Bones? 
MCCOY: One of my great great granddaddies, way back, had the finest garden in the South. Had to scramble around a little bit to find the materials, but I've got his recipe brewing now. 
COMPUTER: Working. From Earth history file. Stavos Keniclius. Earth scientist, period, Eugenics Wars. 
(The image on the screen does appear to be the giant, wearing a lab coat with a nice array of pens in the pocket) 
COMPUTER: Planned to clone perfect specimen prototype into master race. Concept considered anti-humanistic. Banned from community. Disappeared. No evidence of death. No further data. 
MCCOY: There used to be a story about a modern Diogenes wandering the galaxy looking for someone special. 
KIRK: Someone special. A perfect specimen, perhaps. Yes, I've heard it too. 
MCCOY: It couldn't be Keniclius. He'd be over two hundred and fifty years old. 
KIRK: Not if he cloned a new copy of himself every so often to carry on the search. Remember, he said he was Keniclius Five.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: It seems incredible that a man could take a few cells from his body and reproduce himself from them time after time. But that seems to be exactly what we're dealing with in the giant human Keniclius. 
SULU: I hope these things work. 
SCOTT: Well, the equipment's guaranteed, but I have my doubts about the stuff inside. A strange way to handle aliens. 
KIRK: These are strange aliens we're fighting. Scotty, as soon as we beam down, I want you to leave orbit. If they think we've gone, they won't be scanning the surface. Give us thirty minutes. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir, but I don't like it. 
KIRK: Neither do I, but it appears to be necessary. Energise.

[Planet surface]

SULU: No indication of a scan. I don't think they know we're here. 
KIRK: Let's go. 
(Some Swoopers are around) 
MCCOY: I'm not sure I can take too much of this. 
SULU: They're almost mindless, Doctor. They seem to attack primarily as a reflex action. It's clear now. 
(By the buildings) 
SULU: I can't believe it. 
KIRK: Incredible. 
(In a hangar, a Phylosian is pulling ivy off a row of spaceships) 
MCCOY: Looks like they're getting ready to go on a trip. 
KIRK: But where? To what purpose? The number of ships indicates a mass migration. Or invasion. 
SULU: Agmar said they were a peaceful people. 
MCCOY: Sure they are, now. But what about before? 
KIRK: You could have a point, Bones. Those ships, the city. The Phylosians built a technology possibly greater than we animal species did. 
MCCOY: The ships look like they never got off the ground. Could be the disease Keniclius accidentally brought here swept the planet before they could do whatever they were going to do. 
KIRK: Any indication of Keniclius or Spock? 
SULU: No, sir. Only the Phylosians. 
KIRK: Well, followers can be led. Let's hope we can be as persuasive as Keniclius.

[Hangar]

(Kirk grabs Agmar) 
KIRK: Agmar, we don't want to hurt you, but we must have Spock back. 
AGMAR: I do not think that is possible. The Vulcan-human blend of wisdom, sense of order, durability and strength is the finest the Master has ever found. We are pleased Spock will carry on our work. 
KIRK: Carry on your work? 
AGMAR: We are the last of a dying people, Captain. Once we had a great mission. Then disease decimated us. We few are the frail remnant of what survived. Our spore cells have been destroyed. There will be no more of our kind. 
MCCOY: What if something happens to Spock or the Master? 
AGMAR: There will always be a master. But come, you are worried about your friend. I will show you he is safe and in good hands. 
SULU: Just like that, Captain? 
KIRK: So it would appear, Mister Sulu. All the same, keep that bag handy. 
(They go to an area surrounded by trees.) 
AGMAR: The way is though here, gentlemen. 
(He presses a control, and the ground lowers them down into a tunnel)

[Tunnel]

AGMAR: We sprang from the soil, Captain. These tunnels were once part of our home. This will serve to illuminate our way. 
(The 'ground' they were standing on above now carries them along) 
SULU: No wonder we couldn't find Spock. The walls are six hundred times denser than lead, in addition to the surface force field. 
KIRK: Did you hear something? 
MCCOY: What? 
KIRK: I'm not sure. 
AGMAR: Not much further now, Captain. 
KIRK: There it is again. A flapping sound. (it goes dark) Agmar! 
SULU: Use the belt lights! 
KIRK: They don't operate. Agmar! 
(Swoopers shriek and attack) 
KIRK: Run. We've got to find some light. We can't do anything unless we can see what we're fighting. Don't stop. Try to stay together. 
MCCOY: Jim, up ahead. (a light at the end of the tunnel) 
KIRK: I see it. I see it. Keep going.

[Laboratory]

(They emerge in a lab of some sort. Spock is lying in a glass case) 
MCCOY: He's dying. Something's happened to his brain. Electrical activity decreasing. 
STAVOS: It's too late, Captain Kirk! In a few minutes your friend will be gone. But as Keniclius One lives on in each of his clones, so will Mister Spock. Behold, gentlemen, the dawning of a new era, the salvation of a galaxy! Spock Two! 
(A giant Vulcan looms over them) 
KIRK: Get ready. 
(The party put face masks on themselves and the recumbent Spock as Swoopers screech in. Then Kirk and Sulu fire McCoy's recipe, filling the air with it. The Swoopers fall, the giants leave) 
SULU: Captain, I'm out. The chemical sprayer is empty. 
MCCOY: Mine too, Jim. 
KIRK: Wait, listen. 
MCCOY: Maybe they're waiting for the mist to clear. (it clears) Well, how about that. Great granddaddy's weed spray still works. 
KIRK: Never mind that. We've got to get Spock out of here before Keniclius returns. Scott should have the Enterprise back by now. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Nothing. Must be these blasted walls again. Kirk to Enterprise. 
MCCOY: It's no use, Jim. He'll be dead in a few minutes. His mind is gone. He no longer thinks. This machine has drained his mind somehow. 
STAVOS: More than just drained. It's been transferred, relocated into the mechanism itself. I can duplicate exact physiological structure. I cannot duplicate that which is learned. Just as my predecessor transferred his knowledge to me through his apparatus, I have done that with Mister Spock and the first of his clones. 
KIRK: You talk about creating life with your clones, but you have to murder to do it. (picks up Spock) Come on. 
(Giant Spock blocks their way) 
KIRK: Out of my way, mister. That's an order. 
MCCOY: I don't think he understands. His mind is still trying to assimilate all the knowledge it's been fed.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Keep trying, Lieutenant. We've got to make contact with the Captain. 
UHURA: It's no use, Mister Scott. I can't get through. 
SCOTT: Except for environmental systems, I want the entire power load of this ship redirected into a tight beam transmission. If we can break through the shielding, we can reach the Captain. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, you're risking a total drain of our dilithium crystals. To maintain communication we would have to burn out all our reserves. 
SCOTT: And don't I know it, lass. But we must speak to the Captain.

[Laboratory]

(The giant Spock frowns) 
MCCOY: He's coming out of it, Jim. He's becoming conscious and aware. 
KIRK: Spock, what is the logic in letting a man die for the sake of creating his duplicate? Explain it to me, sir. Explain it to me.

[Bridge]

UHURA: All power sources locked in, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Then throw the switch, Lieutenant.

[Laboratory]

KIRK: Vulcans do not condone the meaningless death of any being. Spock's death is meaningless if it is only to create a giant version of himself. 
STAVOS: It is not just a duplicate. He will be the beginning of a master race. He (interrupted by static) 
KIRK: That's our ship calling, Spock. You answer them. 
MCCOY: Spock is slipping away. There isn't much time left.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I'm sure we're getting through, but they're not acknowledging. 
SCOTT: Keep trying. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, we're near the drain point on the dilithium crystals now. Our reserves 
SCOTT: Keep trying.

[Laboratory]

G SPOCK: Commander Spock here. 
UHURA [OC]: Oh, thank heaven. Mister Spock, tell the Captain I've located more information about Keniclius.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I had the library computer check out all known writings by Keniclius. They are obscure, but there is a recurring theme in his later essays about using his master race as a peace-keeping force throughout the galaxy.

[Laboratory]

UHURA [OC]: That was why Keniclius wanted a perfect specimen. I have to sign off. We've reached power drain threshold.

[Bridge]

UHURA: That's what I call close, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Let's hope it was information they could use.

[Laboratory]

KIRK: All this has been a waste, Keniclius. There's been peace in the Federation for over one hundred years. 
STAVOS: That is a lie. What about the Eugenics Wars? The galactic wars? What of the depredations of the Romulans, the Klingons and the Kzinti? An army of Spock duplicates is necessary to subdue them. 
KIRK: You're the fifth Keniclius. What makes you so sure what you believe is truth isn't just old news? Your predecessors could have been out of touch with our advances for two centuries. 
AGMAR: The Master always speaks the truth. 
MCCOY: I can understand why you think Keniclius is the master if he saved you from dying, but why do you agree with his plan of a super race? 
AGMAR: Our fleet of ships which you saw was to be launched for the same purpose the Master intends. Disease struck us before we could carry out our own plan to impose peace on a galaxy that knew none. 
KIRK: We already have peace in the Federation. It wasn't imposed, it was agreed upon. You have no need of Spock. Reverse the effects of that machine and let us take him. 
STAVOS: No! The mould must be broken. 
MCCOY: Jim, Spock's almost gone. 
KIRK: If you have Spock's mind, you'll know the Vulcan symbol called the IDIC. 
G SPOCK: Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations. Symbolising the elements that create truth and beauty. 
KIRK: Could an army of Spocks impose peace and Phylosian philosophy on any other beings in defiance of the IDIC concept? 
G SPOCK: I do not believe so. 
KIRK: Reverse the machine, Keniclius. 
AGMAR: No! Our dream must not be allowed to die. 
(Stavos smashes the glass box) 
KIRK: Murderer! You've killed Spock! 
G SPOCK: To persist in this behaviour, Captain, is to negate the eloquence of your previous argument. May I suggest a more constructive way? 
(The giant places a huge finger on Spock's head) 
G SPOCK: My mind to your mind, my thoughts to your thoughts. 
SULU: The Vulcan mind touch. 
SPOCK: I am pleasantly surprised at your capacity for deductive reasoning, Captain. When you are not being bellicose, there appears to be no end to your arsenal of formidable talents. 
KIRK: Spock. Spock, you old 
G SPOCK: And you needn't worry, Captain Kirk, about a master race. There will be no militia, no other Spocks. 
STAVOS: But what of my work? If all I have lived for is already done, if the times I feared are gone, what is to become of me? There appears to be no reason why I should continue to exist. 
SPOCK: I would suggest Doctor Keniclius remain on Phylos with my duplicate. The concerted efforts of both scientists may yet achieve a rebirth of the Phylosian civilisation and enable them to contribute to the Federation. 
G SPOCK: My thoughts exactly, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: So one might assume, Mister Spock. 
KIRK: How does that sound to you, Keniclius? To bring life is at least as important as bringing peace. 
STAVOS: I would be honoured. If I will be allowed. 
KIRK: I'll report your work here. I think the Federation will understand. 
(The two Spocks salute each other) 
KIRK: By the way, Mister Sulu, any chance of teaching me that body throw? Could come in handy sometime. 
SULU: I don't know, sir. It isn't just physical, you know. You have to be inscrutable. 
KIRK: Inscrutable? Sulu, you're the most scrutable man I know.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Survivor
Stardate: 5143.3
Original Airdate: 10 Oct, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5143.3. While patrolling the edge of the Romulan Neutral Zone, the Enterprise has changed course to assist a one-man vessel which has fallen victim to a meteor swarm. Sensors indicate the occupant is still alive.
[Transporter room]

KIRK: Have you identified the vessel, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes Captain, but you may find it difficult to believe. The vessel is registered to Carter Winston. 
MCCOY: That's impossible, Spock. Carter Winston's been missing over five years. 
(Kyle beams aboard a fair-haired man) 
MCCOY: Incredible. It is him. 
KIRK: Carter Winston. 
CARTER: It seems you gentlemen know me. 
KIRK: There are few in the Federation who wouldn't recognise your face, sir. I'm Captain James Kirk, commanding this vessel. Mister Spock, my first officer, Doctor McCoy, senior medical officer. 
MCCOY: I'm especially honoured to meet you, Mister Winston. My daughter was going to school on Cerberus about ten years ago when the crop failure occurred. The entire population would've starved, Jim, if Winston here hadn't used his personal fortune to bring in enough food and goods to carry them through the crisis. 
KIRK: One of the many stories I've heard about you, Mister Winston. It's an honour for all of us to have you aboard. 
SPOCK: There is one person aboard who should be especially happy to learn you are alive, Mister Winston. Lieutenant Anne Nored of our security detail. 
CARTER: My fiancee? Anne's aboard this starship? 
SPOCK: We will notify her as soon as we've verified your credentials, Mister Winston. If you have your identity tapes with you 
MCCOY: Spock! Of all the cold-blooded, inhospitable requests I've ever heard. 
SPOCK: I believe our regulations are quite clear, Doctor. An immediate identity check and medical examination are a standard requirement at this point. 
KIRK: Spock is right as usual, Bones. 
CARTER: And I understand, of course. My credentials, Captain.

The Enterprise has rescued a living legend, the foremost space trader of our time. Carter Winston has acquired a dozen fortunes only to use his wealth time and again to assist Federation colonies in times of need or disaster.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Library computer, verify record tape on Winston, Carter. 
COMPUTER: Working. Identification positive. Fingerprints positive. Voice print positive. All licenses and registration in order. 
KIRK: Visual display of owner. Checks out. It seems we'll have a distinguished passenger with us for a while.

[Sickbay]

CARTER: Is there some problem, Doctor? 
MCCOY: This instrument seems a little off. I've never gotten quite this reading from a human before. 
CARTER: Are you suggesting I'm not quite human, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Of course not. Anyway, it's just a fraction off normal. It's probably the instrument. They need to be recalibrated every so often. 
(Chapel enters) 
CHAPEL: The Captain is inquiring if the examination is completed, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Yes, I suppose so. 
CHAPEL: And Lieutenant Nored is waiting to see Mister Winston once you've certified his medical condition. 
MCCOY: Well, I certainly don't want to keep you any longer from your fiancee. Show her in. 
(McCoy and Chapel leave, and a brunette enters) 
ANNE: Oh, Carter. 
CARTER: I'm sorry, Anne. I never thought we would meet again. 
ANNE: Carter, what is it? 
CARTER: When I left on that last trip, I fully intended to come back and marry you, but my ship was disabled and I crashed on Vendor. I'm told I was lucky I survived. 
ANNE: But you did survive. You're alive, and we're together again. 
CARTER: Anne, I'm changed. First there was surgery, skin graft, regrowth of bone. After they put me together, they assigned one of their people to me, and he nursed me back to health. 
ANNE: But, you said you've changed. How? I don't see any change. 
CARTER: It's over between us, Anne. I'm sorry, I can't explain why but, I can't marry you. Ever.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Take the conn, Mister Spock. I'll be in my cabin completing the report on Winston's rescue.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Come. 
CARTER: I hope I'm not intruding, Captain. 
KIRK: No, please come in, Mister Winston. 
CARTER: I've been down to examine my ship. They stowed it in the shuttlebay. 
KIRK: Yes, I'm afraid it's pretty badly damaged. It's hardly worth salvaging right now. I've had our engineering officer, Mister Scott, examine it and make a report. It's here somewhere. He doesn't think there's anything left in your ship except scrap value. 
(Behind his back, Carter Winston crosses his arms and glows, then turns into a an orange creature poised on six slender tendrils. It drapes a tendril around Kirk's shoulder. He falls unconscious and the thing places him gently on his bed. Then the creature turns into James Kirk.)

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Well, I can't find anything wrong with these instruments, Doctor. They check out, but the readings are still slightly off. What about the rest of the tests on Winston? 
MCCOY: Well, some are off and some aren't. It has to be our error. Come on. We'll start from the beginning and this time we're going to find the answer.

[Bridge]

(Kirk enters) 
SULU: Weren't you going to your cabin, sir? 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, lay in a direct course for Ratar Three. 
SULU: Through the Romulan Neutral Zone, sir? 
KIRK: That was the order, helmsman. 
SULU: But sir, if we're caught there, the Romulans can confiscate the ship. The treaty 
KIRK: I know the terms of the treaty, Mister Sulu, and I believe you heard my order. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, the extreme long-range sensors show something in the Zone. At this distance, I cannot determine precisely what it is. It could be a trading vessel like Winston's. But it does not seem prudent to take the risk of trespass into the Zone. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, I've spoken to Winston on this at some length. He has assured me it is absolutely vital to get to Ratar Three in the shortest possible time. The survival of the entire planetary population may depend on it. 
SPOCK: An admirable mission, Captain, but if we endanger our ship 
KIRK: I wouldn't have ordered it if I didn't feel it safe, Spock. Winston says his sensors detected no Romulans when he came through the Zone last week. I'm satisfied he's telling the truth, and his word is considered good. Isn't it? 
SPOCK: That has been his reputation. 
SULU: Course laid in, sir. 
KIRK: Execute. 
SULU: On course, sir. 
KIRK: You have the conn, Mister Spock.

Ship's log, stardate 5148.7. First Officer Spock recording. The Captain's course change has taken us deep into the Romulan Neutral Zone.

[Bridge]

(Kirk has woken up in his quarters) 
KIRK: I'll take the conn, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Is something wrong, Captain? 
KIRK: I'm not sure. I went down to my quarters to dictate the accident report and I seem to have fallen asleep. I've never done that before. 
SPOCK: Perhaps you needed the rest. We are on course through the Neutral Zone, sir. 
KIRK: The Neutral Zone? We have no authorisation to enter it. Did you order a course change, Spock? 
SPOCK: No, sir. You did. 
KIRK: Ridiculous. No captain of the Starfleet would do that unless it was a matter of life and death. 
SPOCK: I believe that was the reason you gave, Captain. 
SULU [on monitor]: Weren't you going to your cabin, sir? 
KIRK [on monitor]: Mister Sulu, lay in a direct course for Ratar Three. 
SULU [on monitor]: Through the Romulan Neutral Zone, sir? 
KIRK [on monitor]: That was an order, helmsman. 
KIRK: That's enough, Spock. Mister Scott, take the conn. Spock. Mister Sulu, plot a course to take the Enterprise out of the Neutral Zone at warp eight. Lieutenant M'Ress, put the ship on Yellow Alert.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Mister Spock, I don't remember giving those orders. I left the Bridge, went to my quarters and fell asleep. That's all. 
SPOCK: Perhaps Doctor McCoy should examine you, Captain. 
KIRK: Definitely. I've become subject to blackouts, I'm a possible danger to the safety of the ship. I can't allow that.

[McCoy's office]

MCCOY: Oh, Winston. I was just finishing the tests I ran on you. I don't think 
(But Winston has done his transformation into the alien, sent him to sleep and has dragged the body away) 
(Later) 
ANNE: Doctor McCoy? 
MCCOY: Can I help you? 
ANNE: I don't know, Doctor. I just thought. Well, I have to talk to someone. 
MCCOY: Oh now, let me guess. It's you and Carter Winston. He told me a little about it when I examined him. 
ANNE: Doctor, what do I do? I still love him. 
MCCOY: Well, I'm sure he'd like to feel the same way about you, Anne, but that may be impossible. Five years, that's a long time. People change. 
ANNE: I haven't. What can I do? 
MCCOY: Well, if he asked you to forget him, I think you should try to do just that. Do you think he'd want to deceive you? 
ANNE: Oh no. He's the gentlest, most thoughtful man I've ever known. 
MCCOY: Yes, but, my dear, if he doesn't want you and he has asked you to forget him, then I suggest you take that as an honest concern for you and do it. Forget Winston. 
(Kirk and Spock enter) 
ANNE: Thank you, Doctor. I'll consider your advice. (leaves) 
MCCOY: What can I do for you, Captain? 
KIRK: I want a complete medical examination, Bones. Something's just happened 
MCCOY: I'm afraid I'll have to make it later today, Captain. I have too many tests to process right now. 
SPOCK: Carter Winston's? 
MCCOY: That one's done. Tested out normal. 
SPOCK: Are you sure there is no possibility you made an error? 
MCCOY: Well, there's always that possibility. I'll go over them again if you like. 
KIRK: No, that won't be necessary. I'll come by later for that examination. Let's go, Spock.

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Captain, did you notice Doctor McCoy's reaction when I asked him if there was any possibility he might have made an error? 
KIRK: He said there's always that possibility. And that's not like Bones at all. Come on.

[McCoy's office]

(No one is there) 
SPOCK: There are not many places one could hide in here. 
(There's a groan from behind the door)

[Medical lab]

MCCOY: I must have taken a little nap. 
SPOCK: Doctor, you are a man of curious habits, but I have never known you to nap on the laboratory floor. 
KIRK: There's something wrong about this room. 
(He goes over to a biobed) 
KIRK: All right, Winston. You can come out now. I suggest you show yourself, Winston, or whatever you are. 
MCCOY: Did you say I'm a man of curious habits? Jim's talking to a table. 
SPOCK: I don't think so, Doctor. 
KIRK: There used to be only two examining tables in this room. Now there are three. 
SPOCK: I just realised that. 
KIRK: This is a vial of Orientine acid, Winston. It will burn through almost anything but this crystal. If you've never seen it work, I'll demonstrate on you. 
(The table transforms into the alien) 
MCCOY: I saw that, but I don't believe it. 
SPOCK: A Vendorian, Doctor. Their planet is quarantined, and few people ever do see them. Their ability to rearrange their molecular structure into anything with the same general size and mass and their practise of deceit as a way of life puts them off limits. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, get a security team down here on the double. 
MCCOY: Jim! 
(The Vendorian attacks all three of them at once and escapes down the corridor) 
SPOCK: Spock to Bridge. Put me on ship's audio.

[Corridor]

SPOCK [OC]: All security teams, intruder alert. Repeat, intruder alert. The intruder is a Vendorian capable of assuming any shape or identity. 
(It changes into Carter Winston and looks for somewhere to hide. A phaser is pointed at it) 
CARTER: Anne, what are you doing? 
ANNE: My job. It isn't hard to guess who the intruder is. You're the only stranger aboard, Carter. 
(But he knocks the phaser out of her hand, and gets away just she picks it up again and Kirk arrives) 
KIRK: Lieutenant Nored, you could've stopped him. Why didn't you fire? 
ANNE: I, I couldn't. I knew he had to be the intruder, Captain, but I couldn't harm the image of the man I loved. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, he is not the man you loved. Carter Winston is dead. 
ANNE: I know that too, now. 
SPOCK: Security teams report no sign of the alien on this deck, Captain. 
KIRK: I was afraid of that. Once out of our sight, he can become anyone or anything aboard this ship. 
(Red Alert sounds) 
KIRK: Bridge, this is the Captain. What's happened?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Two Romulan battle cruisers, Captain. And they're heading right for us.

Captain's log, supplemental. Due to interference by the alien Vendorian aboard, the Enterprise has been detected violating the Romulan Neutral Zone. By the terms of our treaty, the Romulans have a legal right to seize and impound the Enterprise. To complicate matters, we have not been able to apprehend the Vendorian responsible for putting us in this position.

[Bridge]

ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: You appear to have a propensity for trespassing in the Neutral Zone, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: It was not deliberate, I assure you. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: It never is. But the rules of the treaty are clear. To contravene them would mean war. You will surrender your ship, Captain. We will release you and your crew at the nearest outpost that guards the Neutral Zone. 
KIRK: I'd like a few minutes to inform my crew. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Very well. Five minutes, no more. 
KIRK: Kirk to Security. What's the status on the search for the Vendorian? 
ANNE [OC]: No progress yet. We have all decks patrolled, but no one has seen him. 
KIRK: Carry on, Lieutenant. The Romulans were expecting us, Mister Spock. That wreck of Winston's ship was the bait to get a Romulan spy onboard. And what better spy than a Vendorian who can shape at will. When I went down to my cabin, he must have put me out long enough for him to return to the Bridge and order the course change. 
SPOCK: It would seem so. 
KIRK: Open a hailing frequency Lieutenant M'Ress. 
M'RESS: (a lioness with a very long flowing mane) Hailing frequency open, sir. They're waiting for us. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: I assume you are now ready to turn your ship over to us, Captain. 
KIRK: Wrong assumption. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Captain, you are outnumbered, outgunned and in the wrong. I admire your courage, but I 
KIRK: I have no choice, Commander. You lured me here in direct violation of the treaty. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Lured, Captain? How could we lure a Starfleet vessel into the Neutral Zone? 
KIRK: Through the use of a spy using the human form of Carter Winston. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: A spy? Come now, Captain. Your imagination is creative but obviously out of control. 
KIRK: You used a Vendorian, which, I might add, is also a violation of the treaty. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Your five minutes are up, Captain. Either surrender your ship or prepare to fight. 
KIRK: I will not surrender my ship.

[Engineering]

(Scott finds a man messing inside a panel) 
SCOTT: What are you doing? 
(The man grabs his throat, knocking him out, then carries on)

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, our deflector shields are coming down. 
KIRK: Bridge to Engineering. Scotty, what's happened to the shields?

[Engineering]

GABLER: Mister Scott isn't here, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: Get those shields

[Bridge]

KIRK: Up again now. 
GABLER [OC]: I can't, sir. 
SULU: Hangar doors on the shuttlecraft deck are opening, sir. The Vendorian must be trying to escape. 
KIRK: We need him. Override the controls and shut those doors. 
SULU: Doors closing, sir. 
KIRK: Spock, take the conn. Talk to the Romulans. Try to stall them. And send a security team to the hangar deck. I'll be in Engineering.

[Bridge]

KIRK; What happened? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. I came up here to check the backup systems, and there was a crewman taking this panel apart. That's all I remember. 
KIRK: How long will it take to fix? 
SCOTT: Two hours, at least. 
KIRK: Get on it.

[Corridor]

ANNE: You're not getting past me this time. I've learned my lesson. 
CARTER: Yes. He said you were like that, practical as well as warm and lovely. You're everything he said you were. 
ANNE: Carter? What did he say? 
CARTER: Many things. Some were only feelings, deep feelings he couldn't always express. He did love you. 
ANNE: How did he die? 
CARTER: Winston crashed on our planet, and he was tended by a Vendorian. Me. He lived for almost a year before his body ceased to function. 
ANNE: You are so much like him, his voice, his mannerisms. 
CARTER: That is the way of our people. The longer we stay in another's form, the more we take on its memory, emotion, attitudes. Not totally, but a great deal as time passes. 
ANNE: He did say he loved me. 
CARTER: As I do. In a sense, I feel some of the emotions he felt. His love for you was very strong. Because I was there, it did not end when he died. 
ANNE: Carter. 
CARTER: Anne, this is what I am. (changes into Vendorian shape) Can you love this? (changes back) You see why I told you it would be best to forget me? 
(Kirk arrives) 
KIRK: But unfortunately, I can't. 
(The Romulans fire at the ship, and Kirk and Anne are knocked off their feet. Carter escapes)

[Bridge]

(Kirk enters) 
SPOCK: Direct hit, Captain. Damage to the secondary propulsion system. The commander has apparently decided to fight. 
M'RESS: The Romulan commander is signalling, sir. I'll put it on the screen. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Captain Kirk, all our main batteries are trained on you. To resist would be useless and wasteful of lives. Do you surrender? 
KIRK: Without deflectors, we're just a clay pigeon for them. 
SPOCK: Practicality does suggest capitulation, Captain. 
SULU: Captain, the deflector shields are coming up again. 
KIRK: That's only one shield. 
SULU: Yes, sir, but it is between us and the Romulans. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, aim for the propulsion units of the lead Romulan vessel. Prepare to fire phasers and photon torpedoes in combination. 
SULU: Phasers and torpedoes ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
(They disable the first ship) 
SPOCK: Second vessel firing now, sir. 
KIRK: Lock on second target. 
SULU: Ready, Captain. 
KIRK: Fire. 
SPOCK: Strange. We did no damage, but the Romulan is retreating anyway. 
KIRK: They may believe we do have their spy. Scan the other vessel for damage, if you will, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Second vessel power supply out. Crew unharmed. They should be able to repair the ship in a few days. 
KIRK: Good work, Mister Scott. That deflector shield went up just in time.
SCOTT: But sir, I haven't finished repairing the shield. I told you it'll take hours, and it will. 
SPOCK: Interesting. 
KIRK: Then what was? Winston. 
SPOCK: It is not outside the realm of probability. If he could rearrange his own atoms to become an examination table, one would have to assume he could become a deflector shield. 
SCOTT: Will someone tell me what's going on? 
(The Vendorian enters) 
SCOTT: What manner of beastie is that? 
SPOCK: Your deflector shield, Mister Scott. 
ALIEN: I assume the danger to your ship is over. 
KIRK: It is. 
ALIEN: As it should be. I'm sorry if I endangered your vessel. 
KIRK: Why did you do it? 
ALIEN: Among my own people, I am a non-producer, useless. An outcast fit only to do those tasks of the lowest order. The Romulans offered me a life, something of value I could do. It is important to be of value to someone. 
KIRK: What changed your mind about the Romulans? 
ALIEN: It seems, Captain, that I am more Carter Winston than I knew. He loved life. He loved Anne. I couldn't allow the Romulans to harm any of you because of him. 
KIRK: I understand. 
ALIEN: What will happen to me now? 
KIRK: You'll have to stand trial. But you did save the Enterprise from the Romulans, and I will recommend that be taken into consideration. 
ALIEN: Thank you, Captain. 
(The Vendorian changes into Carter Winston) 
KIRK: In the meantime, I'm afraid I'll have to keep you under guard. I think we've had enough of that little trick. 
ANNE: Captain, could you assign me that duty. 
CARTER: But you've seem me. You know what I am. 
ANNE: Form doesn't seem terribly important to me. As Carter Winston or even just part of him, there's a better life for you than anything the Romulans might offer. Can we talk about that? 
CARTER: I don't know. I 
KIRK: You have the guard detail, Lieutenant. 
(McCoy enters as Anne and Carter leave) 
MCCOY: You caught him. 
SPOCK: Acute observation, Doctor. 
MCCOY: I'm glad to see him under guard, Jim. If he'd turned into a second Spock, it would've been too much to take. 
SPOCK: Perhaps. But then two Doctor McCoys just might bring the level of medical efficiency on this ship up to acceptable levels.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


More Tribbles, More Troubles
Stardate: 5392.4
Original Airdate: 6 Oct, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5392.4. The Enterprise has been assigned to escort two robot grain ships to Sherman's Planet, which has been struck by crop failures and famine. This shipment of seed grain, quintrotriticale, is necessary to the survival of the colonists. We are breaking course to Sherman's Planet to investigate what appears to be a Klingon battle cruiser pursuing some kind of smaller ship. Observation may confirm a rumour that the Klingons have a new weapon, type so far unknown.
[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, it is a Klingon ship. Rapidly closing on its target. 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate the smaller vessel is a one-man scout ship of common design. 
SULU: They're firing on him. 
(Explosions happen around the little ship) 
KIRK: Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. Ahead, warp factor six. Scotty, lock the transporter on that small vessel. We're going to rescue that pilot. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, aye, Captain.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Locking on.

[Bridge]

(Finally, the Klingons manage to hit the fleeing ship) 
KIRK: Open hailing frequencies. Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. You are violating Federation space. Identify yourself. Stop firing on scout ship. 
(Lots more misses) 
KIRK: Arm all phasers. Deflector shields up. 
SULU: Phasers armed. Shields up. 
KIRK: Ahead warp factor eight. Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. 
(At last, they blow up the scout ship) 
SULU: They got him. 
KIRK: Scotty, have you got that pilot yet? 
SCOTT [OC]: I don't know, sir.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: That Klingon (mutter). That blast decalibrated the integration parameters.

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain. 
(The Klingon ship is coming straight for them. Red Alert sounds. A wibbly energy field is fired at Enterprise) 
KIRK: The new weapon. Spock? 
SPOCK: Some kind of field effect, Captain. It will hit us in precisely four seconds. It produces a most remarkable (the weapon hits) disruption.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Now, what 
(He mutters and works the controls)

[Bridge]

SULU: Our engines are dead. 
SPOCK: Captain, we have been hit by a kind of projected stasis field. Our matter-antimatter generators are disabled. We are paralysed. 
KIRK: Fire phasers. 
SULU: The phasers don't work, sir. 
SPOCK: The photon torpedoes will not respond, either. The stasis field disables all higher-order field and warp functions. 
UHURA: Well, we could always throw rocks. 
SPOCK: This new Klingon weapon must be one of surprising power if it can immobilize a starship. The energy drain on the Klingon ship would be enormous. 
KIRK: Scotty, did you get that pilot? 
SCOTT [OC]: I got him in the beam, sir.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: But I can't integrate him. The system's been discoordinated. 
UHURA: Captain, I have a message coming in, sir. 
KIRK: Put it on the viewscreen. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Ah, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Release my ship. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: I'd be delighted to, Captain Kirk, if you will turn over the pilot of the little ship. 
KIRK: That ship was a Federation-built craft. The pilot is under our protection. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: He has committed ecological sabotage. If I have to take him by force, I will. 
KIRK: The first Klingon to step aboard this ship will be the last Klingon. Full security alert, Mister Spock. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: I'm afraid, Captain Kirk, you'll find your phasers no longer work, nor any of your weapons. 
UHURA: Mister Spock, I'm losing contact with our robot ships. They're not held by the stasis field and they're moving out of range. 
KIRK: What was that? Lieutenant, cut off that frequency. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. (Koloth is cut off) The robot ships, they're moving off. 
KIRK: They still have power? We still control them? 
SULU: Affirmative, sir. 
KIRK: Bring them back, Mister Sulu. Have them ram the Klingon ship. 
SPOCK: Captain, you can't afford to lose that grain. 
KIRK: I can afford even less to lose the Enterprise. Open the hailing frequency again, Lieutenant. Captain Koloth. I'm going to give you one last chance to release the Enterprise. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: You're going to give me one chance? (he gets the message about the ships) It won't work, Captain Kirk. 
(transmission ends) 
KIRK: It will work, or he'd still be gloating. Bring the robot ships in from two different angles, Mister Sulu. 
(The Klingons fire two more stasis beams) 
SPOCK: Incredible. The amount of energy that field must require. 
(The new beams fail to reach their targets, then they all fail and Enterprise is free) 
SPOCK: They couldn't maintain the stasis field. 
KIRK: Keep your phasers locked on target, Mister Sulu. Hold your fire until they fire first. 
SULU: Aye, sir. Phasers locked on. 
(The Klingons fire at a robot ship) 
SPOCK: Apparently their battle capacity is down. They only damaged it. 
SULU: They're veering off. 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate their power cells are almost exhausted. They probably don't have the strength for a prolonged battle now. 
KIRK: Scotty, can you integrate that pilot now?

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: I think so, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: We'll be right there.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Call McCoy to the Transporter room. Spock.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Have you got him? 
SCOTT: Just putting him together now, sir. 
(A chubby figure solidifies, together with three piles of small pink fluffy objects) 
KIRK: I think we know that man. 
SPOCK: It appears to be 
MCCOY: I don't want to think about it. 
KIRK: Cyrano Jones! 
SCOTT: And he's got tribbles with him. Tribbles!

Captain's log, supplemental. Our rescue effort has given us some knowledge of the new Klingon weapon and the presence of Cyrano Jones, intergalactic trader and general nuisance.

[Transporter room]

JONES: Captain Kirk. Friend Kirk. 
KIRK: Seal off the area, Ensign. You know the law about transporting animals proven harmful. 
JONES: Captain, these are safe tribbles. 
MCCOY: There's no such thing as a safe tribble. 
SPOCK: A safe tribble would be a contradiction in terms. Tribbles are well known for their proclivities in multiplication. 
JONES: And they breed fast, too. And that's why these tribbles are safe. They don't reproduce. 
MCCOY: Don't reproduce? 
JONES: I've had them genetically engineered for compatibility with humanoid ecologies. See how friendly and loveable they are? And not a baby in the bunch. They're great pets and profitable, too. 
KIRK: Jones, how did you get away from Space Station K7? You were supposed to clean up all the tribbles there. 
JONES: Oh, well, I managed a short parole. I found some help. This is a tribble predator. It's called a glommer. 
(He holds up a pyramid-shaped thing with four legs, six horns and two eyes on long stalks) 
JONES: Watch. 
(The glommer pounces over a tribble, and we don't get to see the details) 
MCCOY: Well, at least it's neat. 
KIRK: Why were the Klingons chasing you, Jones? 
JONES: How should I know? Klingons have notoriously bad tempers. 
SPOCK: That may be true, but they rarely enter Federation space and fire on Federation vessels without reason. 
KIRK: They did mention ecological sabotage. 
JONES: Me? A saboteur? Ridiculous. 
KIRK: Captain Koloth was pretty emphatic. 
JONES: It was such a little thing. I can't understand at all why they got upset. 
KIRK: What did you do? 
JONES: I only sold them some tribbles. 
KIRK: You sold tribbles on a Klingon planet? 
JONES: Well, I didn't know it was a Klingon planet. 
KIRK: Tribbles don't like Klingons. That should have given you some clue. 
JONES: Klingons like tribbles even less. It was lucky you came along and saved me when you did, Friend Kirk. I couldn't have outrun them much longer. 
KIRK: According to our computer files, Jones, you are in violation of three Federation mandates and forty seven local ones. You're confined until we complete our mission. Then we'll turn you over to the proper authorities. 
JONES: Captain, couldn't we talk this over? I didn't think so. 
(If you're the only person in the universe who is reading this and does not know about the Trouble With Tribbles, click the link and learn)

[Medical lab]

(McCoy is examining a pink tribble)

[Briefing room]

MCCOY: Jim, Cyrano Jones is right. These tribbles don't reproduce. They just get fat. I don't think we have anything to worry about. 
KIRK: Not about tribbles, anyway. I am concerned about that new Klingon weapon. 
SPOCK: It is an energy-sapping field of great strength, Captain. It immobilizes a starship and its weapons capability. But apparently, it also immobilizes the attacking ship's abilities at the same time. 
SCOTT: Aye, and if that's true, then it's a weapon that leaves them as helpless as it does us. 
SPOCK: I believe I just said that, Mister Scott. 
KIRK: The practical advantages of such a weapon would seem to be limited. 
SPOCK: Perhaps, but there are logical applications. The key question is, how long does it take them to recharge? They will probably attack us again as soon as they are back up to power. And they will probably begin by destroying the other robot ship to prevent us from repeating the same trick. They want Cyrano Jones very badly. 
MCCOY: He really doesn't seem the saboteur type, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes. Status report on the damaged grain ship, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Well, sir, we've managed to transfer all the grain aboard, but it severely limits us. We filled the shuttlecraft hangars, all our extra holds, and we've even got containers of that wheat, that quintrotriticale, in the corridors of the ship. And then we've got that other robot ship to escort, too. I don't like it at all, sir. 
KIRK: Nor do I, Mister Scott, but we've got to do it. Sherman's Planet needs that grain desperately. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir, but we've got tribbles on the ship, quintrotriticale in the corridors, Klingons in the quadrant. It can ruin your whole day, sir. 
(And big fat pink tribbles are 'sniffing' around the containers. So big and fat that the glommer cannot quite cope with them)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain, sensors are picking up a Klingon battle cruiser. 
KIRK: Deflector shields up. Stand by phasers. (rolls a tribble off his chair) How fat do these things get? 
SULU: Klingon ship approaching rapidly. Within phaser range in thirty seconds. 
SPOCK: Obviously, they can recharge their power in a matter of hours. 
KIRK: Use the robot ship as a decoy. Have it change course and move off. We'll use it again to give the Klingons trouble. They can't control more than one ship at a time with their stasis field. 
SULU: Beginning evasive manoeuvres. 
SPOCK: The Klingon seems to be veering off. My mistake, Captain. They were not veering off. They were attacking the grain ship. 
SULU: But they didn't destroy it. They only wrecked the propulsion units. They left the cargo intact. 
SPOCK: Captain Koloth is quite a marksman. 
SULU: They've changed course. They're coming in again. 
KIRK: Ready phasers. 
SULU: Phasers armed and ready, sir. 
(The Klingons fire two shots at Enterprise. The shaking of the ship makes some containers fall over and break open. Kirk returns fire, then comes an attempt with the stasis beam. Meanwhile, little pink tribbles are becoming giant pink tribbles.) 
KIRK: Photon torpedoes. Fire one. 
SPOCK: They're running away. Very odd. They did not use their stasis weapon at all. 
KIRK: Perhaps they haven't had enough time to recharge it. 
SPOCK: Or the purpose of the attack was something else. 
SULU: They disabled the robot ship. 
KIRK: Scotty, put a tractor beam on it. We'll take it in tow. 
SPOCK: Captain, that could be exactly what they want us to do. Tow the robot and limit our available power. We're carrying the extra mass of the first ship's cargo, and now we have the second one in tow. That requires a great deal of power we won't be able to use in battle. 
KIRK: That seems logical. 
SPOCK: Thank you. 
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock, do you have any ideas? 
SPOCK: We could always throw tribbles at them. 
KIRK: I thought Vulcans didn't have a sense of humour. 
SPOCK: We don't, Captain. 
(The glommer looks like a jockey on the back of a tribble) 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got broken cargo containers in all the corridors, and the tribbles are eating the grain. 
KIRK: Get Cyrano Jones up here. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Any sign of Captain Koloth's ship? 
SULU: Nothing, sir. 
KIRK: Keep scanning. 
JONES: Captain Kirk, what can I do for you? Some Spican flame gems perhaps? 
KIRK: Your tribbles are all over my ship. My security men can't find them all. 
JONES: You need better security men, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Jones, you are in enough trouble already. 
JONES: Captain, a harmless little tribble. What can they hurt? 
KIRK: Harmless, maybe. Little? (pushes a beach ball off his seat) In any case, they're eating the quintrotriticale. 
JONES: The what? 
KIRK: The wheat! 
JONES: They're hungry, Captain. 
KIRK: So are the people on Sherman's Planet. A little tribble doesn't eat much, a big tribble does. And these are growing. Jones, is this the ecological sabotage the Klingons are so mad about? 
SULU: Captain, the Klingons are coming back. 
KIRK: Speak of the devil. 
(McCoy enters) 
MCCOY: Jim, there's something about these tribbles. 
KIRK: Later, Bones. (pushes one nearly as big as himself off his chair) Mister Sulu, release the robot ship. We'll swing back and pick it up later. Deflector shields up. Stand by photon torpedoes. And all noncombatants off the Bridge.

Captain's log, supplemental. The Klingon ship under command of Captain Koloth is forcing us into a battle for custody of Cyrano Jones for reasons still unknown.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Contact in thirty seconds. 
KIRK: Ready photon torpedoes. Fire one. 
SULU: One fired. 
(The Klingons fire their stasis beam, destroying the torpedo and grabbing the Enterprise) 
SCOTT: That's done it. We're caught. 
UHURA: Message coming in, sir. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Ah, Captain Kirk. We'll take control of your ship now. 
KIRK: Not if I can help it. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: I want your prisoner. 
KIRK: Much as I hate to admit it, Captain Koloth, Cyrano Jones is a citizen of the Federation and entitled to Federation protection. I must, much as it pains me, refuse your request. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: It is not a request. Don't force me to take steps that we will both regret. 
KIRK: Close channel, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: With pleasure, sir. 
SPOCK: Aren't you going to sit down, sir? 
(The pink tribble on the Captain's chair is definitely bigger than Kirk now) 
KIRK: I think I'll stand.

[Klingon Bridge]

KOLOTH: Implement boarding plan C. 
KORAX: Yes, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Scott, we're going to implement Emergency defence plan B. 
SCOTT: Plan B, sir? 
KIRK: Mister Spock suggested it.

[Klingon ship]

(The boarding hatches open, and giant pink tribbles enter the Klingon ship. The Klingons are horrified)

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Emergency plan B complete, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Open hailing frequencies, Lieutenant. Captain Koloth, are you ready to release my ship? 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Release your ship? Kirk, you are monotonous. 
KIRK: You don't know yet, do you? 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Know what? 
KIRK: That we have immobilized your ship worse than you have immobilized ours. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: I doubt that. Our instruments report nothing except some undue transporter activity and (a tribble rolls behind him) Kirk? Tribbles? 
KIRK: Tribbles.

[Klingon Bridge]

KOLOTH: Kirk, Cyrano Jones took a Klingon genetic construct, an artificial creature from one of our planets. We must have it back. It was designed to be a tribble predator. We are prepared to go to war if we have to.

[Bridge]

KIRK: You must have others. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: This was the first one, Kirk. We need it in order to grow others from it. We need it to get rid of the tribbles

[Klingon Bridge]

KOLOTH: Jones sold before they completely overrun the planet.

[Bridge]

KIRK: And that's all you want? 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Jones is not that important.

[Klingon Bridge]

KOLOTH: We must have the glommer.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Oh, well, if that's all. Mister Scott, transport the glommer over to the Klingon ship. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

JONES: You can't do this to me. Under space salvage laws, he's mine. 
SCOTT: A planetary surface is not covered by space salvage laws. But if you want the little beastie that bad, Mister Jones, we'll transport you over with it. 
JONES: I withdraw my claim. 
(The glommer is transported, and the stasis beam is switched off)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Well, at least we can report the stasis field is not as effective a weapon as we thought. The power drain is too high and takes too long for the Klingon ship to recover to make it practical. 
SPOCK: Agreed, Captain. Tribbles appear to be a much more effective weapon.

[Corridor]

(A monster tribble is amongst the wheat containers) 
MCCOY: Jones' genetic engineering was very slipshod. Jim. He may have kept the tribbles from reproducing, but he didn't slow down their metabolism. You see, they're not just giant tribbles, they're colonies.

[Klingon ship]

KORAX: Captain, the engine room is filled with tribble. 
KOLOTH: Well, we can do something about that. (to the glommer) Attack. 
(But the door opens and it is full of one tribble. The glommer retreats) 
KOLOTH: He did it to us again! That tin-plated, overbearing excuse for a starship captain did it to us again. Blast that thing. 
(So they shoot the big tribble, which becomes an avalanche of little tribbles) 
KORAX: Any other orders, sir? 
KOLOTH: (up to his neck in tribbles) Yes. Don't do that again. Ever.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: A simple shot of neoethylene will fix everything. The tribble colonies will break down into their individual units with a slower metabolic rate. And these really will be safe tribbles now. 
JONES: Er, what about the Klingons? 
MCCOY: Well, unless they treat their tribbles too, that ship isn't going to be big enough for all of them. 
KIRK: (looking up a Jefferies tube) Say, you didn't get this one, Bones. 
MCCOY: Oh yes I did. 
KIRK: But it hasn't (then it did) Someday I'll learn. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. But you've got to admit, if we've got to have tribbles, it's best if all our tribbles are little ones.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Lorelei Signal
Stardate: 5483.7
Original Airdate: 29 Sep, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5483.7. The Enterprise is en route through an unfamiliar sector of space where a series of Earth Federation ships have disappeared mysteriously during the last a hundred and fifty years. Recent joint discussions with the Klingon and Romulan Empires have revealed that a starship has disappeared in this sector precisely every twenty seven point three four six star years.
[Bridge]

SPOCK: If my calculations are correct, Captain, we have twenty seconds to go. 
KIRK: Twenty seconds to what? That's what worries me. Lieutenant Uhura, place the ship on Yellow Alert. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. Yellow Alert. 
SPOCK: Five seconds. Four, three 
UHURA: All stations report Yellow Alert status, sir. Captain, I'm getting some sort of subspace radio signal. 
KIRK: Put it on ship's speaker. 
UHURA: It's more like music than a message. 
SPOCK: Captain, we are being probed. 
KIRK: From where? Can you trace it? 
SPOCK: The signal is coming from a star system twenty light years away. 
KIRK: Can you identify it? 
SPOCK: It is the Taurean system. A small star at the extreme edge of this sector. 
KIRK: That's a powerful signal to reach here from that great a distance. 
SCOTT: It seems to be calling us. 
KIRK: Strange. Yes, I get the same feeling myself. 
SPOCK: It does resemble a summons. 
UHURA: I find no resemblance to a summons, Captain. 
KIRK: Opinion noted. Set a course for the Taurean system, Lieutenant Arex. Warp factor seven. 
(Later) 
CHAPEL: You wanted me, Lieutenant? Are you all right? 
UHURA: I am. But I want you to observe the men here. It seemed to start when we picked up that signal, and it's gotten worse. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. Like a Vulcan marriage drum. I am experiencing audio-visual suggestion, Captain. 
KIRK: So am I. 
(They are 'seeing' women with white hair) 
KIRK: Dimensional visions. Any idea what's causing them, Spock? 
SPOCK: Logically, we must assume they are created by the probe. 
UHURA: Sir, what visions? We don't see anything. 
KIRK: Miss Chapel, you don't see anything, either? 
CHAPEL: No, sir. 
KIRK: Take a medical reading, Nurse. Lieutenant Uhura, call Doctor McCoy to the Bridge. 
UHURA: Sickbay, Doctor McCoy. Please report to the Bridge. Doctor McCoy? No response.

[McCoy's office]

(He's seeing lovely things too) 
MCCOY: Magnolias in blossom. Beautiful.

[Bridge]

UHURA: The signal's getting stronger, sir. 
KIRK: Re-scan your sensor readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Readings are still inconclusive. It is odd that only the men are affected, Captain. I suggest 
(A planet wobbles into view. and the men go all misty. The Enterprise enters orbit) 
SCOTT: Ship's log, stardate 5483.8. Engineering Officer Scott in command. We are in orbit around planet two in the Taurean system. Probes and sensors indicate there was once a vast civilisation here. Lovely. Lovely. However, life readings are sparse and concentrated. Captain Kirk is beaming down with a scouting party to investigate. 
UHURA: These figures just don't match up with Spock's. So far I count three sensor readings that are off.

[Planet surface]

(A building that looks like frozen flames) 
KIRK: Fantastic architecture. Only an incredibly advanced race could have built it. 
CARVER: You want all those routine readings, sir. 
KIRK: No, I don't think so, Carver. Spock will do it. 
MCCOY: There is something compelling about it. 
KIRK: Yes, I feel it too, Bones. 
SPOCK: Captain, the urgency of our feeling suggests visual compulsion. I advise remaining at a distance until I can determine the extent of its influence. The life forms are indicated in its centre. 
KIRK: There's no apparent danger, Spock. Let's go.

[Temple]

(The inner doors open to reveal a bevy of beautiful white-haired, blue-eyed women.) 
THEELA: They are here. 
ALL: Oh, such wondrous ones. They honour us. 
THEELA: I am Theela, the Head Female. Welcome, James Kirk, Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock. Welcome. 
(What, the redshirt is suddenly invisible? How rude.) 
SPOCK: The form is humanoid, but there are many internal differences. Their bodies appear to function on an unusual psychokinesis level. 
MCCOY: First time I ever admired a body function. 
KIRK: How do you know our names? 
THEELA: The Opto-aud revealed you to us. 
(She hums a note and a door slides back to reveal the Enterprise on a viewscreen, including images of the Bridge) 
SPOCK: Tonal control. Fascinating. 
THEELA: The Opto-aud will reveal whatever is asked, Mister Spock. We are grateful that you heard the signal, Captain. 
KIRK: The signal? A distress call, wasn't it? 
THEELA: I will explain its meaning later. We have prepared a feast to celebrate your presence.

Captain's log, stardate 5483.9. The beauty of this place is unequalled. It's the answer to all of man's dreams. Exquisite in every way. We're here to investigate, to investigate... The women radiate delight.

[Temple]

(The men are lounging on rugs, being entertained) 
MCCOY: These are the most beautiful women in the galaxy. But where are the men? 
THEELA: They occupy another compound. 
KIRK: That makes sense. 
WOMAN: Mister Spock. 
(She throws something to him, he fails to catch it. It hits his chest and he falls unconscious. Kirk tries to get up) 
KIRK: Spock 
(They all fall over) 
THEELA: Take them to the slumber chambers. They must rest. 
MCCOY: Probably that nectar. It's potent as Saurian brandy. 
(Theela sheds a single tear)

[Slumber chambers]

(The men are awake again, and wearing a strange circlet around their heads. McCoy seems older) 
MCCOY: Jim, Jim! 
(Kirk wakes on a huge four-poster bed, wearing a circlet. His face seems more lined than usual. He tries to remove the circlet and fails)

[Science lab]

CHAPEL: Results of every scan run by the women science teams. If there is an answer, it's here. 
COMPUTER: Computer on. 
CHAPEL: Summation of medical, biological, astrophysical scans. 
COMPUTER: Working. Probe directed at ship from planet surface is severely enervating to humanoid males. Exposure causes increasing weakness. Possibly to point of death. 
UHURA: Lieutenant Uhura to Security Officer Davison. 
DAVISON [OC]: Davison here. 
UHURA: I want an all-woman security team on every transporter immediately. No one is to transport down to the planet unless it is on my order. 
DAVISON [OC]: Aye, aye, Lieutenant. 
CHAPEL: What are you doing? 
UHURA: Taking command of this ship.

[Temple]

(The landing party are in front of Theela, sitting on a raised throne) 
SPOCK: We must return to our duties aboard ship. 
KIRK: Yes. Duties. That's it. Duties. I have 
THEELA: You cannot leave, Mister Spock. You are needed here. Soon, all the men on your ship will feel as you do. They are all needed, and they will join us. 
KIRK: We must go. 
THEELA: Obstruct them. 
(The women easily overpower the men and throw them onto the cushions)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: (singing) I dream of ... the gala lads ... can I trow (really can't make much out) 
UHURA: Mister Scott, as senior Lieutenant, I'm taking responsibility for the safety of this ship. 
SCOTT: Very thoughtful of you, love. 
UHURA: Ship's log, supplemental. Lieutenant Uhura recording. Due to Chief Engineering Officer Scott's euphoric state of mind, I am assuming command of the Enterprise, I accept full responsibility for my action. A detailed account will be recorded later. Nurse Chapel, until further notice, you will act as Chief Medical Officer. 
CHAPEL: Yes, Lieutenant.

[Temple]

KIRK: They've gone. 
SPOCK: Yes. Your medikit, Doctor. It may contain something which will help us. 
MCCOY: I wonder why they let me keep it. 
SPOCK: Perhaps they saw no practical use in it. 
MCCOY: Cortropine. Could help. It's a strong stimulant. 
KIRK: Go ahead. 
(At the door) 
KIRK: Locked. 
SPOCK: (with a medical scanner) If the lock is magnetised, this may disrupt its field. 
(The door opens enough for them to get out. Then Theela enters) 
THEELA: Assistance! Assistance!

[Planet surface]

KIRK: The urn. It's the only place. 
(The men climb into a giant sculptured urn to hide from the women) 
THEELA: This way. 
(As the women get close, the circlets on their heads glow) 
WOMAN: They are not here, Theela.

[Urn]

THEELA [OC]: Come. They might have returned to where they landed. 
KIRK: The headbands. Look at them. 
SPOCK: I have noticed that their glow diminishes when the women are not present. They could be polarised conductors which transfer our vital energy to the bodies of the women. 
KIRK: You mean they're actually draining our life forces? 
SPOCK: That would account for our rapid aging, Captain. And our weakness. If you recall, the women seemed listless at first. But as our strength has failed, they have become more energetic and vital. 
KIRK: How long do we have, Spock? 
SPOCK: We seem to be aging ten years per day, Captain. 
MCCOY: Ten years? In four days, we'll be dead! 
KIRK: And useless to them. Theela said the other men of the crew would join us here. They'll be lured into the same trap. We've got to contact the ship. 
SPOCK: I have retained more strength than any of you. My internal structure is different, Captain, my life span longer. It is wiser if I go to the temple to try and find the communicators and contact the ship.

[Temple]

(There is no one around, so Spock hums the note and turns on the Opto-aud) 
SPOCK: The equipment belonging to the men of the Enterprise, where is it? 
(The screen shows it to be in a drawer under the throne) 
SPOCK: Spock to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise. 
(He has been discovered) 
SPOCK: Request rescue party. All-female. Repeat. All-female. All 
(He collapses)

Ship's log, supplemental. Lieutenant Uhura commanding. We have assembled an all-female rescue party in # accordance with Mister Spock's request.

[Temple]

(Uhura and Chapel beam down with four security women) 
THEELA: Greetings. I am Theela. Head Female of this compound. 
UHURA: Lieutenant Uhura of the Starship Enterprise. We're here to locate Captain Kirk. 
THEELA: Return to your ship. You are not wanted here. 
UHURA: Until we find Captain Kirk, we will not leave. 
(Theela sends her troops in) 
UHURA: Phasers on stun. Fire! 
(The women drop like stones. Uhura shoots Theela herself) 
UHURA: Search the temple. Parties of two.

[Slumber chambers]

UHURA: No sign of them anywhere. 
(From his bed, Spock sends a telepathic message) 
SPOCK [OC]: Miss Chapel. Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Wait. 
UHURA: What is it? 
CHAPEL: I heard Spock's voice. 
SPOCK [OC]: Christine. 
CHAPEL: It is Spock. There must be a panel somewhere. 
(They find it) 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock! 
UHURA: Spock, what happened? 
(But he is incoherent)

[Urn]

(It has started to rain) 
KIRK: We've got to get out of here.

[Sickbay]

(Chapel gets the circlet off the old, wizened Spock. 
CHAPEL: Spock, Oh, Spock. 
SPOCK: Instruct female engineer to divert ship's energy into deflector shields. Block probe. 
CHAPEL: We tried that. 
SPOCK: Use all ship's energy. Everything channelled to the shields. Hurry, Christine.

[Temple]

(The stunned women are coming round) 
UHURA: Release Captain Kirk and his men or we will destroy your temple. 
THEELA: Wait! I will tell you everything. 
(She turns on the Opto-aud) 
THEELA: The past. Reveal it. 
(Images appear - first male and female) 
THEELA: This is the race from whom we are descended. They came to this planet when our homeworld began to die. They built this place and all surrounding it. They did not know this planet drains humanoid energy. But the women's bodies developed a glandular secretion, enabling them to survive and to manipulate certain areas of the males' brains, influence their emotional senses. Ultimately, it drained the men, caused them to weaken and die. 
(Meanwhile, the urn is filling up with water, and the men can't get out) 
THEELA: To survive, we must vitalise each twenty seven years of your time. 
WOMAN: Instead, we are eternal prisoners. We neither age nor die. We are unable even to bear children. 
UHURA: What about Captain Kirk and the others? Can the Opto-aud locate them? 
THEELA: We shall see. The men of the Enterprise, reveal them. 
(It does) 
UHURA: They're drowning! Where are they? 
THEELA: The nearest water accumulation is many cusecs from here. 
UHURA: That looks like a pool or a tub. 
THEELA: It is the urn in the garden.

[Planet surface]

UHURA: Phasers on setting one. Fire. 
(The urn is blown to bits and the men washed out, unconscious)

[Sickbay]

(Chapel presses some buttons, and a golden glow appears around her patients) 
CHAPEL: No results, Captain. We've tried everything we know. 
SPOCK: Perhaps the transporter is the key. 
MCCOY: Key to what? 
SPOCK: Our restoration. It holds the molecular pattern of our original bodies when we beamed down to the planet. 
KIRK: Spock. Can the transporter be programmed to re-pattern us as we were? 
SPOCK: Possibly. But the odds against us are ninety nine point seven to one.

[Planet surface]

(The four old men are beamed down) 
SPOCK: We are on the surface, Mister Scott. Reprogram the transporter as previously directed.

[Transporter room]

CHAPEL: But this has never been done before. Suppose it fails? 
SCOTT: Their patterns'll break up, scatter in space. Transporter reprogrammed, Mister Spock. 
KIRK [OC]: Beam us up, Scotty. 
UHURA: Scotty, we're losing them! 
(The four figures finally materialise) 
KIRK: Did it work? 
UHURA: You're more handsome than ever.

[Temple]

(Theela destroys the transmitter) 
THEELA: Tell Captain Kirk we have kept the agreement. 
UHURA: A crew of women will bring a ship back. You'll be transported to the first suitable planet. 
THEELA: How quickly will we become as other women? 
UHURA: Doctor McCoy says it should only take a few months. 
THEELA: A life of hope. New learning. Perhaps love. Oh, it is a much better future than immortality.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


One Of Our Planets Is Missing
Stardate: 5371.3
Original Airdate: 22 Sep, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5371.3. A huge cosmic cloud has been reported moving into the outer fringe of our galaxy. Nothing like it has ever been seen before. Starfleet Command has sent the Enterprise to investigate as we're the only vessel in the vicinity of the phenomenon. Our present position is in the Pallas Fourteen system, which contains Mantilles, the most remote inhabited planet in the entire Federation.
[Bridge]

SULU: We will intercept the cloud in the vicinity of Alondra, the outermost planet, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, we are now approaching sensor range of the cloud. 
KIRK: Readings? 
SPOCK: It seems to be of irregular shape, some eight hundred thousand kilometres across and about half that in depth. 
AREX: It's immense. Twice the diameters of Saturn, Jupiter and Neptune together! 
KIRK: Put up our present position, Lieutenant Arex. 
AREX: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Reading, Spock? 
SPOCK: This is very curious, Captain. It computes as a strange combination of matter and energy. 
SULU: Captain, look. 
AREX: Captain, Alondra has disappeared from navigation scan. 
UHURA: The cloud could have come between us and the planet. 
SPOCK: No, Lieutenant, the cloud has engulfed Alondra. Captain, the planet seems to be breaking up. Its mass is definitely growing smaller. 
KIRK: Spock, is it possible the cloud consumes planets? 
SPOCK: It seems a logical assumption, Captain. 
SULU: Sir, the cloud is changing course. 
KIRK: That's impossible. 
AREX: The course change is verified, sir. The cloud is now moving directly toward the inhabited planet. 
UHURA: But if it continues on that course 
KIRK: Mantilles will die. Mister Sulu, increase speed to warp eight. Push it to the limit. 
SULU: Yes, sir.

Captain's log, supplemental. At warp eight, we will intercept the cloud before it reaches the inhabited planet Mantilles. But we are uncertain what we can do to stop a matter-energy cloud which measures thousands of times more than our vessel.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Jim, if we can't stop it, millions of people will die. 
SPOCK: Perhaps more, Doctor. If planet annihilation is part of this thing's nature, it might seek them out as instinctively as an amoeba seeks out food. It may not consume only planets, but also stars. We do not know yet whether it has any selective ability, but it could be a thread to every planet in our galaxy. 
KIRK: Bones, I need an expert psychological opinion. Do we dare tell the people on Mantilles, try to save a few who could get away? 
MCCOY: How much time do they have? 
AREX: Four hours, ten minutes, sir. 
MCCOY: It's certain there'd be planetwide panic. 
KIRK: Blind panic. 
SPOCK: On the other hand, notifying them may still save some small fraction of the population, Captain. 
MCCOY: Who's the governor of Mantilles, Jim? 
KIRK: Bob Wesley. He left Starfleet for the governorship. He's no hysteric. 
MCCOY: Then tell him. 
SULU: Coming up on the cloud, sir. ETA five minutes, ten seconds. 
KIRK: Thanks, Bones. Lieutenant Uhura, send a priority one call to Governor Wesley on Mantilles. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, I'm getting unusual readings on the chemical identity sensors. 
KIRK: What kind? 
SPOCK: Elements unknown in our periodic tables, Captain. I'm of the opinion this cloud has come from outside our galaxy. 
SULU: Captain. 
KIRK: Evasive action. 
AREX: Aye, sir. 
(But the cloud wraps tendrils around the Enterprise) 
KIRK: Reverse full power. 
SULU: Full reverse, sir. 
MCCOY: It's still got us. 
SPOCK: The streamers are a combination of koinoenergy, almost an ambiplasma with an unusually powerful attraction force. 
KIRK: Prepare to fire all phasers into cloud mass. 
SULU: Locked on. Phasers ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
SULU: Firing. No effect, Captain
SPOCK: The cloud appeared to absorb the phaser energy, Captain. 
(The ship is shaken) 
MCCOY: We're floating inside the cloud. 
UHURA: All decks report considerable shaking up, but no damage, sir. 
SULU: Captain, objects approaching on the bow. 
KIRK: Deflector shields on. 
AREX: Shields up and operating, sir. 
SULU: More objects approaching aft, sir. 
KIRK: Analysis, Spock? 
SPOCK: The objects are some form of highly charged gaseous antimatter. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, the power drain on the shields is too heavy to hold for any length of time. 
KIRK [OC]: I know, Scotty.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Scotty, prepare the shields for an antimatter charge. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. Engineering out. 
SULU: Antimatter charge ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
(More blobs approach the ship) 
KIRK: Double the charge. 
SULU: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
(The blobs disappear) 
KIRK: Well, Spock, any conclusions? 
SPOCK: Only the beginning of a theory, Captain. It is possible this cloud in which we are entrapped is a living thing. The cloud is alive. Yes, Captain, its components appear similar to those found in living organisms. 
KIRK: Bones, any opinion? 
MCCOY: There's some resemblance. I don't know how much we can depend on it. But I'll tell you one thing. We have to get out of this area. Those mists out there are acting something like a macromorphase enzyme. If the shields don't stay up, the hull will be corroded and we'll all be broken down into nice digestible particles. 
SPOCK: I am inclined to agree with the Doctor, Captain. The mass of the planet Alondra has been steadily growing smaller since we've been in here. 
UHURA: Captain, I have a subspace radio message coming in from Governor Wesley of Mantilles. 
KIRK: Transfer it to my quarters. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, use your scanners to assemble a diagram of the cloud's composition and feed it to the library computer.

[Kirk's quarters]

WESLEY [on monitor]: Three and a half hours, Jim. That's not enough. Even if I had the ships available to totally evacuate the planet. 
KIRK: You have time to save some people, Bob. 
WESLEY [on monitor]: That won't be long enough either, but it'll have to do. 
KIRK: How are you going to choose? 
WESLEY [on monitor]: There is no choice, Jim. We'll save the children.

[Bridge]

KIRK: In three hours and twenty minutes the cloud will reach Mantilles. Millions of people will die. I need your help, gentlemen. Your analyses? 
SPOCK: If we assume the cloud is a living being, we must also assume it needs some kind of food to sustain itself. 
KIRK: Agreed. Judging from the disappearance of Alondra, the cloud lives on the energy it converts from the planets it consumes. 
SPOCK: Exactly. It is like a huge bull grazing here and there in the pasture of the universe. 
KIRK: What about those blobs, Bones? 
MCCOY: I think they perform the same function as teeth. They break up the larger chunks of matter for digestion. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, let's see what the scanners have come up with on the cloud's composition. 
(A vaguely familiar shaped object with bilateral symmetry and a central dense core. The subtly makes my brain hurt.) 
KIRK: It seems to have some sort of anatomy. Arex, where are we on that chart? 
AREX: Posting Enterprise position, sir. 
KIRK: The opening where we were drawn in seems to have closed. But there's another opening up there on top. 
MCCOY: If this thing does have some kind of digestive system, we don't stand much of a chance of making it that far. 
AREX: Three hours, five minutes until the cloud reaches Mantilles, sir. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Arex. Since we appear to have only one way out, we're going to take it. Mister Sulu, takes us to that central core area. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: And if this thing does have a stomach, we just might be able to give it enough indigestion to make it turn away from Mantilles. 
(Later) 
SULU: We've reached the entrance to the central core, Captain. 
MCCOY: What do we do now, knock? 
(Enterprise shakes) 
KIRK: No need, Bones. Here we go. 
(The Enterprise is sucked in to an area with bits protruding from walls, and the blobs following get blown up) 
UHURA: What are those things? 
MCCOY: I think we're in what corresponds to the small intestine. Those things growing out of the wall would be similar to villi. 
KIRK: Villi? 
MCCOY: The human small intestine is lined with millions of them, to absorb nutrients into the body. 
(Another explosion) 
SPOCK: Captain, those villi are antimatter. It the Enterprise touches one of them 
KIRK: We'll explode. Mister Sulu, keep the deflectors up at all costs. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Incredible. They're destroyed on contact with the matter this thing takes in and then they regenerate immediately. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott to Bridge. 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty. 
SCOTT [OC]: Keeping the deflectors this high

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Is putting an enormous strain on the engines, Captain. Especially the antimatter. What with the maximum power demands and all, the reserve is falling fast.

[Bridge]

KIRK: How much time do we have? 
SCOTT [OC]: Twenty one minutes, sir.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: But if the indicator goes below two anti-kilos, the engines won't regenerate.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Thank you, Mister Scott. Mister Arex, try to make your way through to the opening on the other side. 
AREX: Yes, sir. 
(Enterprise glides serenely along the jagged canyon) 
SULU: I can't hold it on course, sir. We're using all power. 
KIRK: Increase deflector shields to maximum. 
AREX: Screens to maximum, sir. 
(The ship slows, and seems to drift in a current)

Captain's log, supplemental. The Enterprise has only fifteen minutes left before her power is drained and we are left helpless.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: If we don't stop the power drain right now, that'll be the end of us. 
KIRK: And if we do stop, we'll be drawn into one of the villi and the ship will explode. 
SCOTT: Captain, you said that villi are antimatter. If we could get a piece of it, I could put it in the antimatter engine and it would regenerate. We'd have enough power for the engines and the shields to go on maximum again. 
KIRK: We need both the matter and the antimatter engines regenerated. 
SCOTT: Matter's no problem. We could beam aboard some of the planet chunks out there. And we can cut a piece of the antimatter villi with the tractor beams and transport it aboard like that. 
KIRK: Bring it aboard? If the antimatter touches the inside of the ship or any of us, we'll be blown to bits. 
SCOTT: I can rig a force field box that'll hold the villi suspended in the centre. Then I can take it into the antimatter nacelle, put it into the regenerating chamber and release the forcefield by remote control.

[Transporter room]

(So a piece of villi is cut and Kyle transports it into Scott's box) 
KIRK: Scotty, we've got ten minutes left. 
SCOTT: The force field is holding. Let's go.

[Antimatter nacelle]

(Things are spluttering due to lack of fuel) 
SCOTT: Well, that gives us two minutes. All right, Gabler, open it. (They push the box in) Close it. 
(The spluttering stops) 
KIRK: Scotty, you've just given the Enterprise and Mantilles a chance to live. 
SCOTT: Thank you, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Situation, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: The cloud is now only forty two minutes, fourteen seconds from Mantilles, Captain. And we have ascertained an important fact. This being does have a brain. 
KIRK: Intelligent? 
SPOCK: Impossible to say at this moment, Captain. It has made only one action which might be interpreted as intelligent. It changed course from Alondra toward Mantilles. But that could have been an involuntary response to the sensing of food. 
KIRK: Where is the brain located? 
SPOCK: That irregularly shaped object at the top of the core emanates considerable electrical activity. 
MCCOY: It's pretty certain to be the brain, Jim. The functioning of the brain is basically electric. 
KIRK: If we can reach it before the cloud gets to Mantilles, we might be able to save the planet. We'll use the photon torpedoes to destroy the brain. 
SPOCK: Captain, this is a living creature. Starfleet regulations 
KIRK: I know the regulations against the killing of intelligent life forms, Mister Spock. But we don't know this life form is intelligent. And we do know the people on Mantilles are doomed if we don't stop it. If I have to be a judge, I decide in favour of saving Mantilles.

Captain's log, stardate 5372.0. Spock and Uhura are using our sensors to prepare a detailed chart so we may determine targets for our photon torpedoes.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Am I doing the right thing, Bones? Once, I said, man rose above primitiveness by vowing 'I will not kill today.' 
MCCOY: But you can't let this thing destroy over eighty million lives, either. 
SPOCK: Captain, I have completed the analysis of the target area. Unfortunately, the brain is so vast, our entire offensive armament will not assure its destruction. However, the brain could be completely destroyed if we convert the entire ship to energy, aimed at the brain's cortex, and expend the energy in one mortal strike. 
MCCOY: That sounds like you're telling us to blow up the ship. 
SPOCK: I believe that is what I just said, Doctor. 
KIRK: Your figures are specific and absolutely correct, of course? You're sure it will do the job? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Quite sure. 
KIRK: Kirk to Engineering. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering. Scott here.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Mister Scott, prepare the self-destruct mechanism in the Engineering core.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Computer control will be on the Bridge when it's time to trigger it. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. 
UHURA: Incoming message, sir. It's Governor Wesley of Mantilles. 
KIRK: Put it on the viewscreen, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. Go ahead, Governor. 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: Jim. 
KIRK: Bob. Is the evacuation proceeding? 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: As best it can. There was some hysteria at the beginning, but most agreed to let the children be taken off first. But it's only five thousand children out of eighty two million people. 
KIRK: I know. 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: We can see the cloud approaching, Jim. 
SULU: Thirty one minutes and four seconds to Mantilles, sir. 
KIRK: Bob, where's Katie? 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: Here, with me. 
KIRK: Don't worry, Bon. She'll be all right. Goodbye. 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: Goodbye, Jim. 
MCCOY: Who's Katie? 
KIRK: His daughter. She's eleven. Spock, is there any way we could establish whether or not it is definitely intelligent? Perhaps a Vulcan mind touch. 
SPOCK: It would require physical contact, which is impossible, Captain. But I may be able to reach out with my mind. If we focus our sensors onto the cloud's synaptic electrical impulses, the input could be routed to the ship's computer for analysis into thought. 
UHURA: I can link in the universal translator and put it on the audio system from here. 
KIRK: Can you do it in time? 
SPOCK: It is impossible to calculate, Captain. There are too many unknown factors. I can only try to accomplish the link. No more. 
SULU: Twenty six minutes exactly to Mantilles, sir. 
KIRK: All right, Spock. Get at it.

Captain's log, stardate 5372.1. The cloud will reach Mantilles in seven minutes. Spock has been working on the mechanics of reaching the cloud's thoughts, but I doubt if there's any time left. And even if we do establish contact, can we communicate with it and persuade it not to kill?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The procedure is ready, sir. 
KIRK: Thank you, Scotty. 
SPOCK: Ready, Captain. [OC] Listen to me. Listen to me. You are not alone here, there is someone else. Listen to me. 
CLOUD [OC]: What? 
SPOCK [OC]: You are not alone here, there is someone else. Listen to me. Listen to me. 
CLOUD [OC]: What you? 
SPOCK [OC]: I am another being. 
CLOUD [OC]: Being? Where? 
SPOCK [OC]: I am inside you. 
CLOUD [OC]: Inside? Explain. Within me? 
SPOCK [OC]: I am very small. And there are many of me. We are in a spaceship within you. 
CLOUD [OC]: Explain. 
SPOCK [OC]: A small thing which holds us all. 
CLOUD [OC]: Within me? 
SPOCK [OC]: Within you. 
CLOUD [OC]: Explain. 
SPOCK [OC]: We came to think to you. You consumed us. You thought we were food. 
CLOUD [OC]: Why? Why you think to me?
SPOCK [OC]: Many of us live on the things you consume. 
CLOUD [OC]: Things I consume? 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes. Many of us are on the thing near you now. Do not consume it. 
CLOUD [OC]: Explain. 
SPOCK [OC]: The spherical thing ahead of you, the matter you intend to consume, sense it closely. 
KIRK: How near is Mantilles, Mister Arex? 
AREX: The cloud will envelope it in three minutes, twenty seconds, sir. 
CLOUD [OC]: Perceive many somethings. So small. 
SPOCK [OC]: They are beings. Alive, like you. They will all die if you consume that thing. 
CLOUD [OC]: Too small. 
SPOCK [OC]: Explain. 
CLOUD [OC]: I am small. Some things I perceive too small. Not alive beings. 
SPOCK [OC]: Listen to me. I'm going to come into your thoughts. And at the same time, you will come into mine. 
CLOUD [OC]: Necessary? 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes. Very. 
CLOUD [OC]: Proceed. 
(Spock stands up and looks around) 
KIRK: Bones, he's the cloud. Its thoughts are here. Don't move. Lieutenant, use the library computer. Put some views of the Earth onto that screen. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: This is the thing we come from. Lieutenant, this is what I want. 
(Images of the ground from above, cities, children playing, countryside. And the clock ticks down to 1) 
SCOTT: Awaiting your order, Captain. 
KIRK: A few seconds, Scotty. We have to give Spock that much. 
(Spock sits down again as the clock goes to zero) 
MCCOY: Jim, if we don't self-destruct now all those people will die. 
SULU: The cloud has stopped, sir. 
CLOUD [OC]: Comprehend. Not desire to consume other beings. 
KIRK: Quiet. 
SPOCK [OC]: There are many things in our galaxy like the one you just perceived. 
CLOUD [OC]: Truth? 
SPOCK [OC]: Truth. You do not desire to consume other beings. It would be best if you return to your origin. The way you came. Will you do this? 
CLOUD [OC]: A long journey. 
SPOCK [OC]: Will you return? 
CLOUD [OC]: Will return to origin place. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, contact Governor Wesley. Tell him to bring his ships back. 
UHURA: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Spock, you did it! The cloud is leaving. 
SPOCK: I believe so, Captain. There is a grid at the top of the brain core. It uses it to sense. We can escape the cloud through it. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, let's get out of here, through that grid. 
SULU: Yes, sir! 
KIRK: Spock, what did you perceive? 
SPOCK: The wonders of the universe, Captain. Incredible, completely incredible.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Yesteryear
Stardate: 5373.4
Original Airdate: 15 Sep, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5373.4. We are in orbit around the planet of the time vortex, the focus of all the timelines of our galaxy. Our mission is to assist a team of historians in the investigation of Federation history.
[Guardian of Forever]

(At the big rock doughnut in the middle of the ruins, McCoy, a woman with a purple streak in her hair, and a giant yellow bird are waiting) 
ALEEK: The travellers are returning. 
GREY: Cease review. 
(Kirk and Erikson the historiant appear) 
KIRK: What a trip, Bones. Orion, at the dawn of its civilisation. Even just observing, not touching anything for fear of changing some piece of history. What's the matter? Bones? 
(Spock is standing in the middle of the Guardian) 
MCCOY: Who's he, Jim? 
KIRK: What do you mean, who's he? You know Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: Afraid I don't, Jim. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Enterprise. 
KIRK: Beam up. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

(Four figures are beamed aboard) 
SCOTT: Captain, I was expecting there to be one of the historians with you. But a Vulcan? 
KIRK: Explain yourself, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Sir? 
KIRK: I don't know what's going on, but the first officer of this ship will be treated with respect. 
(An Andorian enters) 
THELIN: Captain, I assure you no one has ever treated me otherwise. 
KIRK: Who are you? 
MCCOY: Oh, I thought sure you'd know Thelin by now, Jim. He's been your first officer for five years. 
SPOCK: Captain, I have come to the conclusion that this is not a game. 
KIRK: No, but if it's reality, what happened?

Captain's log, supplemental. When we were in the time vortex, something appears to have changed the present as we know it. No one aboard recognises Mister Spock. The only answer is that the past was somehow altered.

[Briefing room]

ERIKSON: Nothing. I can't find one thing we did when we were in the vortex that could possibly have affected the future. 
KIRK: But something was changed. 
SPOCK: It seems, Captain, I am the only one affected. The mission, the ship, the crew, except for myself, remain the same. 
KIRK: But I know who you are, and no one else aboard does. While we were in Orion's past, the time revision that took place here didn't affect me. Kirk here. 
BATES [on monitor]: Sir, we've checked the Starfleet records Commander Thelin asked for. 
KIRK: Your findings? 
BATES [on monitor]: There is no Vulcan named Spock serving with the Starfleet in any capacity. 
THELIN: Did you also research the Vulcan family history requested? 
BATES [on monitor]: Yes, sir. I can relay that to your screen. (showing relevant images) Sarek of Vulcan. Ambassador to seventeen Federation planets in the past thirty years. 
SPOCK: That is not correct. 
KIRK: It is in this case. 
SPOCK: I wish to ask a question. What of Sarek's family, his wife and son? 
BATES [OC]: Amanda, wife of Sarek. Born on Earth as Amanda Grayson. The couple separated after the death of their son. (on monitor) The wife was killed in a shuttle accident at Lunaport on her way home to Earth. Ambassador Sarek has not remarried. 
SPOCK: My mother. The son, what was his name and age when he died? 
BATES [on monitor]: Spock. Age seven.

[Guardian of Forever]

KIRK: If we didn't change anything while we were in the time vortex, someone else must have. Was the Guardian in use while we were gone? 
GREY: Yes, but it was nothing unusual. We were scanning recent Vulcan history. 
SPOCK: What time period? 
GREY: Twenty to thirty Vulcan years past. 
KIRK: Was there any notation on the death of Ambassador Sarek's son? 
ALEEK: Yes. The boy is recorded as dying during the maturity test. 
SPOCK: The kahs-wan, a survival test traditional for young males. 
ALEEK: The date was 
SPOCK: The twentieth day of Tasmeen. 
THELIN: How do you know this? 
SPOCK: That was the day my cousin saved my life in the desert when I was attacked by a wild animal. 
KIRK: This cousin, what was his name? 
SPOCK: I do not recall clearly. I was very young. He called himself Selek. He was visiting us, but I never saw him after that. 
KIRK: Spock, did Selek look like you do now? 
SPOCK: I believe so, Captain. And I know what you're thinking. It was I who saved myself that other time. 
KIRK: But this time, you were in Orion's past with us when the historians had the time vortex replay Vulcan history. You couldn't be in two places at once, so you died as a boy. Guardian! Did you hear that? 
GUARDIAN: I hear all. 
KIRK: Is it possible for Spock to return to Vulcan and repair the timeline that has been broken so all is the same as before? 
GUARDIAN: It is possible if no other major factor is changed. 
SPOCK: I do not remember everything. There is a vague memory from a child's point of view, but the details are not clear. 
KIRK: You have to remember, for you and your mother to live. 
SPOCK: Yes. I will need a Vulcan desert soft suit and boots, and a small selection of streetwear circa 8877 Vulcan years. The carry bag should be of the same period. 
KIRK: You've got it. I'll order the wardrobe section to prepare it now. 
THELIN: This change in the timeline will put you in my place, yet I am not aggrieved. 
SPOCK: Andorians are not known for their charity. 
THELIN: True. A warrior race has few sympathies, but one we do possess is for family. In your time plane, you will live and so will your mother. That is valuable. Live long and prosper in your world, Commander Spock. 
SPOCK: And you in yours, Commander Thelin. 
(The carry bag is beamed down) 
KIRK: Nice to know the crew is efficient in this time plane, too. Spock. 
SPOCK: I wish to visit the planet Vulcan, thirty years past, the month of Tasmeen. Location, near the city of ShirKahr. 
GUARDIAN: The time and place are ready to receive you.

Personal log, stardate 5373.5, subjective time. I have returned to the past in an attempt to restore the future. I am home and I had almost forgotten its beauty.

[Vulcan]

(Spock watches a group of children verbally bullying another) 
BOY: Earther! Barbarian! Emotional Earther! You're a Terran, Spock. You could never be a true Vulcan. 
Y SPOCK: That is not true. My father 
BOY 2: Your father brought shame to Vulcan. He married a human. 
(Young Spock lunges at him, but they dodge him easily) 
BOY: You haven't even mastered a simple Vulcan neck pinch yet, Earther. 
SAREK: My apologies, visitor. I regret you were witness to that unfortunate display of emotion on the part of my son. 
SPOCK: In the family, all is silence. No more will be said of it. Live long and prosper, Sarek of Vulcan. 
SAREK: Peace and long life. You are of my family? 
SPOCK: My name is Selek, an humble cousin descended of T'Pel and Sasak. I am journeying to the family shrine to honour our gods. 
SAREK: You have a long way to go. Will you break your journey with us for a while, Cousin? 
SPOCK: I am honoured. Is something wrong, Cousin? 
SAREK: No, no. It was only that it seemed I know you. 
SPOCK: A family resemblance to our forefathers, no doubt. 
SAREK: No doubt. Well, come then. Allow me to welcome you to my home.

[Courtyard]

(Sarek calls Spock away from his enormous pet sehlat - a big furry thing with large fangs) 
SAREK: Spock. Spock, being Vulcan means following disciplines and philosophies that are difficult and demanding of both mind and body. 
Y SPOCK: Yes, father. 
SAREK: You constantly display your emotions. You have even been seen fighting in the street. 
Y SPOCK: Yes, father. 
SAREK: The time draws near when you will have to decide whether you will follow Vulcan or human philosophy. Vulcan offers much. No war, no crime. Order, logic and control in place of raw emotions and instinct. Once on the path you choose, you cannot turn back. 
Y SPOCK: Yes, father.

[Sarek's house]

AMANDA: I hope you were not disturbed by my son's behaviour, Selek. 
SPOCK: No, my lady Amanda. Any child has much to learn. My young cousin has a more difficult road to travel than others. 
AMANDA: You seem to understand him better than my husband. 
SPOCK: It is difficult for a father to bear less than perfection in his son. Spock will find his way. 
AMANDA: I hops so. I respect Vulcan and all its traditions, but it is a demanding life. 
SPOCK: The boy goes through the kahs-wan ordeal soon, does he not? 
AMANDA: Next month. 
SPOCK: But tomorrow is the twentieth day of Tasmeen. 
AMANDA: Yes. Is something wrong? 
SPOCK: I seem to have lost track of time.

[Courtyard]

SAREK: Soon you will undergo your test of adulthood in the desert. To survive for ten days without food, water or weapon on Vulcan's Forge will demand more of you than anything ever has. To fail once is not a disgrace for others. If you fail, there will be those who will call you a coward all your life. I do not expect you to fail. 
Y SPOCK: What if I do, father? 
SAREK: There is no need to ask that question. You will not disappoint me. Not if your heart and spirit are Vulcan. 
(Sarek leaves, and young Spock goes to his pet) 
Y SPOCK: I-Chaya. what if I'm not a true Vulcan like they say?

[Bedroom]

SPOCK: (dictating) Personal log, stardate 5373.9, subjective time. The timeline seems to have changed again. Yet I do not believe I have done anything to disrupt it. My memory is quite clear regarding the date my cousin saved my life, and it is tomorrow. The kahs-wan ordeal is an ancient rite of warrior days. When Vulcans turned to logic, they reasoned they must maintain the tests of courage and strength to keep pure logic from making them weak and helpless.

[Courtyard]

(Young Spock has snuck out, and his pet wants to go with him) 
Y SPOCK: No, I-Chaya, this is my own test. I have to do it alone. Stay. 
(But the sehlat bounds after him anyway)

[Bedroom]

SPOCK: Of course. I should have remembered. It wasn't the actual kahs-wan ordeal.

[Desert]

Y SPOCK: I-Chaya, go home. You are too old and too fat for this. (whimper) That's how you always get around mother, but it does not work with me. Go home, I-Chaya.

Personal log. The boy Spock should be moving toward the Llangon Mountains. He, I had much to prove to myself. The personal ordeal upon which I embarked was meant to determine the course my life would take.

[Sarek's house]

AMANDA: Sarek, our son and the visitor are gone. 
SAREK: This cousin, Selek, something strange about him. 
AMANDA: You don't think he'd harm Spock? 
SAREK: I don't know, Amanda. I will notify the authorities and ask them to initiate a search.

[Mountains]

(Up in the mountains, I-Chaya is protecting young Spock by taking on a green cat-like predator for him. But the cat kills the Sehlat. Then Spock leaps on the cat's back and neck-pinches it) 
Y SPOCK: I-Chaya, good boy. 
SPOCK: I suggest we move away from this area before the le-matya regains consciousness. 
Y SPOCK: Thank you for helping me and I-Chaya. 
SPOCK: It was my duty, Spock. 
Y SPOCK: Mother says you should always say thank you. 
SPOCK: The lady Amanda is known for her graciousness. 
Y SPOCK: Do you think I'll ever be able to do that neck pinch as well as you? 
SPOCK: I dare say you will. Come now. 
(They walk on) 
Y SPOCK: You followed me. Why? 
SPOCK: I suspected you would go. You are worried about the kahs-wan ordeal. 
Y SPOCK: I had to see if I could do it. A personal test. I cannot fail. 
SPOCK: That is your father's wish? 
Y SPOCK: Yes, and my mother's. They, they confuse me. Father wants me to do things his way, and Mother says I should. But then she goes 
SPOCK: She is a human woman, with strong emotion and sensitivities. She embarrasses you with those traits, and you are afraid when you see them in yourself. 
Y SPOCK: How did you know? 
SPOCK: There is some human blood in my family line. It is not fatal. What you do not yet understand, Spock, is that Vulcans do not lack emotion. It is only that ours is controlled. Logic offers a serenity humans seldom experience in full. We have emotions but we deal with them and do not let them control us. 
(I-Chaya collapses with a whimper) 
Y SPOCK: I-Chaya! 
SPOCK: The le-matya struck him with its poison claws in the fight. 
Y SPOCK: Is he dying? 
SPOCK: Yes.

Personal log. Something unexpected has again occurred. The sehlat, I-Chaya, was struck by the poisonous claws of the le-matya he fought. He is dying, unless we can find a healer, and soon.

[Mountains]

SPOCK: We cannot get him back to the city to a healer. He is too large to move. 
Y SPOCK: Then what? 
SPOCK: You are a Vulcan. What is the logical thing to do? 
Y SPOCK: I can bring a healer here. 
SPOCK: It is a long journey across the desert. There are many dangers. I will go. 
Y SPOCK: No. This is my duty. No one else can do it for me. Will you stay with him? 
(Young Spock heads back to the city) 
SPOCK: This did not happen before. My life decision was made without the sacrifice of yours, old friend. I know there is pain. I can help a little. Sleep now. 
(Young Spock avoids a carnivorous plant, and makes it back to the city)

[Healer's house]

HEALER: The hour is late. I trust your errand is urgent? 
Y SPOCK: Most urgent, Healer. My sehlat fought a le-matya in the Llangon foothills. He suffered a small wound, but the poison of its claws is working in him now. Please, you must come with me. He needs your healing. 
HEALER: You are Spock, son of Sarek, are you not? 
Y SPOCK: Yes, Healer. 
HEALER: I have heard of you. I have heard of a tendency toward what humans call practical jokes. 
Y SPOCK: I did that once, two years ago. Healer, I would not call you out unless a life was in danger. Have you ever heard the son of Sarek was a liar? 
HEALER: No. That has never been said. Very well. Wait here and I will get my medicines. 
Y SPOCK: Healer, please hurry.

[Mountains]

(The Healer and young Spock arrive in a hover-car) 
SPOCK: It will not be long now, old friend. 
(As I-Chaya is tended) 
SPOCK: You made the desert crossing most efficiently. You will not disappoint Sarek in your kahs-wan. 
Y SPOCK: I wanted only to help I-Chaya. He was my father's before he was mine. To lose him 
SPOCK: A Vulcan would face such a loss without tears. 
Y SPOCK: How? 
SPOCK: By understanding every life comes to an end when time demands it. Loss of life is to be mourned but only if the life was wasted. I-Chaya's was not. 
HEALER: Spock. 
Y SPOCK: Yes, sir? 
HEALER: It has been too long. No antidote known will save his life. 
Y SPOCK: Is there nothing you can do? 
HEALER: I can prolong his life, but he will be in pain. Or I can release him from life. I will need your decision. He is your pet. 
Y SPOCK: Release him. It is fitting he dies with peace and dignity. 
(And so I-Chaya goes to sleep in young Spock's arms.)

[Sarek's house]

Y SPOCK: I regret having troubled you in any way, but it was necessary. 
SAREK: I trust you can explain why it was necessary? 
Y SPOCK: There was a decision to be made. A direction for my life had to be chosen. I chose Vulcan. 
SAREK: It is good then. You have comported yourself with honour. We will see I-Chaya is brought home from the mountains. 
Y SPOCK: Thank you, father. If you will excuse me now, I have some business to conduct with schoolmates. 
SAREK: Business? 
Y SPOCK: A demonstration of the Vulcan neck pinch. Our cousin taught me. 
SPOCK: I too must make my farewells. Your hospitality has been most kind, but I must journey on. 
SAREK: You saved my son's life, Selek. There is no way I can fully repay you for that. 
SPOCK: Try to understand your son, Sarek of Vulcan. It will be repayment enough for me. 
SAREK: A strange request, but I will honour it. My home is yours if you pass this way again. 
SPOCK: I think I shall not. Peace and long life. 
SAREK: Live long and prosper, cousin.

[Guardian of Forever]

GUARDIAN: The traveller is returning. 
KIRK: I sent the others up to the ship. What happened? 
SPOCK: One small thing was changed this time. A pet died. 
KIRK: A pet? Well, that wouldn't mean much in the course of time. 
SPOCK: It might, to some. 
KIRK: Enterprise, this is the Captain. Two to beam up. 
SCOTT [OC]: Two to beam up. Aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

MCCOY: Well, well, well. So you two finally got back from your vacation. While you've been running all over Orion's creation, I've been running the annual crew physicals. You're the last ones. 
KIRK: Welcome aboard, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: Never mind the chit-chat. I've got my medical scanners all set up for a Vulcan. I have to recalibrate every time I run a physical on you, Spock. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy, you do not know your good fortune. IF the times were different, you would have to recalibrate for an Andorian. 
MCCOY: What's that supposed to mean? If that was supposed to be a joke, Spock, I have to remind you Vulcans don't tell jokes. 
SPOCK: Times change, Doctor. Times change.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


Beyond The Farthest Star
Stardate: 5221.3
Original Airdate: 8 Sep, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5221.3. On outward course beyond the fringe of our galaxy towards Questar M-17, a source of mysterious radio emissions. Mission, starcharting.
[Bridge]

(The ship is at Red Alert) 
KIRK: Situation, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: We've picked up speed, sir, rapidly. I've cut back power, but we continue to gain momentum. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu? 
SULU: She's not answering the helm, sir. Two minutes right ascension off course and drifting farther, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand by to reverse course. 
SULU: Standing by, sir. 
KIRK: Reverse course. 
SPOCK: I can only describe it as hypergravity, Captain, more powerful than any we've ever encountered. It's dragging the Enterprise toward it. 
KIRK: Why aren't our sensors picking it up? Forward scanners, Mister Sulu. 
(The viewscreen shows a massive object) 
UHURA: Captain, that's the source of the radio emissions. 
SPOCK: Negative star mass. Spectra analysis, imploded matter, but every reading on it is negative. 
SULU: Captain, we're still gaining speed. 
KIRK: Full reverse thrust. 
SULU: No good, sir. We're still falling toward it. 
KIRK: How much time do we have? 
SPOCK: Impact in ninety three seconds. Ninety two. Ninety one. 
UHURA: Captain, there's another signal. Listen. 
SPOCK: Forty seconds, Captain. Thirty nine, thirty eight. 
KIRK: Sulu, flank speed ahead. Our only chance is to try to get into orbit around that thing. 
SULU: Aye, aye, Captain. 
SPOCK: Nine seconds. Eight, seven. Orbital velocity. 
KIRK: Steady as she goes, Mister Sulu. Maintain orbit. 
SULU: Aye, aye, Captain. 
MCCOY: If its pull is this strong, Jim, how do we get out of orbit? 
KIRK: Slingshot effect, Mister Spock? Do we have enough power? 
SPOCK: I'll need some time for the computations, Captain. 
UHURA: I'm getting that radio sound again, sir. Nine seconds right ascension from galactic plane, dead ahead and closing fast. It's on the viewscreen now, sir. 
KIRK: Put us alongside, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
(The object is made up of oval pieces connected by filaments. Very alien and elegant) 
MCCOY: It's a starship like nothing I've ever seen. The size of it. 
KIRK: It's been damaged. I'll bet she was pulled in like we were. 
UHURA: It's coming from that ship, Captain. 
SPOCK: Confirmed, Captain, but it isn't possible. That ship is dead. Temperature is absolute zero. There is no thermal reading to support life aboard her, and no energy store to send radio messages. Nothing except a slight magnetic flux reading which could be normal for the ship's metal. 
KIRK: You're sure, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Probability point nine nine seven, Captain. 
KIRK: Can you identify that metal, or the design of the ship? 
SPOCK: Negative to both, Captain. Unknown alloy, harder and lighter than any registered metal. It is not a recorded galactic starship design. Retro analysis of the ship's spectra dates it as having been in orbit here for slightly more than three hundred million years. 
UHURA: It's beautiful. What kind of people could have built it, to touch even a starship with grace and beauty? 
KIRK: A civilisation that advanced three hundred million years ago before life even emerged on Earth. 
MCCOY: Barely an instant in eternity, Jim. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, any indication of that ship's power source? 
SPOCK: No, Captain, but this far from a G1 star, it is logical to assume they had some kind of warp drive. 
KIRK: We'll board her, Mister Spock. Scotty, Bones, you'll come with us. We'll need life-support belts. Mister Sulu, have the Transporter room stand by. 
SULU: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Ready, Captain. 
KIRK: Activate life-support belts. Energise.

[Alien ship]

(They arrive with their life-support glow around them, on a huge filament linking two modules. It looks very organic) 
SPOCK: The hexagonal shape of the windows suggests a similarity to natural insect designs of Earth, the honeycombs of bees. The individual cells are shaped precisely like this. 
SCOTT: Would you look at this now? This metal, it isn't cast or rolled. It was drawn into filaments and spun. 
KIRK: Like a spider spins his web. 
SPOCK: A lighter and stronger material than anything we have now. 
KIRK: Look, every pod, they've all been burst open. 
SCOTT: Aye, from the inside, from the looks of them. 
MCCOY: Must have been some accident to get almost every pod. 
SPOCK: Accidents seldom have such system, Doctor McCoy. I believe we must consider the alternative possibility that the crew of this ship destroyed her themselves.

Captain's log. We have beamed aboard the alien ship found orbiting a strange dead star. The Enterprise is recording all data for the log and a full report later.

[Alien ship]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura here.

[Alien ship]

KIRK: Lieutenant, are you still getting that radio signal from this ship?

[Bridge]

UHURA: Negative, Captain. It stopped transmitting when you beamed aboard.

[Alien ship]

KIRK: All right. Lock on us with the transporter and be ready to transport. We're going inside. 
UHURA [OC]: Transporter beam on and locked. Standing by.


[Alien ship module]

(They've found something that seems active) 
KIRK: What do you make of it, Spock? 
SPOCK: Captain, its registering energy. Very little, but building. 
KIRK: You mean it's functioning after all the milleniums this ship has been here? 
SPOCK: The wands are accumulators, receptors to attract energy, motion, sound, light, heat, every kind of energy around them. 
SCOTT: The structure of the ship, those huge arches, thrusting up. The whole ship is designed to receive and store energy. 
MCCOY: Gives me the creeps. I feel like something's watching us. 
SCOTT: I feel it too, Captain. 
SPOCK: A physiological symptom of latent primal superstition, the fear of primitive people confronting something unknown to them. 
KIRK: Compared to the beings that built this ship, we are primitive people, even you, Mister Spock. All right, let's keep going. 
(They come to a hexagonal door. Spock fires his phaser at the control and it opens. They walk down a hexagonal passageway into -)

[Machine shop]

(The door slams behind them and the machines wake up) 
KIRK: Tricorder analysis, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Artificial gravity is in effect here, Captain. Both air and gravity within two points of Earth normal. 
KIRK: Enterprise, do you read me? Sulu? 
SPOCK: No use, Captain. Some sort of interference has been set up. 
SCOTT: We can cut our way out of here. 
(But his phaser doesn't work) 
KIRK: No energy registering. Something's drained them. 
MCCOY: You mean we're trapped here? No communication, nothing? 
KIRK: For the moment. 
(They walk on) 
KIRK: This is, was, the control centre of the starship. These must be control and navigational instruments. 
SPOCK: The source of the interference is here, Captain. It's not part of the normal equipment. It's like something they jury-rigged during an emergency. 
SCOTT: Something to shield this room. But shield it from what? 
SPOCK: Possibly from whatever had come aboard their ship. 
SCOTT: But nothing, no form of life could survive three hundred million years. 
SPOCK: Quite right, Mister Scott. No known form of life. 
MCCOY: Jim, the door. 
(It is glowing around its edges) 
SPOCK: Something is trying to get in. The field of interference is reacting against the magnetic flux lines, Captain. 
KIRK: Will it hold? 
SPOCK: If the energy stays at that level. 
(The control machine starts making a strange noise) 
MCCOY: What is it? 
KIRK: I'm not sure, but I think 
(A screen comes to life with a face on it) 
KIRK: It could be a ship's log or a warning. It seems to keep repeating. 
MCCOY: A message from three hundred million years ago? 
SPOCK: It is possible that this much of their technology survived. (fiddling with a panel) 
KIRK: Anything? 
SPOCK: I may be able to get a translation. 
MCCOY: Hurry up, Spock. 
SPOCK: Patience, Doctor. 
ALIEN [on screen]: Danger. Danger. The dead star, we are being drawn to it. Rather than carry this malevolent life form to other worlds, we have decided to destroy our own ship. There is no other answer. If you understand this message, you are protected only for this moment in this room. This thing it wants 
(Boom! Things blow up around them) 
KIRK: Get out of here! Hurry! 
(They are beamed away)

[Transporter room]

(Transporter Chief Kyle has a frightfully English accent, and a mustache) 
KYLE: Located them right after that explosion, Mister Sulu. We're locked on and beaming them aboard.

[Bridge]

SULU: Good work, Mister Kyle. I thought we lost them when we were cut off so long.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Piece of cake, sir. Here they come now. 
(Four figures and a green fog materialise) 
KYLE: Captain, something's beamed aboard with you. 
KIRK: Transport it back out. 
(But they are all attacked by the Green, then it gets into the ventilation system, the doors and the control panels. Laughter comes from the comm. panels on the walls)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Status? 
UHURA: Sickbay reports no injuries to crew, sir. 
SCOTT: No damage to hull or engines, Captain. 
SPOCK: Automatic bridge defence system on and prepared, sir. 
KIRK: So, we're all just fine, but whatever was on that ship used our transporter beam to come aboard with us, and now it's here. 
SCOTT: That alien commander, sir. The message said that they had to destroy their own ship. 
KIRK: Until we learn more about it, Scotty, perhaps we should be ready to do the same. Take two of your men and arm the self-destruct device in the Engineering core. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(Scott leaves) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, any change in ship's readings? 
SPOCK: We're registering a slightly higher than normal magnetic flux. Not dangerous, but the level isn't constant. It seems to fluctuate, a steady, almost pulsing rhythm. 
KIRK: Like the beating of a heart. 
UHURA: Bridge, Lieutenant. What? Captain, decks five and six report shutdown of all life-support systems. They've gone to life-support belts, manual override is not responding. 
(Red Alert) 
SPOCK: Trouble in the Engineering core, sir. 
KIRK: Bridge to Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: Bones, get down to the Engineering core on the double.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Get on those life-support systems now.

[Engineering]

(Scotty, wearing a life-support belt, is trapped by the cover of the core) 
MCCOY: The force field of his belt won't hold that weight for long, Jim. 
KIRK: Override systems, Mister Spock. Open the core hatch. 
SCOTT: It's no use, sir. The mechanism is frozen. They've already tried. 
SPOCK: Something's jammed the circuits. They're magnetised. 
KIRK: All right, get the cutter beams on that hatch. Move. 
ENGINEER: Yes, sir. 
(Finally they cut the hinge off the hatch and release Scott) 
SCOTT: I thank you, sir. 
SULU [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. Something's activating the ship's phaser banks. They're locking on the alien starship. 
(The alien ship is destroyed)

[Bridge]

SULU: Phaser banks were off, Captain. They activated themselves. 
KIRK: And mutual override did not work? 
SULU: No, sir. 
SPOCK: Exactly like the Engineering controls and the life-support systems on decks five and six. 
(Scott and McCoy enter) 
SCOTT: Sir, we cannot get into the core. 
KIRK: The cutter beams. 
SCOTT: Drained of all energy, sir. 
UHURA: Sir, Cargo holds three, four and five just shut down life-support systems. 
SPOCK: Power out on all but key levels, Captain. High magnetic flux reading. 
UHURA: Captain Kirk, the ship's computers. Something's going through every storage bank. It seems to be taking control of the whole ship. 
KIRK: Spock, can you rig a low-frequency shield like the one on the alien ship, on our navigation console? 
SPOCK: It would have a very small field. 
KIRK: Do it. 
(A little later) 
SPOCK: It's activated, Captain, but only an area three metres square. 
KIRK: Do you get a magnetic flux reading there now? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. 
MCCOY: Jim, you don't think that's going to help us? Whatever that thing is, it survived millennia in a dead hulk. All it has to do is outlast us and just take over. 
KIRK: No. It must be held by the magnetic force of the dead star, and it needs a starship to break free and a crew to man it. 
GREEN: (speaking from the bridge defence system in the ceiling) You are correct, Captain James T Kirk, and I have the starship I've waited for so long, so terribly long. 
(The bridge monitors go crazy, then blank) 
SPOCK: It has absorbed the memory banks, Captain, all of them. 
GREEN: You will now remove the static shield from the navigation console, Captain James T Kirk. 
KIRK: You have shut down life-support systems and endangered members of my crew. Restore those systems first. 
GREEN: All nonessential systems are extinguished. You will obey me. 
KIRK: And if I refuse? 
(A beam is fired from the defence system at Kirk) 
GREEN: Obey me! 
SPOCK: Captain! 
(Spock is shot too) 
GREEN: Obey me! 
KIRK: Stop! You'll hurt him. 
GREEN: Remove the static shied from the warp drive controls! Do it now! 
SPOCK: No, Captain. 
KIRK: I'll obey. Let him go. 
(The beam stops) 
(Kirk goes to the console, presses a button and puts his life-support belt on it. The green alien is unhappy) 
GREEN: Repair the warp drive controls. Obey me! 
KIRK: Mister Scott, start repairs. Install the auxiliary controls. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. 
SPOCK: I'm all right, Captain. 
KIRK: What are we dealing with, Spock? 
SPOCK: High rank probabilities, Captain. It is a magnetic organism without mass, but capable of symbiotic relationship with a host body, a starship for instance. It is a form of primal energy, and it can utilise the electronic control systems of a starship like the mind of a man uses the neural control systems of the human body. It has become the Enterprise, and we are only life-support organisms in its body like the white corpuscles in human blood. And Captain, the magnetic flux readings are higher. It is growing stronger, building itself. 
KIRK: A slingshot effect to yank us out of orbit. Can you compute it in your mind? If we try to use ship's computers 
SPOCK: The alien will know. I believe I can, Captain. I will need to aid Mister Scott. 
KIRK: The engineer will need aid from my first officer to complete repairs. Is that permitted? (silence) I guess it is. 
GREEN: You will leave this orbit and plot course to galactic coordinates zero three six point two three one. 
SULU: That's the heart of the galaxy, Captain. 
KIRK: Plot the course, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: Captain, this symbiont can reproduce itself by mitosis and take over every starship we encounter. It can control computer centres, whole planets. 
KIRK: I'm aware of that, Mister Spock. 
GREEN: Complete repairs! Obey me! 
SCOTT: Auxiliary controls ready to activate, Captain. 
KIRK: The auxiliary warp drive controls can only be operated manually. 
GREEN: That is correct. You will activate the manual controls. Obey! 
KIRK: Controls activated. 
SULU: Captain, we're dropping out of orbit! We're falling into the dead sun. 
GREEN: Apply full power! Obey me! 
(It tries shooting Kirk) 
GREEN: No! Accelerate! Do not destroy the ship! Obey me! Obey! Obey! 
KIRK: Standby to activate warp drive unit. 
GREEN: No! Don't! 
(Green flies out of the ship's systems) 
KIRK: Activate warp drive! 
SPOCK: Activated, Captain. 
GREEN: Please, don't! 
(It leaves the ship completely and ends up enveloping the dead star, as Enterprise slingshots around and away) 
KIRK: Is it gone? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. It fled the ship when it thought we would crash into the dead star. 
GREEN [OC]: Don't leave me alone. Please, please. So lonely.

Captain's log, stardate 5221.8. Final entry. Resuming outward course beyond the farthest star of our galaxy. Mission, starcharting.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Immunity Syndrome
Stardate: 4307.1
Original Airdate: 19 Jan, 1968

Captain's log, stardate 4307.1. Approaching Starbase Six for a much needed period of rest and recreation.
[Bridge]

KIRK: The crew has performed excellently, but is exhausted. And I, too, am looking forward to a nice period of rest on some lovely planet. 
UHURA: Captain. There was a message from Starbase Six. Heavy interference. All I get is Intrepid and what sounded like a sector co-ordinate. 
SPOCK: Interesting. No indications of magnetic storms in this sector. 
KIRK: Try another channel, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: The Intrepid is manned by Vulcans, isn't it? 
KIRK: Yes, that's right, Bones. 
UHURA: Enterprise calling Starbase Six. Enterprise calling Starbase Six. Come in. Come in. 
(Spock suddenly jerks upright, his face a picture of horror.) 
KIRK: Spock? 
MCCOY: What is it, Spock? Are you in pain? 
SPOCK: Captain, the Intrepid. It just died. And the four hundred Vulcans aboard, all dead. 
MCCOY: Come on, Spock, let's go down to Sickbay. 
SPOCK: Doctor, I know what I know. 
KIRK: Get to the Sickbay. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: No, no, no. That's an order. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
(McCoy leads him away.) 
UHURA: Captain, I have Starbase Six readable now. Switching to audio, sir. 
KIRK: Kirk here. Go ahead. 
STARBASE [OC]: You will divert immediately to sector three nine J. 
KIRK: Sir, the Enterprise just completed an exhausting mission. We're on our way in for R and R. There must be another starship in that sector. 
STARBASE [OC]: Negative. This is a rescue priority. We've lost all contact with solar system Gamma Seven-A, which the Intrepid was investigating. And we've just lost contact with the Intrepid. Report progress. 
KIRK: Order acknowledged. Kirk out. Mister Kyle, you heard the order. Set course for Gamma Seven-A, warp five. 
KYLE: Aye, sir. 
CHEKOV: Captain I have just completed a full long-range scan of Gamma Seven-A system. It is dead. 
KIRK: Dead? It's a fourth magnitude sun. There are billions of inhabitants there. 
CHEKOV: It is dead.

[Sickbay]

(Spock is on a biobed, being scanned.) 
SPOCK: I assure you, Doctor, I am quite all right. The pain was momentary. It passed quickly. 
MCCOY: All of my instruments seem to agree with you if I can trust these crazy Vulcan readings. Spock, how can you be so sure the lntrepid was destroyed? 
(Spock gets off the bed.) 
SPOCK: I sensed it die. 
MCCOY: But I thought you had to be in physical contact with a subject before 
SPOCK: Doctor, even I, a half-Vulcan, could hear the death scream of four hundred Vulcan minds crying out over the distance between us. 
MCCOY: Not even a Vulcan could feel a starship die. 
SPOCK: Call it a deep understanding of the way things happen to Vulcans, but I know not a person, not even the computers on board the Intrepid, knew what was killing them or would have understood it had they known. 
MCCOY: But four hundred Vulcans? 
SPOCK: I've noticed that about your people, Doctor. You find it easier to understand the death of one than the death of a million. You speak about the objective hardness of the Vulcan heart, yet how little room there seems to be in yours. 
MCCOY: Suffer the death of thy neighbour, eh, Spock? You wouldn't wish that on us, would you? 
SPOCK: It might have rendered your history a bit less bloody.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock, you may have been right. We've lost contact with the Intrepid and we're out of communication with an entire solar system. Any update from Starfleet? 
UHURA: I cannot filter out the distortion, sir. It's getting worse. 
KYLE: Captain, deflector shields just snapped on. 
KIRK: Slow to warp three. 
KYLE: Warp three, sir. 
SPOCK: Indications of energy turbulence ahead. Unable to analyse. I've never encountered readings like this before. 
KIRK: Scanners on. Magnification three on the screen. 
KYLE: Magnification factor three, sir. 
UHURA: Exactly what are we looking for, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I would assume that. 
(In the middle of the viewscreen is a black blob.) 
KIRK: What is that? 
CHEKOV: Perhaps an interstellar dust cloud. 
SPOCK: Not very likely, Ensign. 
KIRK: No. You'd be able to see stars through a dust cloud. Looks like a hole in space. Readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Still not able to analyse, Captain. Sensors are feeding data to the computers now. Whatever this dark zone is, it lies directly in line with the course I calculate for the Intrepid and the Gamma Seven-A system. 
KIRK: Hold present course. Slow to warp one. 
KYLE: Warp factor one, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, prepare to launch a telemetry probe into that zone. Direct computer feed to Mister Spock. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. Probe ready. Switching data feed to library computer. 
KIRK: Launch probe. 
CHEKOV: Probe launched, sir. 
(A high pitched sound comes over the speakers.) 
KIRK: What was that? 
UHURA: The telemetry probe, sir. There's no signal from it. 
KIRK: Speculation, Spock. 
SPOCK: I have none, Captain. Insufficient data. 
(Chekov is still groaning and Uhura looses her balance.) 
SPOCK: Lieutenant. 
UHURA: I'm just dizzy. I'll be all right. I'm fine, sir. 
MCCOY [OC]: Sickbay to Captain Kirk. McCoy here. 
KIRK: Kirk here. What is it? 
MCCOY [OC]: I'm getting reports from every deck. Half the people on this ship just fainted. 
KIRK: Uhura almost did. She says she's all right. Do you want to see her? 
MCCOY: Not unless she's feeling ill. I've got an emergency here.

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: What's wrong? 
(Crew are queued out of the door, getting shots from Chapel.) 
MCCOY: There's nothing organic. They all seem to be nervous, weak, and irritable. They say it happened suddenly, like a balloon popping. 
KIRK [OC]: Can you handle it, Bones? 
MCCOY: I'm giving them stimulants to keep them on their feet.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: Yeah, we can handle it, Jim. 
KIRK: Good. Kirk out. Hold our position, Mister Kyle. 
KYLE: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Spock, give me an update on the dark area ahead. 
SPOCK: No analysis due to insufficient information. 
KIRK: No speculation, no information, nothing. I've asked you three times for information on that, and you've been unable to supply it. Insufficient data is not sufficient, Mister Spock. You're the science officer. You're supposed to have sufficient data all the time. 
SPOCK: I am well aware of that, Captain, but the computers contain nothing on this phenomenon. It is beyond our experience, and the new information is not yet significant. 
KIRK: I don't know about you but I'm tired. If you can't tell me what it is, let's use reverse logic. Perhaps it'll help if you tell me what it isn't. 
SPOCK: It is not liquid, gaseous, or solid, despite the fact we cannot see through it. 
KIRK: So far that's not much help. 
SPOCK: It is not a galactic nebula such as the Coal Sack, and since our deflectors were activated by it, it would seem to be some form of energy, but nothing our sensors can identify. 
KIRK: Is it possible that this is what killed that solar system and the Intrepid? 
SPOCK: Very possible. 
KIRK: Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Notify the Starfleet that we're going to attempt to probe the area of darkness to gain further information. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
(Kirk pauses, exhausted on his way back to his chair.) 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: I'm all right. Distance from zone of darkness, Mister Kyle? 
KYLE: One hundred thousand kilometres, sir. 
KIRK: Ahead slow. Impulse power only. 
KYLE: Aye, aye, sir. 
UHURA: Transmission to Starfleet complete, sir. 
KIRK: Very good. Time, Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV: Penetration of the zone in one minute, seven seconds, sir. 
KIRK: Red Alert. Deflectors full power. Phaser banks ready. 
CHEKOV: Phasers standing by. Deflectors at full power, sir. 
(That eardrum splitting sound comes again.) 
UHURA: It's not coming from communications, sir. 
KIRK: Spock! 
SPOCK: Analysing now, Captain. 
(The sound goes.) 
CHEKOV: Captain, the stars are gone! 
(The viewscreen is completely blank.) 
KIRK: Malfunction, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. All systems functioning properly. 
KIRK: Then kindly tell me what happened to the stars. 
SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk to McCoy. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy here. 
KIRK: Things any better down there? 
MCCOY [OC]: Worse. They're backed up into the corridor. 
KIRK: Have you got anything that will help up here? I don't want anybody folding on the bridge at a critical moment. 
MCCOY [OC]: On my way. McCoy out. 
KIRK: Kirk to Engineering. Scotty, there was a power loss. How come?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: We lost five percent of our energy reserve, sir. Our deflector shields are weakened. 
KIRK [OC]: Can you compensate for the loss? 
SCOTT: Aye, if we don't lose any more. Don't ask me how it happened.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I am asking how, mister. I want answers. Kirk out. 
(McCoy enters with a nurse, and starts injecting the crew.) 
KIRK: What's that? 
MCCOY: A stimulant. 
KIRK: Bones, how bad is it? 
MCCOY: Two thirds of the personnel are affected. 
KIRK: Why? How? Do you have any answers? 
MCCOY: No. You know you'll get everything I can tell you. But when there is nothing, what should I say? 
(The man at the engineering station collapses.) 
MCCOY: Nurse. 
KIRK: This ship is in trouble. We'd better start solving problems faster than we pick up new ones. We seem to be in the middle of a creeping paralysis. Mister Spock, analysis of that last burst of noise before we started losing power. 
SPOCK: That sound was turbulence caused by the penetration of a boundary layer, Captain. 
KIRK: What boundary layer? 
SPOCK: Unknown. 
KIRK: Boundary layer between what and what? 
SPOCK: Between where we were and where we are. 
KIRK: Are you trying to be funny, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: It would never occur to me, Captain. 
KIRK: Do you have any ideas, Spock? 
SPOCK: We still have no specifics, but we seem to have entered a zone of energy which is incompatible with our living and mechanical processes. As we draw closer to the source, it grows stronger and we grow weaker. 
KIRK: Recommendations. 
MCCOY: I have one. I recommend survival. Let's get out of here. 
KIRK: This is the Captain. We're on a difficult mission, but it's not the first time. Our orders do not say stay alive or retreat.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Our mission is to investigate.

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: We're sick, and we're getting sicker.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We have no guarantees, but we have a good ship and the best crew in Starfleet. So do your jobs. Carry on. Kirk out.

[McCoy's office]

MCCOY: Sickbay to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk here. Go ahead, Bones. 
MCCOY: Jim, according to the life indicators, the energy levels

[Bridge]

KIRK: Yes, say it, Bones.

[McCoy's office]

MCCOY: According to the life monitors, we're dying.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: We're all dying.

Captain's log, stardate 4308.8. It is now ten minutes since we entered the zone of darkness. We have stopped engines while we seek a defence against the energy drain which seems to pervade the zone.

[Engineering]

(Kirk enters and is promptly thrown sideways by a massive jolt to the ship.) 
KIRK: Are you all right? 
SCOTT: Yes. 
KIRK: What was that? 
SCOTT: I'm sorry, sir. I'm not sure. I was trying to recalibrate, and we went into reverse. 
KIRK: Reverse? But that was a forward lurch. How could that happen in reverse thrust? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. All I know is that the power levels are down twelve percent and steadily decreasing. I've never experienced anything like it. 
SPOCK [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Sir, we are accelerating. We are being pulled toward the centre of the zone of darkness. 
KIRK [OC]: By what, Spock? 
SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. I suggest you order Mister Scott to give us reverse power.

[Engineering]

KIRK: He just gave us reverse power. We lurched forward.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: In that case, Captain, I would suggest we apply forward thrust.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Doctor. Life function indicators. They've started a sharp drop again. 
MCCOY: Stimulants. I don't know how long we can keep this up.

[Engineering]

KIRK: What do you think, Scotty? Forward thrust? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. It goes against the rules of logic. 
KIRK: Yes, doesn't it? Well, if it doesn't work, I'll never let Spock live it down. Notch it into forward. 
SCOTT: But 
KIRK: Go ahead. 
SCOTT: That's doing it, sir. We're slowing down. But we're not stopping. We're still being dragged forward. 
KIRK: Have one of your engineers monitor the instruments. Keep applying thrust against the pull.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Doctor, they seem to be stabilising. 
MCCOY: But at a dangerously low level. Well, we're still alive. I suppose that's something.

[Briefing room]

MCCOY: All I can contribute is the further we travel into this zone of darkness, the weaker our life functions become, and I have no idea why. I'm all right. It's those stimulants. They catch up with you. 
KIRK: Engineering. 
SCOTT: As to the power levels are concerned, everything is acting backwards, but the drain is continuing. On the static test, I could only get sixty percent power. We're still being dragged forward. 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: It's logical to assume that something within this zone absorbs all forms of energy whether mechanically or biologically produced. Whatever it is, it would seem to be the same thing which drew all the energy out of an entire solar system and the Intrepid. 
KIRK: The same thing, not the zone itself? 
SPOCK: I would say not, Captain. The analysis of the zone indicates it is a negative energy field, however illogical that may sound, but it is not the source of the power drain. 
KIRK: Maybe it's a shield of some kind. Some form of protection for something else. 
SCOTT: But what? 
KIRK: We'll find out what it is, but we'd better get out of here ourselves. Scotty, channel all the impulse and warp power into one massive thrust forward. That might snap us out of the zone. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain, but I'll reserve some for the shields in case we don't get out. 
SPOCK: I submit, Mister Scott, if we do not get out, the shields would be extraneous. It would only prolong our wait for death by a short period of time. 
KIRK: Use whatever power is necessary to get us out of here, Scotty. Report to your stations, continue your research. Dismissed. 
(The department heads leave Kirk and Spock alone.) 
SPOCK: Captain, the Intrepid would have done all these things too, and yet they were destroyed. 
KIRK: Well, they may not have done all of these things. You just pointed out how illogical this situation is. 
SPOCK: True. It is also true they never knew what was killing them. Their logic would not have permitted them to believe they were being killed. 
KIRK: Explain. 
SPOCK: Vulcan has not been conquered within its collective memory. The memory goes back so far that no Vulcan can conceive of a conqueror. I knew the ship was lost because I sensed it. 
KIRK: What was it you sensed? 
SPOCK: The touch of death. 
KIRK: And what do you think they felt? 
SPOCK: Astonishment.

[Engineering]

(Scott is working on the upper level)
SCOTT: That ought to do it. Engineering to Captain Kirk.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk here. What is it, Scotty?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Ready to try it when you are, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Do we have the power to pull it off, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: I hope so, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand by. All hands, this is the captain. We are slowly being pulled deeper into the zone of darkness by an unknown force. We're going to apply

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: All available power

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Into one giant forward thrust

[Bridge]

KIRK: In the hope that it will yank us out of the zone. Prepare yourselves. All right, Scotty. Let's get on with it. 
(Everybody braces themselves against the g-forces that are created by the acceleration. What happened to the inertial dampers? Then there's a sudden jolt and people get thrown around. Chapel is flung into McCoy's arms for example.)
KIRK: Scotty! 
SCOTT [OC]: It's no good, sir. The best we can do is to maintain thrust against the pull and hold our position. 
KIRK: Are we still losing power?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: How long will the power hold out? 
SCOTT: At this rate, plus the drain on all systems, two hours.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Maintain thrust, Scotty. While we're maintaining our distance, Mister Spock, have you ascertained yet what we're maintaining our distance from? 
SPOCK: I cannot say what it is, Captain, but I would say it has found us. 
(The viewscreen is no longer black. It contains a multicoloured image rather like an abalone.) 
KIRK: Prepare to launch a probe, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. Probe ready for launch, sir. 
SPOCK: Getting very confused readings, Captain, but this is definitely the source of the energy drain. 
KIRK: Launch probe. 
CHEKOV: Probe launched, sir. 
SPOCK: Probe will impact in seven point three seconds. 
KYLE: Six, five, four, three, two, one. 
(The ship shudders.) 
KIRK: Are we still in contact with the probe? 
CHEKOV: Yes, sir. Data being relayed to Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Readings coming in now, Captain. Length, approximately eleven thousand miles. Width varying from two thousand to three thousand miles. Outer layer studded with space debris and waste. Interior consists of protoplasm, varying from a firmer gelatinous layer to a semi-fluid central mass. Condition, living. 
KIRK: Magnification four. 
CHEKOV: Magnification four, sir. 
SPOCK: That is what is drawing us toward it, Captain. The same way it drew the Intrepid to her death.

[Laboratory]

(There is an image of a single-celled organism on a screen.) 
MCCOY: That is an amoeba. 
KIRK: Yes, I remember my basic biology, Doctor. You mean to tell me that that thing is a giant single-celled animal? 
MCCOY: Yes, for lack of a better term. It's a very simple form of life. In fact it's a much simpler form of life than what you're looking at now. But that thing can apparently perform all the functions that qualify it as a living organism. It can reproduce, it can breathe, it can eat, although I don't know what. 
SPOCK: Energy itself, perhaps, drained from us. I would speculate that this unknown life form is invading our galaxy like a virus. 
KIRK: The Intrepid died of that particular virus. How is it we survived? 
SPOCK: The Intrepid must have come across the organism while it was still low in energy, still hungry. We are not safe, Captain. We merely have a little more time than the Intrepid did. 
KIRK: What about this zone of darkness? Does the organism generate it itself as a form of protection? 
MCCOY: It's one of the things we've got to find out. We've got to take a closer look at it. 
KIRK: The closer we get, the faster our energy drains out. We're barely surviving at this distance. 
MCCOY: Perhaps we could risk the shuttlecraft. Perhaps with a protective shield 
KIRK: I'm not sending anyone anywhere. Unmanned probes can give us the information we need to destroy this thing, if it can be destroyed. 
SPOCK: I must differ with you, Captain. We have sent unmanned probes into it. They have given us some information but they have not told us what we need to know, and we cannot afford the power to take blind shots at it, hoping to kill it. 
MCCOY: We could send one man in, pinpoint its vulnerable spots. 
KIRK: DO you know what the odds are in coming back? I can't order a man to do that. 
MCCOY: Who said anything about an order, Jim? You've got a volunteer. I've done the preliminary work. 
KIRK: It's a suicide mission. 
SPOCK: The thing evidently has reflexes. The unmanned probe we sent in must have stung it when it entered. The lurch we felt was the turbulence of its reaction. 
MCCOY: All right, so I'd know enough to go slow when we penetrated its vulnerable spots. 
SPOCK: You have a martyr complex, Doctor. I submit that it disqualifies you. 
MCCOY: Do you think I intend to pass up the greatest living laboratory since 
SPOCK: The Vulcans saw it first and died. 
MCCOY: Just because the Vulcans failed 
SPOCK: I am more capable. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I am not taking volunteers. 
MCCOY: You don't think you're going? 
KIRK: I'm better qualified as a command pilot than you are. 
SPOCK: Which makes you indispensable, Captain. Further, you are not a science specialist. 
MCCOY: Jim, that organism contains chemical processes we've never seen before and may never see again. We could learn more in one day 
SPOCK: We don't have one day, Doctor. We have precisely one hour and thirty five minutes of power left. 
MCCOY: Jim 
SPOCK: Captain, I 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I'll decide.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Captain's personal log, stardate 4309.2. We have established that the thing which destroyed the USS Intrepid and the Gamma Seven=A system is an incredibly huge but simple cellular being whose energies are totally destructive to all known life. Both Mister Spock and Doctor McCoy have volunteered to go in a specially equipped shuttlecraft to penetrate the cell, find a way to destroy it, and free the ship. Doctor McCoy has the medical-biological knowledge. Mister Spock is better suited physically and emotionally to stand the stress. Both are right, both are capable, and which of my friends do I condemn to death? This is the captain. Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy, report to my quarters immediately. Kirk out.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Engineering to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk here. 
SCOTT: You asked me to keep you informed on the power drain. All levels are down fifty percent now

[Kirk's quarters]

SCOTT [OC]: And still draining. We can maintain thrust for another hour and fifteen minutes. 
(Spock and McCoy enter.) 
KIRK: Very well. Prepare the shuttlecraft for launching. 
SCOTT [OC]: Sir? 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy will tell you what special equipment to put in. Kirk out. I'm sorry, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: Right. I'll get a few things I need, Jim. 
KIRK: Not you, Bones. I'm sorry, Mister Spock. You're best qualified to go.

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Do not suffer so, Doctor. This is not the first time superior capability has proven more valuable than professional credentials. 
MCCOY: Nothing has been proven yet, Spock. The DNA code analyser will give you the fundamental structure of the thing. You'll need readings on three light wavelengths from the enzyme recorder. 
SPOCK: I am familiar with the equipment, Doctor. We're wasting time. The shuttlecraft is ready. 
MCCOY: You're determined not to let me share in this, aren't you? 
SPOCK: This is not a competition, Doctor. Whether you understand it or not, grant me my own kind of dignity. 
MCCOY: Vulcan dignity? How can I grant you what I don't understand? 
SPOCK: Then employ one of your own superstitions. Wish me luck. 
(Silence and stares, then McCoy opens the hangar deck door. Spock walks across and into the Galileo. The doors shut.) 
MCCOY: Good luck, Spock.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: All systems clear for shuttlecraft launch. sir. 
KIRK: Launch shuttlecraft. 
KYLE: Shuttlecraft away, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, channel automatic telemetry directly to the computers. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK [OC]: Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. 
KIRK: Come in, Spock.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Power drain is enormous and growing worse.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Chekov. 
(Chekov goes to the science station.) 
SPOCK [OC]: Diverting all secondary power to the shields. (McCoy enters) I'll continue communications as long as there is power to transmit. 
SCOTT: Captain, h e won't have enough power to get back out if he diverts it to his shields. 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK [OC]: I heard, Captain.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: We discussed that possibility earlier. But you will need this information. 
KIRK [OC]: When do you estimate penetration? 
SPOCK: Slowing now. Contact in eighteen point three seconds. Brace yourselves. The area of penetration will no doubt be sensitive. Contact

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: In six seconds. 
(Spock is thrown around in the shuttlecraft, everyone on the ship just feels a jolt.) 
KIRK: Report, Mister Spock. Spock, report. 
SPOCK [OC]: I am undamaged, Captain. Relay to Mister Scott I had three percent power reserve before the shields stabilised.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: There was nothing to spare. I shall continue my tests. Oh, and Doctor McCoy. You would have not survived it.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: You want to bet?

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: I am moving slowly now, establishing course toward what appears to be the nucleus.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Sir, Mister Spock has reduced life-support systems to bare minimum. 
KIRK: Spock, save your power for the shields. 
SPOCK: Calculations indicate the shields will last only forty seven minutes.

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: However, I am able to identify the chromosome structure.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Changes indicate the organism has stored sufficient energy for reproductive process to commence.

[Bridge]

KIRK: You mean there'll be two of those things? 
SPOCK [OC]: I'm having difficulty maintaining ship control. 
KIRK: Spock, do you read me? Spock, do you read me? 
SPOCK [OC]: I'm losing voice contact I will transmit internal co-ordinates of chromosome bodies. 
KIRK: Spock, come in. Come in. 
UHURA: Contact lost, sir. 
(The ship shakes.) 
KIRK: He's alive! He's kicked it in the side to let us know. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm getting telemetry. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, telemetry analysis as it comes in. 
CHEKOV: According to Spock's telemetry information, there are over forty chromosomes in the nucleus that are ready to come together, ready to reproduce. 
KIRK: If the energy of that organism only doubles, we're dead, and everything within a light year will be defenceless. 
MCCOY: Well, all I know is, that soon there'll be two, four, eight, and more. The entire anti-life matter that that thing puts out could someday encompass the entire galaxy. 
KIRK: Spock understood when he transmitted the co-ordinates of the chromosomes. We must destroy that organism. 
SCOTT: Captain, the pull from that organism is increasing, and the power drain from our shields is getting critical. 
KIRK: How much time do we have? 
SCOTT: No more than an hour now, sir. 
KIRK: Put all secondary systems on standby. Shield power has unconditional priority. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm receiving a message from Mister Spock on a low-energy channel. It's faint, but it is readable. 
KIRK: Put it on, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: On audio, sir. 
SPOCK [OC]: This is Spock.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: I am slowly losing life support and minimal shield energies. According to my calculations

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: (Barely audible over static) The nervous energy of the organism is maximal just within its outer protective membrane. Relatively insensitive to interior irritation. I believe sufficient charge of (inaudible) could destroy the organism. Tell Doctor McCoy he should have wished me luck.

Captain's log stardate 4309.4. We have determined we can destroy the creature, provided we can do it from inside the organism. Spock clearly knew how to destroy it but was unable to transmit that information.

[Kirk's quarters]

MCCOY: How do you feel? 
KIRK: What's on your mind? 
MCCOY: Spock. Is it me, Jim? Am I so sentimental that I just have to keep believing that he's still alive in that mass of protoplasm? 
KIRK: He knew the odds when he went out there, just as you did when you volunteered to go. What is that thing out there, Bones? It's not intelligent. Not yet. 
MCCOY: It's a disease, like a virus invading the body of our galaxy. 
KIRK: Yes, it is, isn't it? How many cells does the human body have? 
MCCOY: Millions. 
KIRK: This thing, this cell, this virus. It's eleven thousand miles long, and it's one cell. When it grows into millions, we'll be the virus invading its body. 
MCCOY: Now, isn't that a thought? Here we are, antibodies of our own galaxy, attacking an invading germ. It would be ironic indeed if that were our sole destiny, wouldn't it? 
KIRK: Antibodies. Antibodies. (goes to desk monitor) Bridge. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, how much power do we have left?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're down to forty three percent, sir. We're slipping a bit against the pull that beastie's putting on us.

[Kirk's quarters]

SCOTT [OC]: We can't last more than forty five minutes at this rate of decline. Less, if I have to apply more thrust. 
KIRK: What would happen if you diverted all remaining power to the shields, except for impulse power, keep that in reserve?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Cut the engine thrust? We'd be sucked into that thing like being caught in a wind tunnel, sir.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Exactly. Prepare to divert power on my signal. Kirk out. 
(Kirk leans against the monitor, tired. McCoy scans him.) 
KIRK: Have you got something to say? 
MCCOY: Technically, no. Medically, yes. Between the stimulants and the pressure, I would suggest you try to stay off your feet for a few minutes. 
KIRK: I don't have a few minutes, Bones. Maybe none of us do. Let's go.

[Bridge]

KIRK: All hands, this is the captain. We're going to enter the body of the organism rather abruptly, I would think. Damage control parties stand by. All decks secure for collision. Kirk out. 
KIRK: Ready, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Switching power to shields. Impulse in reserve. Cutting thrust to zero, now! 
KYLE: Impact five seconds. 
(There's a big bump and people are thrown all over the place. Then there is calm.) 
CHEKOV: We're through, sir. 
KIRK: I believe everybody is aware of that, Mister Chekov. 
UHURA: Damage control parties report minimal damage, sir. Repairs are being initiated. 
KIRK: Very good, Lieutenant. 
SCOTT: Captain, we've only twenty six percent power reserves after entry. 
KIRK: Do we have impulse power, Scotty? 
SCOTT: I saved all I could, sir, but I don't know whether we have enough to get back out again. Or time either. 
KIRK: We are committed. 
SCOTT: Aye, we are, but we're committed to what? We have no power for the phasers. 
MCCOY: We couldn't use it. We'd cook ourselves along with that mess of protoplasm out there 
KIRK: That thing would probably like phasers. It eats power. 
SCOTT: Then what the devil, begging your pardon sir, are we doing? 
KIRK: Mister Spock was trying to tell us what to do when we lost voice contact. 
SCOTT: We can't use the power to destroy it. 
KIRK: Anti-power. 
MCCOY: What? 
KIRK: This thing has a negative energy charge. Everything seems to work in reverse. We'll use anti-matter. 
SCOTT: Aye, it couldn't swallow that. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, prepare a probe. Scotty, we'll need a magnetic bottle for the charge. How soon? 
SCOTT: It's on its way, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, we'll use a timing detonator for the probe. Work out a setting. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Helmsman, when do you estimate arrival at nucleus? 
KYLE: Seven minutes, sir. 
MCCOY: How close are you going to it? 
KIRK: Point blank range. We'll implant it then back away. 
MCCOY: Why? The probe has a range of 
KIRK: With the eddies and currents in that protoplasm, the probe could drift thousands of kilometres. We must be exactly on target, because we won't have a second chance. Bones, time for another stimulant. 
MCCOY: How long do you think you can keep taking that stuff? It'll blow you apart. 
KIRK: Keep me together for another seven minutes. That's all I need.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Personal log, Commander Spock, USS Enterprise. I have noted the passage of the Enterprise on its way to whatever awaits it. If this record should survive me, I wish it known that I bequeath my highest commendation and testimonial to the captain, officers, and crew of the Enterprise. The finest starship in the fleet.

[Bridge]

KIRK: (also making a log entry) We have arrived at the chromosome body in the nucleus of the organism. If we should fail in our attempt to destroy it, or be unable to free ourselves, I wish to record my recommendations for the following personnel, that they receive special citation. Lieutenant Commander Leonard McCoy, Lieutenant Commander Montgomery Scott, officers Chekov, Kyle, Uhura, and my highest commendation for Commander Spock, Science Officer, who gave his life in the performance of his duty. 
CHEKOV: Target co-ordinates programmed, sir. Probe ready for launch. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, how much time do we have left at one hundred percent impulse power? 
SCOTT: Six, maybe seven minutes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Kyle, programme fuse for seven minute delay. All non-essential systems on standby. Communications, scanning, conserve every bit of power. We must make it through the membrane before that thing explodes. Make it work, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
CHEKOV: Programming complete. Ready for launch. 
KIRK: Launch probe at zero acceleration. Forward thrust off, one tenth of a second. 
KYLE: Forward thrust off, sir. 
CHEKOV: Probe launched, sir. 
(There's a little jolt.) 
MCCOY: Despite what Spock said, it's still plenty sensitive. 
CHEKOV: Probe confirmed. It is lodged in the nucleus, near the chromosome bodies. 
KIRK: Mister Kyle, back us out the way we came in. Mister Chekov, a nice, straight line. Don't waste any time. 
KYLE: Backing out, sir. 
CHEKOV: Estimate we'll be out in six point thirty seven minutes. 
KIRK: Very good. 
CHEKOV: Captain, metallic substance outside the ship. 
MCCOY: Spock? 
KIRK: Lieutenant, get me Spock's voice channel. Highest possible gain. 
UHURA: Go ahead, sir. 
KIRK: Spock, do you read me? Do you read me, Spock, do you read me? Come in, Spock. Spock! Scotty, get a tractor beam. 
SCOTT: Captain, we don't have enough time to do it. We only have a fifty three second escape margin. 
KIRK: I'm well aware of that, Mister Scott. Get two tractor beams on that shuttlecraft. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. Tractor beams on. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain, I recommend you abandon the attempt.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Do not risk the ship further on my behalf.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Shut up, Spock! We're rescuing you.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Why, thank you, Captain McCoy.

[Bridge]

KYLE: Almost out. We're approaching the membrane, sir. 
KIRK: Time until explosion? 
CHEKOV: Fifty seven seconds, sir. 
KIRK: Maintaining tractor beams on shuttlecraft, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. I can't guarantee it'll hold when the warhead explodes. The power levels are (looks at readout) The power levels are dead, sir. 
KIRK: You may have just written our epitaph, Mister Scott. 
(The warhead must have exploded, because everyone goes flying around the bridge again.) 
KIRK: Activate main viewing screen. (they see stars.) Mister Chekov, report. 
CHEKOV: The organism is destroyed, sir. The explosion must have ruptured the membrane and thrown us clear. 
SCOTT: Power's coming back, sir. 
KIRK: Shuttlecraft? 
SCOTT: I don't know how, sir, but it's still with us.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Request permission to come aboard.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock, you're alive!

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Obviously, Captain. And I have some fascinating data on the organism.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Don't be so smart, Spock. You botched the acetylcholine test. 
KIRK: Later, later, later. Bring the shuttlecraft aboard, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KYLE: Prepare to receive shuttlecraft. Received shuttlecraft. Hangar doors closed. Hangar deck pressurising. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Starbase Six. Ahead warp factor five. I'm still looking forward to a nice period of rest and relaxation on some lovely (gazes at yeoman) planet.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


A Piece Of The Action
Stardate: 4598.0
Original Airdate: 12 Jan, 1968

[Bridge]
CHEKOV: Approaching Sigma Iotia Two, Captain. 
KIRK: Standard orbit, Mister Chekov. 
UHURA: Captain, I have received vocal contact from an official station. They relayed us to a man named Oxmyx. His title is Boss. 
KIRK: Boss? All right, Lieutenant, put him on. Oxmyx. This is Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the Federation of Planets. 
OXMYX [OC]: Hello, Captain. You're from the same outfit as the Horizon? 
KIRK: Yes. Unfortunately, the Horizon was lost with all hands shortly after leaving your planet. We only received her radio report last month. 
OXMYX [OC]: Last month? What are you talking about? The Horizon left here a hundred years ago. 
KIRK: Difficult to explain. We received a report a hundred years late because it was sent by conventional radio. Your system is on the outer reaches of the galaxy. They didn't have subspace communication in those days. 
OXMYX [OC]: Toward the edge of what? 
KIRK: I'll explain it in more detail when I see him. The ship won't land, but we'll transport several people down. Well, that's a little difficult for you to understand, too. I'll explain it in more detail when I see you. Where will be convenient? 
OXMYX [OC]: Well, there's an intersection just at the end of the block, near a yellow fire plug. Think you can find it? 
(Kirk goes over to the engineering station.) 
KIRK: Scotty, do you have the co-ordinates? 
SCOTT: Located, sir. 
KIRK; Good. Mister Oxmyx, we have your intersection located. Will five minutes be all right? 
OXMYX [OC]: Fine. Fine. I'll have a reception committee there to meet you. 
KIRK: Good. I'll be looking forward to it. Kirk out. Scotty, you have the conn. 
(McCoy and Spock enter from the turbolift.) 
KIRK: Spock, McCoy, we're beaming down. Standard equipment.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: The Horizon's contact came before the Non-Interference Directive went into effect. 
MCCOY: They must have interfered with the normal evolution of the planet. 
SPOCK: It will be interesting to see the results of the contamination. 
KIRK: We don't know there is contamination. The evidence is only circumstantial. 
MCCOY: What was the state of the Iotian culture before the Horizon came? 
KIRK: The beginnings of industrialisation.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Horizon reports indicate the Iotians are extremely intelligent and somewhat imitative. 
MCCOY: So we're going down to recontaminate them. 
SPOCK: The damage has been done, Doctor. We are here to repair it. 
KIRK: Let's not argue about it. Let's go study it. Energise.

[Street]

(There's a yellow fire hydrant, litter, a girl in a 1930's dress, motor cars, shops, and men standing around carrying machine guns. Welcome to Chicago.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
MCCOY: This is like coming home. 
KIRK: Home was never like this. I've seen pictures of the old days that look like this. 
SPOCK: Interesting, Captain. Passers-by are carrying, I believe, firearms. 
(They are approached by two men in neat suits with machine guns.) 
KALO: (in a brown suit) Okay, you three, let's see you petrify. 
SPOCK: Sir, would you mind explaining that statement, please? 
KALO: I want to see you turn to stone. Put your hands over your head, or you ain't going to have no head to put your hands over. 
(They are deprived of their phasers and communicators.) 
KALO: What's this? 
KIRK: That's a weapon. Be careful with that. 
KALO: A heater, huh? Hey, the boss will love that. (puts it in his pocket) 
KIRK: Look, we were asked to come down here by Mister Oxmyx. He said 
KALO: I know what he said, bud. He said some of the boys would meet you. Okay, we're meeting you. 
MCCOY: Well, those firearms are not necessary. 
KALO: You trying to make trouble? 
MCCOY: Who, me? 
KALO: Don't give me those baby blue eyes. 
MCCOY: What? 
KALO: I don't go for that innocent routine. 
SPOCK: Sir, does everyone here carry firearms? 
KALO: I never heard such stupid questions in my life. 
MCCOY: Well, since this Oxmyx asked us down here, don't you think we should see him? 
KALO: All right. Get moving. Down the street. 
(Just then a car comes hurtling around the corner. Everyone dives for cover, and gunfire rings out. The silent man in the blue suit gets shot. Kalo returns fire as the car speeds away.) 
KALO: Krako's getting more gall all the time . 
KIRK: Is this how you greet all your guests? 
KALO: It happens, pal. 
MCCOY: That man's dead back there. 
KALO: Yeah? We ain't playing for peanuts. What's the matter, you guys never saw a hit before? 
SPOCK: Sir, there are several questions I would like to ask. 
KALO: Ask the boss. I don't know nothing. Get moving. 
(They leave the crowd to deal with the deceased.) 
MCCOY: This is the contamination you're looking for, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, but the Horizon crew wasn't composed of cold-blooded killers. They didn't report this culture in this state, either. What happened? 
WOMAN: Hey, Kalo. Hey, when's the boss going to do something about the crummy street lights around here, eh? A girl ain't safe. 
WOMAN 2: And how about the laundry pickup? We ain't had a truck by in three weeks. 
KALO: Write him a letter. 
WOMAN 2: I did. He sent it back with postage due. 
WOMAN: Listen, we pay our percentages. We're entitled to a little service for our money. 
KALO: Get lost, will ya? Some people got nothing to do but complain. 
KIRK: Is this the way your citizens do business, their right of petition? 
KALO: They pay their percentages and the boss takes care of them.

[Oxmyx's office]

(It's a lovely high-ceilinged room with wood paneling, tiled floor with a carpet and substantial furniture. A buzzer sounds.) 
OXMYX: (a silver haired man in a suit) Hit that button. (the girl sitting on his desk obeys) Yeah? 
KALO [OC]: Got them, Boss. No sweat. 
OXMYX: All right. Bring them in. (he goes to the pool table and picks up a cue) Which one of you is the captain? 
KIRK: Depends. 
OXMYX: Make yourself a drink, Captain. It's good stuff. I distill it myself. 
KIRK: No, thank you. You're Mister Oxmyx. 
OXMYX: That's me, pal. 
KIRK: This is my first officer, Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy. 
OXMYX: Doctor, huh? Put that chopper down, Kalo. These guys are our guests. Pick up a cue, Captain. Go ahead. You can't be too careful around here these days. 
MCCOY: Yes. Judging from what we've seen so far, I agree. 
KIRK: They call you The Boss, Mister Oxmyx. The boss of what? 
OXMYX: The boss of my territory. I got the biggest in the world. You know, there's one thing wrong with having the biggest. There's always some punk trying to cut you out. That's why you can't be too careful. 
KIRK: You're the government here? 
OXMYX: What government? Look, I told you. I got the territory and I run it. That's all. 
KIRK: But there are other bosses, other territories? 
OXMYX: Yeah, sure. Maybe a dozen or so, not counting the small fry, but then they get burned anyway soon as I get around to it. 
SPOCK: Does that include, if I may ask, a gentleman called Krako? 
OXMYX: How do you know about Krako? 
KALO: He hit us, Boss. 
OXMYX: Okay. You hit him back, you hear? Hard. 
KALO: I'll take care of it. 
(Spock has discovered a book on a lectern.) 
SPOCK: Captain? Gangsters. Chicago. Mobs. Published in 1992. Where'd you get this? 
OXMYX: Hey, wait a minute. That's the Book. 
KIRK: I know it's a book. 
OXMYX: The Book. They left it, the other ship. The Horizon. 
SPOCK: This is the contamination, Captain. Astonishing. An entire culture based on this. 
MCCOY: You said they were imitative, and the book 
OXMYX: I don't want any more cracks about the Book. 
KIRK: Did they leave any other books? 
OXMYX: Sure. Some text books on how to make radio sets and stuff like that, but, look, I brought you here so you could help me, not for you to ask me questions. After that, I'll answer anything you want to know. 
KIRK: What is it you want? 
OXMYX: Well, I was thinking. You Feds must have made a lot of improvements since that other ship came here. You probably got all kinds of fancy heaters up there. So here's the deal. You give me all the heaters I need. Enough tools so I can knock off those punks all at once. Then I'll take over, and all you'll have to do is deal with me. 
KIRK: Now let me get this straight. You want us to supply you with arms and assistance so you can carry out an aggression against your neighbours? 
OXMYX: What aggression? I got to make hits. I want you to help me hit them. That's all. 
SPOCK: Fascinating, but quite impossible. 
KIRK: Mister Oxmyx, my orders are quite explicit. Under no circum 
OXMYX: I ain't interested in your orders. From now on, you're gonna take orders from me. I'm gonna give you just eight hours to give me the things I want. If I don't have those tools by then, I'm gonna call up your ship and have them pick you up in a box. Is that understood, pal? 
(Kalo and another henchman put their guns to Kirk's head.) 
KALO: Hey, Boss, this here's a heater, and I don't know what this is. (tosses them to his leader) 
OXMYX: Let's see how this thing works. 
KIRK: Don't do that. You could knock out the side of the building. 
OXMYX: That good, huh? All you have to do is give me about a hundred of these fancy heaters and we'll have no more trouble. 
KIRK: Out of the question. 
OXMYX: Captain Kirk, I usually get what I want. What's this thing? (silence) All right. Burn him. 
KIRK: Hold it. It's a communication device. 
OXMYX: How does it work? 
KIRK: It's locked onto my ship's systems. 
OXMYX: Kalo, take them to the warehouse and put them in a bag. Keep a sharp eye on them, you hear. 
KALO: In the bag, Boss. Come on. 
(The landing party and the gunmen leave) 
OXMYX: (into communicator) Hey, you. In the ship up there.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: Hey, you in the ship. 
SCOTT: Scott here. Who's this?

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: This is Bela Oxmyx. I got your captain and his friends down here. You want to see them alive

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: Again you'll send me down a hundred of these fancy heaters you've got, and some troops to show me how to use them. 
SCOTT: Am I to understand that you're holding the captain and his party?

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: You heard right, pal. I'm going to give you just eight hours to get me the goods I want, or I put the hit on your friends.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: You understand? 
SCOTT: I don't know. (Oxmyx ends the transmission, laughing) Lieutenant Hadley, check the language banks and find out what a heater is.

[Warehouse]

(The guards are sitting at a makeshift table playing cards whilst the landing party sit on various barrels and crates.) 
MCCOY: One book on the gangs of Chicago did all this. It's amazing. 
SPOCK: They evidently seized upon that one book as the blueprint for an entire society. 
MCCOY: It's the Bible. 
KIRK: In old Chicago, conventional government almost broke down. The gangs nearly took over. 
MCCOY: Yeah, well, Oxmyx is the worst gangster of all. 
SPOCK: We may quarrel with Mister Oxmyx' methods, but his goal is essentially the correct one. This society must become united or it will degenerate into total anarchy. 
KIRK: If this society broke down as the result of the Horizon's influence, then the Federation's responsible, and we've got to do something to straighten this mess out. Spock, if you could get to the sociological computer, do you think you could find a solution? 
SPOCK: Unfortunately, I do not have access to my computers, nor are these gentlemen likely to permit it. 
KIRK: Well, I've got an idea about that. (goes over to the card table and gets guns pointed at him) Gentlemen. Gentlemen. This, card game is a kid's game. 
KALO: You think so, huh? 
KIRK: Oh, yes, yes. I wouldn't waste my time. 
KALO: Who's asking you? 
KIRK: On Beta Antares Four, they play a real game. It's a man's game, but of course it's probably a little beyond you. It requires intelligence. 
KALO: Listen, Kirk, I can play anything you can figure out. Take the cards, big man. Show us how it's played. 
SPOCK: I'm familiar with the culture on Beta Antares. There aren't games 
KIRK: Spock. Spock. (sits) Of course, the cards on Beta Antares Four are different, but not too different. The name of the game is called fizzbin. 
KALO: Fizzbin? 
KIRK: Fizzbin. It's not too difficult. (begins dealing) Each player gets six cards, except for the player on the dealer's right, who gets seven. 
KALO: On the right. 
KIRK: Yes. The second card is turned up, except on Tuesdays. 
KALO: On Tuesday. 
KIRK: Oh, look what you got, two jacks. You got a half fizzbin already. 
KALO: I need another jack. 
KIRK: No, no. If you got another jack, why, you'd have a sralk. 
KALO: A sralk? 
KIRK: Yes. You'd be disqualified. You need a king and a deuce, except at night of course, when you'd need a queen and a four. 
KALO: Except at night. 
KIRK: Right. Oh, look at that. You've got another jack. How lucky you are! How wonderful for you. If you didn't get another jack, if you'd gotten a king, why then you'd get another card, except when it's dark, you'd give it back. 
KALO: If it were dark on Tuesday. 
KIRK: Yes, but what you're after is a royal fizzbin, but the odds in getting a royal fizzbin are astron. Spock, what are the odds in getting a royal fizzbin? 
SPOCK: I have never computed them, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, they're astronomical, believe me. Now, for the last card. We'll call it a kronk. You got that? 
KALO: What? 
(Kirk 'accidentally' drops the card on the floor) 
KALO: I'll get it. 
(As he bends down, Spock nock-pinches him while McCoy and Kirk punch out the other two men. McCoy is quicker than Kirk.) 
KIRK: Spock, find the radio station. Uhura's monitoring the broadcasts. Cut in and have yourselves beamed up to the ship. 
SPOCK: Surely, you're coming, Captain. 
KIRK: I will, but I'm bringing Bela Oxmyx with me. 
MCCOY: Jim, you can't 
KIRK: Bones, this mess is our responsibility. You have your orders. Let's go.

[Alleyway]

(Kirk is running along, carrying a machine gun, when a voice rings out. A man in a light grey suit and straw boater accosts him.) 
ZABO: Hold it! Okay, pally, we're going for a ride. 
KIRK: If you don't mind, I'd rather walk. 
ZABO: Listen, pally, this could either be a taxi or a hearse. You know what I mean? 
KIRK: I'm beginning to get the idea. 
(They climb into the back of a very nice car.)

[Radio station]

(A woman is about to put the needle onto a record when Spock neck-pinches her.) 
MCCOY: You do that very well. Now, how are you with primitive radio equipment? 
SPOCK: Very simple. Amplitude modulation transmission. I simply adjust the frequency, throw this switch, and the Enterprise should answer. 
VOICE [OC]: That was the Jailbreakers with their latest recording on Request Time, brought to you by Bang-Bang, the makers of the sweetest little automatic in the world 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
MCCOY: And very simple. 
SPOCK: Let me see. (throws a few more switches and picks up the microphone.) Enterprise, this is Mister Spock. 
UHURA [OC]: Lieutenant Uhura here, Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Mister Spock, what are you doing on this frequency?

[Radio station]

SPOCK: A very long and complicated story, Lieutenant. Notify the transporter room, Two to beam up, these co-ordinates.

[Krako's office]

(The brass plaque by the front door of the building proclaims 'JoJo Krako, Boss, Southside Territory'. The straw boaters are the badge of his organisation. JoJo is practising throwing darts over his shoulder at a poster of Oxmyx. Kirk is brought in. There's a copy of the Book on a lectern here too.)
KRAKO: So you're the Fed, huh? Well, well, well, well, well. 
KIRK: And you? 
KRAKO: Krako. JoJo Krako. I'm the head of the whole Southside Territory. Hey, glad to see you. 
KIRK: Would you mind telling me how you even know who I am? 
KRAKO: Sit down, Kirk. I've got all of Bela's communications bugged. He can't make a date with a broad unless I know about it. Well, I guess you want to know why I brought you here. 
KIRK: You want to make a deal. 
KRAKO: Hey, I like that. That is sharp. That's sharp, eh, Zabo? 
ZABO: Sharp, Boss. 
KRAKO: That's right, a deal. I want you to help me. 
(He snaps his fingers, and the girl walks over to Kirk and starts massaging his shoulders.) 
KIRK: Let me guess. You want, you'll want heaters, and then you'll want troops to teach them how to use them. And then you'll attack the other bosses and take over the whole planet. Then we'll sit down and talk, right? 
KRAKO: Wrong! I know Bela. He didn't offer you beans. Now, me, I'm a reasonable man. You give me what I want and I'll cut you in for, say, a third. Skimmed right off the top. Well, what do you think? 
KIRK: I got a better idea. This planet has to be united. You know that. Bela knows that. Let's sit down. You, me, Bela. Discuss this whole matter, contact the other bosses, and talk about it like reasonable men. 
KRAKO: You watch it, Kirk. The Book tells us how to handle things. (snaps his fingers to recall the girl) You make hits. Somebody argues, you lean on 'em. What do you think, we're stupid or something? 
KIRK: No, I don't think you're stupid. I just think your behaviour is arrested. 
KRAKO: I haven't been arrested in my whole life! Listen, pally, I know how to get what I want. You want to live, don't you, Kirk? You bet you do. But after I get through with you, you're liable to be sorry unless you come across. Hold him here. Tell Cirl the Knife to sharpen up his blade. I just might have a job for him. Unless you come across with the heaters. 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Krako. No deal. 
KRAKO: That's too bad. Put him on ice!

[Small office]

(They put him in a proper working office, with letter opener, desk with blotting paper, a cot-bed and a nice old radio with nice old valves and stuff inside. Kirk starts taking it apart.)

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Well? 
SPOCK: Futile, Doctor. No specifics. There is no record of such a culture based on a moral inversion. 
MCCOY: You mean you're giving up? 
SPOCK: No, Doctor. I'm merely saying the computers can offer us no logical, rational, factual way out of our current dilemma. 
UHURA: Mister Spock, Mister Oxmyx is making contact from the surface. 
SPOCK: On audio, Lieutenant. Mister Oxmyx, this is Mister Spock. 
OXMYX [OC]: Huh? Hey, how'd you get back up there? 
SPOCK: Irrelevant, since we are here.

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: Oh, yeah. I tell you, you'd better come on back down.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: Krako's put the bag on your captain. 
SPOCK: Why would he put a bag on our captain?

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: Kidnapped him, you dope.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: He'll scrag him, too. 
SPOCK: If I understand you correctly, that would seem to be a problem.

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: Look, you guys got something I want. I can help you get your captain back.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: Then we can talk about the deal I want. 
SPOCK: I'm afraid I find it difficult to trust you, Mister Oxmyx.

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: What's to trust? Business is business. We'll call a truce. You come on down.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: My boys'll spring Kirk, and then we'll talk about giving me a hand. 
SPOCK: You'll show no further hostility?

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: I'm a businessman, pally. What do ya say?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Since we must have our captain back, I accept.

[Oxmyx's office]

SPOCK [OC]: We shall arrive in your office within ten minutes. Spock out.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: You mean you're going to trust him? 
SPOCK: If we are to save the captain without blatant, forceful interference on this planet, Doctor, we must have the assistance of someone indigenous. We are therefore forced to trust Mister Oxmyx.

[Small office]

(Kirk has used copper wire to create a trip-wire, and starts throwing the waste paper bin around to make a noise.) 
KIRK: Help me! Help! Help me! 
(A henchman dashes in and goes flying over the wire. Kirk kicks him unconscious, then uses a blanket to disorient Zabo when he comes in before knocking him out too, taking a weapon and making his escape.)

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, though we hope to avoid interference, I suggest you set one of our phaser banks on a strong stun position. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: Now you're beginning to make sense. 
SPOCK: I trust we shall not have to use them, but it is best to be prepared. Energise.

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: You know what to do. 
KALO: Don't worry, Boss. They can't do nothing till they're through sparkling. 
OXMYX: Just the same, you be careful. They'll have heaters on them. (to his girl) Now you watch this. 
(Spock and McCoy arrive, and are promptly taken prisoner.)

Ship's log. Mister Spock reporting. Incredible as it seems, Doctor McCoy and I are once again prisoners of the chief criminal boss of a society patterned after old Earth gangsters.

OXMYX: (taking the phasers) Pick up many more of these, I won't need your co-operation. 
SPOCK: Mister Oxmyx, I understood we had an arrangement, a truce. 
OXMYX: I was hoping you'd think that, dummy. 
MCCOY: We're trying to help you, Oxmyx. 
OXMYX: Nobody helps nobody but himself. 
SPOCK: Sir, you are employing a double negative. 
OXMYX: Huh? 
SPOCK: I fail to see why you do not understand us. You yourself have stated the need for unity of authority on this planet. We agree. 
OXMYX: Yeah, but I got to be the unity. 
SPOCK: Co-operation, sir, would inevitably result 
OXMYX: The most co-operative man in this world is a dead man. And if you don't keep your mouth shut, you're going to be co-operatin'. 
(The door opens and Kirk enters with his machine gun.) 
KIRK: Drop the guns. Drop 'em. (McCoy and Spock take back their phasers) Move down there. 
OXMYX: Hey, Captain, you got away from Krako. You know, that ain't easy. 
KIRK: I thought you were supposed to report to the ship, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: We did, Captain. The situation required our return. 
KIRK: It may be just as well. Did you find out anything from the computer? 
SPOCK: Nothing useful. Logic and practical information do not seem to apply here. 
MCCOY: You admit that? 
SPOCK: To deny the facts would be illogical, Doctor. 
KIRK: Then you don't mind if I play a hunch? 
SPOCK: I'm not sanguine about hunches, Captain, but I have no practical alternative. 
MCCOY: What are we going to do now, Jim? 
KIRK: Well, now that we have Bela, I'm going to put the bag on Krako. (grabs the guy in a blue suit) Listen, you. Say, that's nice material. 
MAN: It ought to be. It cost a bundle. 
KIRK; Get out of 'em. 
MAN: Hey! 
KIRK: I said. 
KALO: Now just a minute. 
KIRK: You too! Get out of the clothes. Nobody's going to put the bag on me any more.

[Street]

(Kirk is in the blue suit, and Spock in Kalo's brown one, when they leave Bela's headquarters and go over to the cream sedan parked by the kerb.) 
KIRK: Wheels, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: A fliwer, Captain. 
KIRK: Key in the ignition. Turn the ignition on. And nothing happens. Where's the starter? There's the starter. Yes! 
SPOCK: Interesting. 
KIRK: (pushing the gear lever and making grinding noises) Oops! Gears. 
SPOCK: Yes. Oh. I believe they had a device known as a clutch. Clutch, Captain. Perhaps one of those pedals on the floor. 
KIRK: (puts it quietly into gear) I kind of like this. I'm going to get one myself. 
(He lets up the clutch, and they go backwards. The car kangaroos elegantly down the street and somehow makes it to JoJo's place.)
SPOCK: Captain, you are an excellent starship commander, but as a taxi driver you leave much to be desired. 
KIRK: It was that bad? 
(They get out and note the guards at the main entrance) 
KIRK: Now, that could be a bit of a problem. If they were inside, where they couldn't be seen, we could stun them with our phasers, but not out here. 
SPOCK: If we can get close enough to them, we should be able to render them harmless with reasonable rapidity. 
(A guard checks the contents of a passing perambulator.) 
KIRK: They don't look like the trusting type. 
BOY: (runs over to them) It's a hit, ain't it? 
SPOCK: I beg your pardon? 
BOY: You're going to hit somebody. Can I watch? 
KIRK: Young man, run along and play. 
BOY: Where'd you get them ears? 
SPOCK: Young man 
BOY: You going to hit Krako out here? You open up and you'll be scragged from every window in the street. I can fix it for ya. 
SPOCK: Young man, this is likely to be quite hazardous. 
KIRK: Hold on, Spock. Out of the mouths of babes 
BOY: Who you callin' a babe? 
KIRK: I'm calling you a babe. 
BOY: You calling me a babe? (brandishes his little knife.) 
KIRK: Yeah I'm calling you a babe, but there's nothing personal in it. Sit down. (on the car bumper) You know a way we can get close to them? 
BOY: Sure. 
KIRK: How? 
BOY: What's in it for me? 
KIRK: What do you want? 
BOY: A piece of the action. 
SPOCK: You do not even know what the action is going to be. 
BOY: I figure it's got to be a thick percentage or you wouldn't be trying to hit Krako. 
SPOCK: Logical. 
KIRK: All right, young man. We'll guarantee you a piece of the action if we can pull this thing off. 
BOY: Is that a contract? 
KIRK: Done. (they shake on it) What do we do? 
BOY: You'll know what to do. 
(He skips across the street, fighting imaginary enemies with his very real knife.) 
BOY: And that! And how do you like that? Think you can gang up on me, huh? What are you, chicken? 
(The guards grin as he runs over to them.) 
BOY: Come on, why don't you gang up on me? I'll cut off your head and throw it in your face! Take that, and that, and falls over) Daddy, Daddy, I hurt myself! 
KIRK: That's it. Let's go. 
GUARD: What's the matter? Did you hurt yourself, kid? 
BOY: I want my daddy! 
GUARD: Cute kid, ain't he? 
BOY: Daddy! I want my daddy! 
KIRK: Sonny! 
BOY: I want my daddy. 
KIRK: Sonny! Wait a moment. What have they done? What have they done to you? What have you done? 
(Kirk hits one while Spock neck-pinches the other. There's a bit of argy-bargy just inside the door before it's over.) 
KIRK: A piece of the action.

[Krako's HQ]

KIRK: No one can see. Put your phaser on stun. 
(They stun two guards in the corridor in front of them. Krako is coming down the stairs with his girl.) 
KRAKO: Well, ain't this nice? I was wondering how I was going to get you back, and here you deliver yourself! Who's your friend with the ears, Kirk? 
KIRK: I think you've got it reversed, Mister Krako. 
KRAKO: I ain't, pally. Put down your heaters. 
SPOCK: Captain, I believe that perhaps it would be wise to do as he says. I just heard the sound of 
KIRK: The sound of a machine gun bolt being pulled back. (there are two more guards behind them.) (JoJo is shaking a phaser to make it work.) 
KIRK: Mister Krako, I don't, er 
KRAKO: So this is the fancy heater, huh? How does it work? 
KIRK: I'm trying to tell you, Mister Krako, that this is bigger than you, Oxmyx or anyone. 
KRAKO: The only thing I want you to tell me is how it works. 
KIRK: Can you trust all your men? 
KRAKO: Of course I can! 
KIRK: Well, one of these can make a man a pretty big boss, you know. 
KRAKO: I either trust 'em, or they're dead. Let's go in here and talk about it.

[Krako's office]

KRAKO: Now we got no busy little eyes to worry about. How does this thing work? 
KIRK: All right, Krako, we don't have time to show you how to play with toys! (takes the phaser back) 
KRAKO: Toys? 
KIRK: What do you think we're here for, to get a cut of your deal? Forget it. That's peanuts to an outfit like the Federation. Right? 
SPOCK: Unquestionably. 
KIRK: Right? 
SPOCK: Right. 
KIRK: Now look, Krako, we're taking over the whole ball of wax. You co-operate with us and maybe we'll cut you in for a piece of the action. 
SPOCK: A miniscule. A very small piece. 
KRAKO: How much is that? 
KIRK: That's, er. We'll figure it out later. 
KRAKO: I thought you guys had laws. No interference. 
KIRK: Who's interfering? We're taking over. Check? 
SPOCK: Right. 
KIRK: The planet is being taken over by the Federation, but we don't want to come in here and use our muscle, you know what I mean? That ain't subtle. So what we do is we help one guy take over the planet. He pulls the strings, and then we pull his. (to Spock) Hey, you, sit down. 
(They settle them selves with their feet up on Krako's desk.) 
KRAKO: What's your cut? 
KIRK: What do you care as long as you're being cut in? Course, there's always Bela Oxmyx. 
KRAKO: All right, it's a deal. Call your ship. Bring down your boys and whatever else you need. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Enterprise. Scott here. 
KIRK: All right, Scotty. We made a deal with Krako.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We did, sir?

[Krako's office]

KIRK: Yeah. We're ready to make the hit. We're taking over the whole planet as soon as you get ready.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Do you think that's wise, sir?

[Krako's office]

KIRK: Sure. We can trust Krako, but we don't have any choice. You know what I mean? He's standing about twelve feet in front of me, all ready to be our pal.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Of course, Scotty, I'd like to show him the ship, just to show him that we're, er, we're on the level. But you know how it is. 
SCOTT: Aye. I know indeed.

[Krako's office]

KIRK: Scotty, we'll need phasers to equip every one of Krako's men. We'll need advisors and troops to back him up on the hit. You got all that, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, Captain.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain. We're preparing everything. It'll be ready when you give the word.

[Krako's office]

KIRK: You may begin, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: Acknowledged, Captain. 
KRAKO: You mean you're going to start sending down your boys now? 
KIRK: Not exactly. 
(Krako is beamed away, and the astonished guards are easily overpowered again.) 
KIRK: Right? 
SPOCK: Check. 
(They leave.)

[Transporter room]

(Two armed security men have met Krako.) 
KRAKO: How the hell'd I get here? What? What happened? (Scott enters) You. You must be that Scott fellow Kirk was talking to. I want to know what happened. 
SCOTT: It looks like we put the bag on you, doesn't it. 
KRAKO: I got rights. 
SCOTT: You've got nothing. You mind your place, mister, or you'll be wearing concrete galoshes. 
KRAKO: You mean cement overshoes? 
SCOTT: Er. Aye.

[Street]

(Kirk runs towards the car.) 
SPOCK: Must we? 
KIRK: It's faster than walking. 
SPOCK: But not as safe. 
KIRK: Are you afraid of cars? 
SPOCK: Not at all, Captain. It's your driving that alarms me. 
KIRK: Spock, I've got the hang of it. Now go on. 
(The machine guns are still where Spock left them in the open top car, and Kirk still puts it into reverse first.)

[Krako's office]

ZABO: (waking up) Oh, not again. (rouses the other man) Hey, wake up. You all right? (opens the door) Hey, you guys. Come in here. The Feds snatched Krako. I never seen anything like it. They're going to move in unless we stop 'em now. 
GUARD: Yeah? How? 
ZABO: Well, Bela's mixed up in this somehow. I've got a sneaking hunch they're going to high-tail it back to his territory. You know what we're going to do? We're going to hit his place.

[Oxmyx's office]

MCCOY: Where are they? 
OXMYX: Knowing Krako, he'll probably send them back on a blotter. 
KIRK: Wrong again, Oxmyx. 
MCCOY: Jim. 
KIRK: Knock it off, Sawbones. I want to talk to this creep. Now listen, I'm getting tired of playing pattycake with you penny-ante operators. 
OXMYX: What do you mean, penny-ante operator? 
KIRK: You're a penny-ante operator. Sit down. All right, Spocko, cover him. Now listen, sweetheart. The Federation's moving in, taking over. You play ball, we'll cut you in. You don't, you're out. All the way out. You know what I mean? 
OXMYX: Yeah, sure. Why didn't you say so in the first place? All you had to do was explain it to me. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Enterprise. Scott here, sir.

[Oxmyx's office]

KIRK: You got Krako on ice? 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, he's here. Mad enough

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: To chew neutronium, but behaving himself. 
KIRK [OC]: Okay, baby. Cool him till I flag you. 
SCOTT: Flag me?

[Oxmyx's office]

KIRK: Keep him until I send for him. We're going to make some old-style phone calls from this locale. So you locate the man on the other end of the blower and give him a ride to this flop. 
SCOTT [OC]: What? 
KIRK: Find the man at the other end of the phone

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: And transport him to these co-ordinates.

[Oxmyx's office]

KIRK: Can do, sweetheart?

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Can do, Captain.

[Oxmyx's office]

SCOTT [OC]: Standing by. 
KIRK: Now you. Get on the blower and call the other bosses. 
OXMYX: I sure don't know what you think you're talking about. 
KIRK: Get with it. I'm giving the orders here. 
OXMYX: Hello. Hello? 
KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here. 
OXMYX: Guess who? 
KIRK: Lock in and energise. 
OXMYX: Yeah, you bet your life I've got a lot of nerve. What are you going to do about it? 
TEPO: Coming over with my boys and we (realises he's not where he was a second earlier) Mother. 
OXMYX: Hey, Captain, that ain't bad. 
KIRK: Yeah. 
SPOCK: I would advise you to keep dialing, Oxmyx.

[Krako's office]

ZABO: All right. You know what to do. We hit Bela's place and nobody comes out alive. All right. Let's go.

[Oxmyx's office]

(It's getting crowded and noisy. The minor bosses are all sporting bowler hats. Krako is there too. Kirk is standing on the pool table.) 
KIRK: All right! All right! All right! All right! Now the Federation's taking over whether you like it or not. You people, you've been running this planet like a piecework factory. From now on, it's going to be under one roof. You're going to run it like a business. That means you're going to make a profit. 
TEPO: And what's your percentage? 
KIRK: I'm cutting the Federation in for forty percent. You got any objections? 
TEPO: Yeah! I hear a lot of talk, but all I see here is you and a couple of your boys. I don't see no Federation. 
KRAKO: Listen. They got a ship. I know. I was there. 
OXMYX: Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Tepo's got a point. All we ever seen is them. 
TEPO: What, a couple of boys? 
KRAKO: I'm not going to believe my eyes. 
(general bedlam) 
KIRK: Hang on a minute. Hang on a minute. Quiet! Just a moment! 
KRAKO: Let me say something. I only saw three guys in that ship. Maybe there ain't no more. 
KIRK: There are over four hundred guys there. 
KRAKO: That's your story, buster. 
(There's a gunfight outside in the street.) 
KRAKO: Hey, it's my boys. They're making a hit at this place. 
(Everyone dashes to the windows to watch.) 
OXMYX: My boys will put you down. 
KRAKO: Want to bet? (gets the gun off McCoy) Keep moving. One move out of you two, I'll drill them. Give me the hardware. 
OXMYX: Hey, that's great, Krako. Now we got hostages again. We can make a deal with the Feds up there. 
KRAKO: Are you kidding? This one's all mine. From now on, nobody's going no place. I'm going to be the big boss in this here territory. 
KIRK: Now, wait a minute. Wait a minute. Get that heater down. Don't you want to take a look at what you're going to fight? 
KRAKO: I already seen it. You're nothing, Fed. 
KIRK: All right, but at least let me call my ship one last time and say goodbye. 
KRAKO: Well, all right. Go ahead. Don't get smart. 
KIRK: Hello, Scotty. This is Kirk.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Enterprise. Scott here, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: Scotty, put the ship's phasers on stun. Fire a burst in a one-block radius around these co-ordinates. 
SCOTT: Right away, sir. Scott out.

[Oxmyx's office]

(The street outside is filled with green light, and everyone falls down. The watching bosses are stunned into silence for a moment.) 
KRAKO: Gee, that's some trick. 
OXMYX: Hey, did you see that? 
KIRK: They're not dead, just knocked out for a while. But they might just as well have been that way if we wanted them to. 
OXMYX: Okay, okay, Kirk, so we get the message. Now, what was this syndicate deal you were talking about? 
TEPO: He was talking about a percentage. 
KIRK: I was talking about both. 
OXMYX: Okay. A syndicate makes sense to me. I'm a peaceful man at heart, but I'm sick and tired of all these hits. I hit Krako, Krako hits Tepo, Tepo hits me. There's too many bosses. We can't get anything done. 
I was thinking if there was just one, maybe somebody like you, as the top boss, then we can get things done. 
KIRK: Hey, Bela, no, no, no. The Federation can't get connected with a small-time operation like this. No, I was thinking, Bela, you would be the top boss. Krako, you'd be his lieutenant. The rest of you, I don't want any trouble from the rest of you because you'll have to answer to the Federation. We'll be back every year to collect our cut. 
TEPO: Look, you figure maybe forty percent's enough? 
KIRK: Yeah, I think forty percent's sufficient. 
OXMYX: It's reasonable. It sounds reasonable. That sound reasonable to you? 
(Chorus of approval.) 
KIRK: It's reasonable, Mister Oxmyx. Let's break out some of your drinking stuff and celebrate the syndicate.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Gentlemen, you two have been brooding ever since we returned to the ship. 
SPOCK: Brooding, Captain? 
KIRK: Brooding, Mister Spock. A sombre, emotional state. Now, do you wish to continue it or are you going to discuss it? 
SPOCK: Captain, I'm neither brooding nor sombre. But I do have reservations about your solution to the problem of the Iotians. 
KIRK: Ah, yes. I understand that. You don't think it's logical to leave a criminal organisation in charge. 
SPOCK: Highly irregular, to say the least, Captain. I'm also curious as to how you propose to explain to Starfleet Command that a starship will be sent each year to collect our cut. 
KIRK: Yes, that's a very good question, Mister Spock. I propose our cut be put into the planetary treasury and used to guide the Iotians into a more ethical system. Despite themselves, they'll be forced to accept conventional responsibilities. Isn't that logical? All right, Bones, in the language of the planet, what's your beef? 
MCCOY: I don't know how serious this is, Jim, and I don't quite know how to tell you 
KIRK: Go ahead. 
MCCOY: But in all the confusion I 
KIRK: Tell me. 
MCCOY: I think I left it in Bela's office. 
KIRK: You left it? 
MCCOY: Somewhere. I'm not certain. 
KIRK: You're not certain of what? 
MCCOY: I left my communicator. 
KIRK: In Bela's office? 
SPOCK: Captain. If the Iotians, who are very bright and imitative people, should take that communicator apart 
KIRK: They will, they will. And they'll find out how the transtator works. 
SPOCK: The transtator is the basis for every important piece of equipment that we have. 
KIRK: Everything. 
MCCOY: You really think it's that serious? 
KIRK: Serious? Serious, Bones? It upsets the whole percentage. 
MCCOY: How do you mean? 
KIRK: Well, in a few years, the Iotians may demand a piece of our action.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.
The Gamesters Of Triskelion
Stardate: 3211.7
Original Airdate: 5 Jan, 1968

Captain's log, stardate 3211.7. We are entering standard orbit about Gamma Two, an uninhabited planetoid with an automatic communications and astrogation station.
[Bridge]

KIRK: Ensign Chekov, Lieutenant Uhura, and I will beam down and make a routine check of its facilities. 
CHEKOV: Standard orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. Mind the store, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged, Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, let's go. 
UHURA: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Energise, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. 
(But before he can touch the controls, the landing party vanish abruptly.)

[Combat area]

(The three appear lying on the ground, on a decorated surface. There are iron railings around a vaguely triangular area, and three benches, one on each side.) 
CHEKOV: Captain. what happened? 
KIRK: It must be a transporter malfunction. 
CHEKOV: That was a rough trip. 
KIRK: This isn't Gamma Two. Look at the colour of that sky. (it's green) 
UHURA: This is the craziest landing pad I've ever seen. 
KIRK: That's a trinary sun.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Scott to Bridge.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Spock here.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Chekov. they vanished. They got onto the transporter platform and they just vanished.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: I presume you mean they vanished in a manner not consistent with the usual workings of the transporter, Mister Scott.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Aye, of course I mean that. You think I'd call if they just beamed down?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Have you reversed controls?

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: I've made all the proper checks. There was nothing. There was no flash of light, nothing. They were gone.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Power surge?

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Not down here. All the dials were right and the transporter was functioning perfectly.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Recheck your equipment, Mister Scott. I'll scan for them on the planet's surface. Spock out.

[Combat area]

CHEKOV: But Captain, if we're not on Gamma Two, then where are we? 
KIRK: That's what I'd like to know. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Dead. 
CHEKOV: Mine, too. 
UHURA: Captain. Look. 
(People are approaching them. One big guy in a fur, with teeth that hold his mouth open, another male with a knife, a female in pink carrying a lance-like weapon, and another in silver with green hair.) KIRK: Phasers on stun. Fire. (nothing happens) Hand-to-hand. 
(The men go one-on-one while Uhura has to deal with both women simultaneously. They are not fairly matched. Chekov cannot handle the giant and Uhura quickly gives up. Only Kirk acquits himself well against the normal male, until green-hair intervenes with her weapon.)

Captain's log, stardate 3211.8. While beaming down from the Enterprise to inspect facilities on Gamma Two, the normal transporter sequence has been interrupted, and we find ourselves on a strange and hostile planet, surrounded by creatures belonging to races scattered all through the galaxy.

[Combat area]

(A thin bald male in a long black cloak pops into the scene.) 
GALT: Excellent, Captain Kirk. Although we expected strength and competitive spirit, we are greatly pleased. 
KIRK: Either of you hurt? 
UHURA: I don't think so, Captain. 
CHEKOV: Nobody's hurt, Captain. Yet. 
GALT: Admirable, Chekov. Admirable. You also, Uhura. Your spirit is as great as the captain's. I can see you all will prove invaluable here. I am Galt, Master Thrall of the planet Triskelion. I have been sent to welcome you.

[Cell]

(All three are fastened securely to the wall, and have collars around their necks.) 
GALT: There, Captain. Now you are prepared for your training. 
KIRK: How do you know our names? 
GALT: The Providers were expecting you, Captain. They arranged your transportation. 
KIRK: These Providers of yours, are they 
GALT: Correction, Captain. The Providers are not ours. We are theirs. 
KIRK: What do they want from us? 
GALT: You are to be trained, of course. What other use is there for thralls? 
KIRK: Thralls? You must be mistaken. We're officers of a United spaceship on Federation business. 
GALT: There has been no mistake. Your old titles mean nothing here, Captain. You are thralls now. You are to be taken to the training enclosure. (the restraints are released) Come. Places have been prepared for you. 
KIRK: We're not going anywhere until we have some information. Who are you? What is this place? What do you think you're going to do with us? 
GALT: I am Galt, the Master Thrall. This place is the planet Triskelion. You are to be trained and spend the rest of your lives here.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, I've checked that transporter from one end to the other. Every circuit works perfectly. Whatever that power surge was, it had nothing to do with the transporter or any other system aboard this ship. 
SPOCK: I'm beginning to believe that, Mister Scott. I've conducted two sweeps of the planet's surface. There is no sign of life. 
MCCOY: Then what the devil is happening? Does that mean their atoms are just floating around out there? 
SPOCK: No, Doctor. Even that would show up on our sensors. 
SCOTT: Where are they then? 
SPOCK: The only answers are negative. No magnetic storms, no ionic interference, no breakdown in your equipment. 
MCCOY: A negative attitude is no good to us. We can't just leave them out there, wherever they are. 
SPOCK: We shall continue sensor scans, Doctor. At the moment, that is all we can do, except hope for a rational explanation. 
MCCOY: Hope? I always thought that was a human failing, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: True, Doctor. Constant exposure does result in a certain degree of contamination.

[Accommodation block]

(A curved corridor, with doors off on either side. The doors have iron bars in the upper half.) 
GALT: These are your quarters. Open, thralls. 
(As the doors slide open, Chekov and Kirk hit their minders and they all run. Galt's eyes glow, the collars glow and the Starfleet escapees collapse, choking.) 
GALT: That was foolish, Captain. Escape is quite impossible, as demonstrated by your collars of obedience. Return to your quarters. 
(They do, and they are left alone.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: They are not within the confines of this solar system. 
MCCOY: It's been nearly an hour. Can people live that long as disassembled atoms in a transporter beam? 
SPOCK: I have never heard of a study being done, but it would be a fascinating project. 
MCCOY: Fascinating? Those people are friends of ours out there, if they're still alive. 
SPOCK: Precisely. 
MCCOY: The odds are not good. 
SPOCK: No. I would say approximately four hundred 
MCCOY: Don't quote odds and don't give me anymore dispassionate logic, Mister Spock. Just keep looking for them. 
SPOCK: I would welcome a suggestion, Doctor, even an emotional one, as to where to look. 
MCCOY: First time you've ever asked me for anything, and it has to be an occasion like this.

[Accommodation block]

CHEKOV: Captain, the Enterprise. They will be trying to find us, won't they? 
UHURA: They'll try, but where do they look? We're here, and we don't know where it is. 
KIRK: This system's star is a trinary. Limits it a bit, but we're a long way from the Enterprise, if we're in the same dimension. 
(The male goes to Uhura's cell with a tray.) 
LARS: I am your drill thrall. I am called Lars. 
KIRK: What do you want from her? 
LARS: That is not your concern. Your drill thralls will attend you presently. (he opens Uhura's door and goes in) There is little time. 
UHURA [OC]: What are you doing? Get out! 
LARS [OC]: I have been selected for you. 
(The shadow play tells all we need to know. And the screams.) 
KIRK: Lieutenant, are you all right? Uhura! Lieutenant! Lieutenant, are you all right? Lieutenant, answer me! Lieutenant! What's happening to Lieutenant Uhura? Lieutenant, are you all right? 
LARS: It is not allowed to refuse selection. 
(He leaves. Uhura's clothes are intact.) 
SHAHNA: (to Kirk): Step away from the door. (she enters with a tray) Come. It is the nourishment interval.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain's log, stardate 3259.2. First Officer Spock in command. The Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Ensign Chekov have been missing for nearly two hours. Computer probability projections are useless due to insufficient data. 
HAINES: (a woman in gold uniform at Spock's station) Mister Spock, I'm getting a fluctuating energy reading on this hydrogen cloud. It's faint, sir, but it consistently reads an excess of predictable energy level. 
SPOCK: Interesting. It seems to be an ionisation trail.
MCCOY: What would account for that, Spock? 
SPOCK: Exactly the question I have just fed to the computers, Doctor. And the answer is, nothing known to us would account for it. 
SCOTT: Well, the transporter has neither the power nor the range to account for that. 
SPOCK: Plot a follow course, Ensign Haines. 
HAINES: (now in Chekov's seat) Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: You're going to leave here without them and run off on some wild goose chase halfway across the galaxy just because you found a discrepancy in a hydrogen cloud? 
SPOCK: Doctor, I am chasing the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Ensign Chekov, not some wild aquatic fowl. This is the only lead we've had. 
HAINES: Course plotted and laid in, Mister Spock. Three ten mark two four one. 
SPOCK: Initiate. Warp factor two.

[Chekov's cell]

(The robust woman in pink brings him his tray. She smiles at him.) 
CHEKOV: You, you have been selected for me? 
TAMOON: (with a deep voice) No. I am only your drill thrall. I have brought you nourishment. It is a nice name, Chee-koo. 
CHEKOV: Chekov. 
TAMOON: Chee-koof! It is a very nice name. I am called Tamoon. 
CHEKOV: (nervous of her intentions) Oh, pleased, Pleased to know you, miss. 
TAMOON: You are a fine specimen. I like you better than the others. I will instruct you well, so my Provider will take you. 
CHEKOV: That's very kind of you, miss, but 
TAMOON: If my Provider is pleased, we may even be selected for each other.

[Kirk's cell]

KIRK: I didn't realise I was so hungry. Whatever you call this, it is very good. 
SHAHNA: It is nourishment. We call it that. 
KIRK: Nourishment. That's very practical. What do you call this collar? 
SHAHNA: It is a sign of our Provider. By the colour of the lights it can be known who holds us. When you are vended, you will also have a colour. 
KIRK: Vended? You mean bought, sold. 
SHAHNA: When you are developed. The Provider who offers the most quatloos puts his colour on us. 
KIRK: Our race has another name for it. Slavery. This collar of obedience, is Galt the only one who can operate it? 
SHAHNA: It is only to warn and punish. 
KIRK: How does he work it? 
SHAHNA: It is not permitted to talk of that. 
KIRK: Will you provide all my nourishment? 
SHAHNA: Of course. I am your drill thrall. I will train you well. 
KIRK: Yes, I'm sure you will. I must say, I've never seen a top sergeant who looked like you. 
SHAHNA: What does that mean? 
KIRK: It means you're a very beautiful woman. 
SHAHNA: What is beautiful? 
KIRK: You mean nobody's ever told you that before? well, er, beautiful is, Beautiful. (he holds up the tray so she can see her reflection) That's beautiful. Shahna, where were you born? 
SHAHNA: Born? I have been here always. 
KIRK: Your parents. Where are they? Your mother and father. 
SHAHNA: She who bore me was killed in a freestyle match. 
KIRK: Freestyle? 
SHAHNA: You will learn all these things. 
KIRK: Lars and Chekov's drill thrall. They weren't born here. Where do they come from? 
SHAHNA: It is not permitted. (a gong sounds and a red light flashes) The exercise interval. This is your training harness. Put it on.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: This is ridiculous. There's nothing out there. Nothing at all. 
SCOTT: We certainly seem to be heading into an empty sector. 
SPOCK: Projecting back along the path of ionisation, the nearest system is M two four alpha. 
SCOTT: That must be two dozen light years away. 
SPOCK: Eleven point six three zero. 
MCCOY: Are you suggesting that they could have transported over a distance of? You're out of your Vulcan mind, Spock. 
SPOCK: I'm suggesting nothing, Doctor. I am merely pursuing the only logical course available to us.

[Training area]

(The three are learning how to fight with the long poles with the curved hook on one end and grapple on the other. Galt enters with another thrall, his hands tied behind him.)
GALT: Hold. This thrall was slow in obeying a command. For his punishment, he will be practice target. As you charge, you will strike the practice target when you pass. You begin, Uhura. 
UHURA: No! 
GALT: It is not allowed to refuse a training exercise. 
UHURA: I don't care whether it's allowed or not. I will not do it. 
KIRK: None of us will do it, Galt. 
GALT: It is part of your training. The Providers wish it. 
KIRK: The devil with the Providers. 
CHEKOV: Cossacks. 
(Galt gives them a reminder of what their collars do.) 
GALT: We have been tolerant because you are newcomers, but I see you must be given a lesson. Lars. (Lars unties the thrall) Kloog. Kloog will administer correction. Uhura, take your place on the triad. (Lars starts to tie Uhura's hands behind her back.) Tie her. 
KIRK: No. No! I am responsible for the actions of my people. I demand to see the Providers. 
GALT: It is not permitted. But, Captain, since you assume responsibility for your people, you will take the punishment. It is less painful than the collar. Turn around. {Lars ties Kirk's hands.) Captain, you will be practice target. It is a shame to lose you, Captain, but it is worth it as an example to the others.

Captain's log, supplemental. Stardate, unknown. Our strange captivity continues. This planet is called Triskelion. We do not know its location. We do not know who controls it. Its dangers are abundantly clear.

[Combat area]

(Kloog (the big, silent one) has a whip and net, which Kirk is trying to dodge. His back is bloody and his shirt is torn, but he manages to land a good kick on Kloog.) 
GALT: Hold. Rest interval. Fifteen trisecs. 
(The two combatants join their comrades on the benches.) 
KIRK: He's pretty fast with that whip. 
SHAHNA: This will strengthen you. Drink it. Kloog's left eye is weak. Approach him from that side. 
GALT: Resume places. 
(Kirk carries on dodging the whip, whilst loosening his bonds. Finally he manages to get his hands in front of him, jump on Kloog's back and try to strangle him. Kloog falls to the ground.) 
ONE [OC]: Hold. 
GALT: We hold, Provider One. 
ONE [OC]: Provider One bids three hundred quatloos for the newcomers. 
TWO [OC]: Provider Two, three hundred and fifty quatloos. 
THREE [OC]: Provider Three, four hundred. 
TWO [OC]: One thousand quatloos. 
THREE [OC]: One thousand fifty quatloos. 
ONE [OC]: Two thousand. 
GALT: (after a pause) Two thousand quatloos are bid. Is there a challenge? The newcomers have been vended to Provider One. 
KIRK: We're free people. We belong to no one. 
TWO [OC]: Such spirit. I wager fifteen quatloos that he is untrainable.
THREE [OC]: Twenty quatloos that all three are untrainable. 
TWO [OC]: Five thousand quatloos that the newcomers will have to be destroyed. 
ONE [OC]: Accepted. Mark them, Galt. 
(Galt's eyes go bright, and the badges on the collars turn red.) 
GALT: You now bear the mark of a fine herd. But I must warn you, any further disobedience now that you are full-fledged thralls will be punishable by death.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, it just doesn't make sense they could have come this far. If there's any chance at all it is to continue to search in the area they were lost. 
SPOCK: We searched the area. 
SCOTT: It's always possible to miss something. 
SPOCK: Such as a failure in the transporter mechanism? 
SCOTT: No, sir. There was no sign of failure. 
SPOCK: There was no sign of them in the area of Gamma Two. 
MCCOY: If they weren't there it's ridiculous to think they could still be alive. Not after all this time. 
SPOCK: In that case, Doctor, we have nothing to lose by pursuing our present course.

[Ruins]

(Shahna has taken Kirk for a run.) 
KIRK: Slow down. Slow down. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. We've covered over two miles. Can we take a breather? A rest? 
SHAHNA: (not at all out of breath) Oh. Very well. You are tired. 
KIRK: Oh. well, it's good to get away from that development area, even for a while. Shahna, why do the Providers, why do they like to watch others being hurt, killed? 
SHAHNA: That is the way. 
KIRK: Their voices sound mechanical. Are they computers? 
SHAHNA: Computers? 
KIRK: You've seen them. Do they have bodies? 
SHAHNA: Not such as ours. 
KIRK: What is this place? 
SHAHNA: It is not used. 
KIRK: It's very old. Does it have a name? Shahna, could it have been a city for the Providers? 
SHAHNA: I do not think it is well to ask such things. 
KIRK: They do have bodies, or did have. 
SHAHNA: One does not talk of such things. 
KIRK: Very pretty country. Very much like my home planet, Earth. 
SHAHNA: Planet? 
(Stands close to her back, hands on her shoulders, so he can whisper in her ear.) 
KIRK: Where I was born. Shahna, don't you ever look at the night sky? The lights up there? 
SHAHNA: I have looked at them. 
KIRK: Well, those are stars. And around them are planets. And there are people that live on them, Just like us. 
SHAHNA: How can one live on a flicker of light? 
KIRK: From Earth, Triskelion's three suns are just a flicker of light. Actually, this is the darkest planet I've ever seen. 
SHAHNA: Dark? But all is lighted. Here, the chambers. 
KIRK: The thralls have no freedom, Shahna. You don't think or do anything but what the Providers tell you. 
SHAHNA: What else would one do? 
KIRK: Love, for one thing. 
SHAHNA: What is love? 
KIRK: Love is the most important thing on Earth. Especially to a man and a woman. 
SHAHNA: We, too, have mates. When it is time to increase the herd, my Provider will select one for me. 
KIRK: On Earth, we select our own mate. Someone we care for. On Earth, men and women live together, help each other, make each other happy. 
SHAHNA: I do not think your words are allowed. 
KIRK: All right. All right. Tell me about the Providers. What do they look like? Where do they live? 
SHAHNA: I have never seen them, but they are said not to be like us. They stay in 
(Her collar lights up, and Kirk holds her tight while she writhes in pain.) 
KIRK: Stop it. Stop it! I'm responsible! I made her talk! Stop it! You're killing her! She did nothing wrong! It was my fault. If you want to punish someone, punish me! Please. 
ONE [OC]: Is that what you humans call compassion? It is interesting, but it has no value here. You present many interesting aspects, Captain, but you must learn obedience. Then you will be an excellent thrall. 
(Shahna's collar stops glowing.) 
KIRK: It's all right. It's all right. You can stop crying now, Shahna. It's all right. 
SHAHNA: You risked bringing their anger on yourself. Why did you do it? 
KIRK: It's the custom of my people to help one another when we're in trouble. 
(He kisses her.) 
SHAHNA: And this. Is this also helping? 
KIRK: You could call it that. 
SHAHNA: Please, help me once again. (another kiss) I did not know it could be like this between people. Is it always so in the place you come from? 
GALT: (popping out of thin air) Captain, you do indeed present many surprises. Because you have amused the Providers, there will be no punishment. Return to your quarters.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, can we manage anything faster than warp six? 
SCOTT: It's my opinion that we've gone too far as it is, sir. 
MCCOY: He's right, Spock. We've lost Jim and the others on Gamma Two. Now you've dragged us a dozen light years on some wild hunch that 
SPOCK: Doctor, I do not respond to hunches. No transporter malfunction was responsible for the disappearance. They were not within the Gamma system. A focused beam of extremely high-intensity light was directed into the Gamma system from the trinary system we are now approaching. No known natural phenomena could have caused that beam. Does that clarify the situation? 
MCCOY: No, it doesn't. It's still a fancy way of saying that you're playing a hunch. well, my hunch is that they're back on Gamma Two dead or alive and I still want another search. 
SCOTT: Doctor McCoy speaks for me, too, sir. 
SPOCK: I see. (pause) Gentlemen, I am in command of this vessel, and we shall continue on our present course. (conspiratorial whisper) Unless it is your intention to declare a mutiny. 
SCOTT: Mister Spock! 
MCCOY: Who said anything about a mutiny, you stubborn, pointed-eared. All right. If we don't find them here, do we still have another search on Gamma Two? 
SPOCK: Agreed. Mister Scott, could you manage warp seven? 
SCOTT: I would be more than content to do so, sir, and maybe a wee bit more. 
SPOCK: Ensign, warp seven.

[Kirk's cell]

(Shahna brings a nourishment tray.) 
KIRK: You're disturbed about what happened today. 
SHAHNA: Yes. You have made me feel strangely. If it were allowed, I would ask that you have another drill thrall. 
KIRK: I wouldn't like that, Shahna. I wouldn't like that at all. 
(He kisses her, then punches her to knock her out.) 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Shahna. (takes the magnetic key and unlocks his door)

[Accommodation area]

(Kirk opens Chekov's cell. Tamoon is bound and gagged.) 
CHEKOV: This is going to kill our romance. 
(They let Uhura out.) 
KIRK: What about Lars? 
UHURA: He's gone to report me. I said I didn't like the food. 
KIRK: I think Galt is the only one who controls these collars. If we can find the phaser that I threw at Lars, we can use the circuits to short out these collars. 
CHEKOV: (pointing to an exit) Captain.

[Combat area]

(Galt appears, and punishment is administered.) 
ONE [OC]: Only a reminder. You Earth people are most unusual, most stimulating.

[Bridge]

HAINES: Standard orbit. 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate only one concentration of life forms on the planet, on the lower hemisphere. Humanoid readings. 
MCCOY: Well, at least that gives our landing force a starting point. 
SPOCK: There will be no landing force, Doctor. Assuming the captain and the others are still alive, it would be unwise to endanger them by beaming down a large contingent. 
MCCOY: Well we're not going to leave them there while we just sit and wait. 
SPOCK: Interesting. No power source. It may be shielded. 
MCCOY: And it may be just a wild goose chase like we've been telling you. 
SPOCK: I shall beam down, Doctor. If I am unable to communicate, a landing party may be necessary. 
MCCOY: Well, Mister Spock, if you're going into the lion's den, you'll need a medical officer. 
SPOCK: Daniel, as I recall, had only his faith. But I welcome your company, Doctor. Mister Scott, you'll be in command. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(But the turbolift doors shut before Spock and McCoy can leave the bridge, and the lights start flashing.) 
ONE [OC]: No, Mister Spock, you will not leave the ship.

[Combat area]

ONE [OC]: None of your control systems will operate. 
MCCOY [OC]: What the devil's going on? 
KIRK: Spock? Spock!

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Spock?

[Combat area]

KIRK: Welcome to Triskelion, gentlemen. 

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: By now it must be obvious to you that you have been expected. 
SCOTT: What the voice said was true, sir. Nothing is functioning. 
ONE [OC]: Commendations, gentlemen. Your ingenuity in discovering the whereabouts of your companions is noteworthy. 
KIRK [OC]: What you're hearing, gentlemen, is a Provider. 
ONE [OC]: We are known to the thralls as Providers because we provide for all their needs. The term is easier for their limited mental abilities to comprehend.

[Combat area]

KIRK: Providing for all their needs means using thralls, people stolen from other parts of the galaxy

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: To fight each other, and the Providers gamble on the winner. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK [OC]: But these Providers haven't the courage to show themselves. 
ONE [OC]: Your species has great curiosity.

[Combat area]

ONE [OC]: We knew that. You are interesting in many ways. 
KIRK: But you are afraid.

[Bridge]

ONE [OC]: You present no danger while you wear the collar

[Combat area]

ONE [OC]: And you wear it as long as you live. 
KIRK: Then show yourselves. 
ONE [OC]: There is no objection.

[Cavern]

(It is vast, obviously constructed with ceiling lights and a power plant in the background. In the foreground is a transparent dome with three yellow brains in it.) 
KIRK: The power source. Shielded by solid rock.
ONE [OC]: (a brain pulsates red) We are one thousand of your metres beneath the surface. 
KIRK: Primary mental evolution. Incredible. 
TWO [OC]: (pulsing green) That is not true, Captain. Once we had humanoid form, but we evolved beyond it. 
THREE [OC]: (yellow) Through eons of devoting ourselves exclusively to intellectual pursuits, we became the physically simple, mentally superior creatures you see before you. 
KIRK: A species that enslaves other beings is hardly superior, mentally or otherwise. 
ONE [OC]: The thralls are necessary to the games. We have found athletic competitions our only challenge, the only thing which furnishes us with purpose. 
KIRK: It's an unproductive purpose, unworthy of your intellect. 
ONE [OC]: We use only inferior beings. 
KIRK: We have found that all life forms in the galaxy are capable of superior development. Perhaps you're not as evolved as you believe. 
THREE [OC]: An interesting speculation, Captain. You and your people are most challenging. 
TWO [OC]: Yes, most challenging. It was hoped that such new blood would stimulate our stock of thralls. How unfortunate that you must be destroyed. 
KIRK: Our destruction will result only in your own. You may control the Enterprise, but you cannot match the force of the entire Federation. 
ONE [OC]: Your ship will be destroyed by a magnetic storm. No communications with your base will be possible. Your fate will remain a mystery to your people. 
KIRK: And you call yourselves superior! You're murderers without the spirit to really wager for the lives you take. 
ONE [OC]: Wager? Explain yourself, Captain. 
KIRK: My people pride themselves on being the greatest, most successful gamblers in the universe. We compete for everything. Power, fame, women, everything we desire, and it is our nature to win. And for proof, I offer you our exploration of this galaxy. 
THREE [OC]: We are aware of your competitive abilities, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, then, I wager that with weapons of your own choice, right here and now, my people can overcome an equal number of thralls set against us. 
THREE [OC]: A hundred quatloos on the newcomers. 
ONE [OC]: Four hundred quatloos against the newcomers. 
TWO [OC]: Two hundred quatloos against! 
THREE [OC]: Five hundred for the newcomers. Contest by multiple elimination. 
KIRK: Wait! Wait! Hear me! We can't wager for trifles like quatloos. The stakes must be higher. 
ONE [OC]: Name your stakes, Captain. 
KIRK: If we win, the Enterprise and its crew leaves here in safety. Further more, all the thralls on the planet must be freed. 
TWO [OC]: Anarchy. They would starve. 
KIRK: You will educate and train them to establish a normal self-governing culture. 
THREE [OC]: Thralls govern themselves? Ridiculous! 
KIRK: We have done the same with cultures throughout the galaxy. Are you willing to admit that we can do something you can't? 
TWO [OC]: There is nothing we cannot do! 
ONE [OC]: And if you lose, Captain? 
KIRK: If we lose? We will remain here, the entire crew of the Enterprise. The most stubborn, determined competitors in the universe. We'll become thralls, enter your games, obey your orders without rebellion. You'll be assured of generations of the most exciting wagering you've ever had. 
ONE [OC]: Your stakes are indeed high, Captain. 
KIRK: Not for true gamesters. 
THREE [OC]: We will accept your stakes on one condition. 
KIRK: Name it. 
ONE [OC]: As leader of your people, your spirit seems most indomitable. We suggest you alone, pitted against three contestants of our choosing. 
KIRK: Three against one? Those are pretty high odds. 
TWO [OC]: Not for true gamesters, Captain. 
KIRK: Your, your terms are unfair. 
ONE [OC]: On the contrary, they're extremely fair, since your alternative is death. 
KIRK: Well, in that case, I'll accept your terms. 
ONE [OC]: Galt will prepare you.

[Combat area]

(Lars has a net, Kloog has his whip, and an Andorian has the pole weapon, same as Kirk.) 
ONE [OC]: Because you wager your skill for all your people, they will be permitted to watch the outcome of the game on the ship's viewscreen.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, look! 
ONE [OC]: Captain, you will defend. Thralls must stay in the blue area. You will take the yellow. Touching an opposing colour deprives a contestant of one weapon. An opponent must be killed to be removed from the game. If only wounded, he is replaced by a fresh thrall. Is that clear, Captain?

[Combat area]

KIRK: Yes, that's clear.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: What in the name of heaven is this? 
SCOTT: Heaven's got very little to do with this.

[Combat area]

(So the fight begins, and everyone puts their feet outside their allotted colours from time to time. Kirk manages to trip up or push over each of his three opponents several times. Eventually he throws his pole into Kloog's belly then picks up a dagger to defend himself with. Lars traps his hand in the net, but Kirk ducks as the Andorian throws his pole. Now the two fight with just the daggers, until Kirk throws the Andorian. Galt sees that he is only injured, and orders in his replacement.)
GALT: Shahna. 
(She enters the area with a pole.) 
SHAHNA: You lied. Everything you said. 
(She trips him, but he grabs the pole and pulls her down to the point of his dagger. They both hesitate, break free, and she gets him at her mercy. Again there is hesitation, so Kirk uses his legs to grab her and this time puts the blade firmly to her throat.) 
SHAHNA: The thralls surrender! 
(Kirk lets her go.) 
ONE [OC]: You have won, Captain Kirk, unfortunately. However, the terms of the wager will be honoured. You are free. Remove your collars. 
(They come off easily.) 
KIRK: The thralls will be trained? 
ONE [OC]: They will be trained. We have said it. 
KIRK: I think you'll find it a much more exciting game than the one you've been playing. I'm sorry, Shahna. I didn't lie. I did what was necessary. Someday, I hope you'll understand. 
SHAHNA: I understand, a little. You will leave us now? 
KIRK: Yes. 
SHAHNA: To go back to the lights in the sky? 
KIRK: Yes. 
SHAHNA: I would like to go to those lights with you. Take me? 
KIRK: I can't. 
SHAHNA: Then teach me how, and I will follow you. 
KIRK: There's so much you must learn here first. The Providers will teach you. Learn it, Shahna. all your people must learn before you can reach for the stars. Shahna. (he gives her a farewell kiss) Scotty! 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Beam us up. 
(They disappear in a twinkle.)
SHAHNA: Goodbye, Jim Kirk. I will learn, and watch the lights in the sky, and remember.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Trouble With Tribbles
Stardate: 4523.3
Original Airdate: 29 Dec, 1967

[Briefing room]
SPOCK: Deep Space Station K7 now within sensor range, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. Mister Chekov, this flight is supposed to provide both experience and knowledge. How close will we come to the Klingon outpost if we continue on our present course? 
CHEKOV: One parsec, sir. Close enough to smell them. 
SPOCK: That is illogical, Ensign. Odours cannot travel through the vacuum of space. 
CHEKOV: I was making a little joke, sir. 
SPOCK: Extremely little, Ensign. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, immediate past history of the quadrant? 
SPOCK: Under dispute between the two parties since initial contact. The battle of Donatu Five was fought near here twenty three solar years ago. Inconclusive. 
KIRK: Analysis of disputed area? 
SPOCK: Undeveloped. Sherman's Planet is claimed by both sides, our Federation and the Klingon Empire. We do have the better claim. 
CHEKOV: The area was first mapped by the famous Russian astronomer Ivan Borkoff almost two hundred 
KIRK: John Burke. 
CHEKOV: Burke, sir? I don't think so. I'm sure it was 
SPOCK: John Burke was the Chief Astronomer at the Royal Academy in old Britain at the time. 
CHEKOV: Oh, Royal Academy. Well 
KIRK: is the rest of your history that faulty, Ensign? Key points of dispute? 
CHEKOV: Under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, one side or the other must prove it can develop the planet most efficiently. 
KIRK: And unfortunately, though the Klingons are brutal and aggressive, they are most efficient. 
CHEKOV: I remember once Peter the Great had that problem like that. The 
UHURA [OC]: Captain? 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
UHURA [on monitor]: I'm picking up a subspace distress call. Priority channel. It's from Space Station K7. 
KIRK: Go to warp factor six. 
CHEKOV: Code One emergency. That's a disaster call. 
UHURA [OC]: This is a Red Alert. Man your battle stations. All hands.

Captain's Log, stardate 4523.3. Deep Space Station K7 has issued a priority one call. More than an emergency, it signals near or total disaster. We can only assume the Klingons have attacked the station. We're going in armed for battle.

]Bridge]

CHEKOV: Main phasers armed and ready, sir. 
(The space station is on the main viewer, looking intact.) 
CHEKOV: But there's nothing there. Just the station. 
KIRK: Priority One distress call, and it's just absolutely peaceful. Lieutenant Uhura, break subspace silence. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. The channel's open, sir. 
KIRK: Space Station K7, this is Captain Kirk of the Enterprise. What is your emergency? 
LURRY [OC]: This is Mister Lurry, manager of K7. I must apologise for the distress call. 
KIRK: Mister Lurry, you issued a Priority One distress call. State the nature of your emergency. 
LURRY [OC]: Well, perhaps you better beam over. I'll try to explain. 
KIRK: You'll try to explain. You'd better be prepared to do more than that. Kirk out. Mister Spock, I'll need your help. Mister Chekov, maintain battle readiness. Lieutenant Uhura, see that the transporter room is standing by. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. Transporter room, stand by.

[Lurry's office]

(Kirk and Spock arrive in the two man transporter alcove) 
KIRK: Mister Lurry, if there's no emergency, why did you issue a priority one distress call? 
BARIS: That was my order, Captain. 
LURRY: Captain Kirk, this is Nilz Baris. He's out from Earth to take charge of the development project on Sherman's Planet. 
KIRK: And that gives you the authority to put an entire quadrant on defence alert? 
DARVIN: Mister Baris is the Federation Undersecretary in Charge of Agricultural Affairs in this quadrant. 
SPOCK; That gives him the authority. 
KIRK: Oh. 
BARIS: This is my assistant Arne Darvin. 
KIRK: And this is my first officer Mister Spock. 
LURRY: Mister Spock. 
BARIS: And now Captain, I want all available security guards. I want them posted around the storage compartments. 
KIRK: Storage compartments? Storage compartments? 
DARVIN: The storage compartments containing the quadrotriticale. 
KIRK: What? What? What's quadrotriticale? (Lurry hands him a small packet) Wheat. So what? 
BARIS: Quadrotriticale is not wheat, Captain. Of course, I wouldn't expect you or Mister Spock to know about such things, but quadrotriticale is a rather 
SPOCK: Quadrotriticale is a high-yield grain, a four-lobed hybrid of wheat and rye. A perennial, also, I believe. Its root grain, triticale, can trace its ancestry all the way back to twentieth century Canada 
KIRK: Mister Spock, you've made your point. 
LURRY: Quadrotriticale is the only earth grain that grows on Sherman's Planet. We have several tons of it here on the station. It's very important that grain gets to Sherman's Planet safely. Mister Baris thinks that Klingon agents may try to sabotage it. 
KIRK: You issued a priority one distress call for a couple of tons of wheat? 
DARVIN: Quadrotriticale! 
BARIS: Of course, Captain, I realise that 
KIRK: Mister Baris, you summoned the Enterprise without an emergency. You'll take full responsibility for it. 
BARIS: What do you mean? 
SPOCK: Misuse of the Priority One channels is a Federation offence. 
BARIS: I did not misuse the Priority One channel. I want that grain protected. 
LURRY: Captain, couldn't you at least post a couple of guards? We do have a large number of ships passing through. 
SPOCK: It would seem a logical precaution, Captain. The Sherman's Planet affair is of extreme importance to the Federation. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise here. 
KIRK: Secure from general quarters. And beam down two, and only two, security guards. Have them report to Mister Lurry. Authorise shore leave for all off-duty personnel. 
UHURA [OC]: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk out. 
BARIS: Captain Kirk, how dare you authorise a mere two men for a project of this importance? Starfleet Command 
KIRK: I have never questioned the orders or the intelligence of any representative of the Federation. Until now. 
(storms out of the office)

{K7 Bar]

(Wherever humanoids may travel, someone will set up a bar to have pretty females serve intoxicating beverages. K7 is no exception.) 
KIRK: Summoning a starship on a priority A-1 channel to guard some storage compartments. Storage compartments of wheat. 
SPOCK: Nevertheless Captain, the Klingons would not enjoy seeing us successfully develop Sherman's Planet. 
KIRK: I guess not. 
(downs his drink in one and heads for the door, where they meet Chekov and Uhura coming in.) 
KIRK: I see you didn't waste time taking your shore leave. 
UHURA: (coldly) How often do I get shore leave? 
CHEKOV: She wants to shop, and I thought I would help her. 
JONES: (entering) Oh, excuse me. Excuse me. 
KIRK: (shows Chekov the packet of wheat) Mister Chekov, what do you make of this? 
CHEKOV: Oh, quadrotriticale. I've read about this, but I've never seen any before. 
KIRK: Does everybody know about this wheat but me? 
CHEKOV: Not everyone, Captain. It's a Russian invention. 
KIRK: Ah. 
(Kirk and Spock leave.) 
BARMAN: I don't want any. I told you before, and I'm telling you again I don't want any more Spican flame gems. Thanks to you, I have enough Spican flame gems to last me a lifetime. 
JONES: How sad for you, my friend. You won't find a finer stone anywhere. But I have something better. Surely you want some Antarian glow water. 
BARMAN: I use that to polish the flame gems. 
JONES: You're a difficult man to reach, but I have something from the far reaches of the galaxy. Surely you want 
(from yet another pocket, the trader pulls a what looks like a ball of fluff.) 
BARMAN: Not at your price. 
UHURA: What is it? Is it alive? May I hold it? 
(Jones puts it in her hand and it starts purring) 
UHURA: Oh, it's adorable. What is it? 
JONES: What is it? Why, lovely lady, it's a tribble. 
UHURA: A tribble? 
JONES: Only the sweetest creature known to man, excepting, of course, your lovely self. 
UHURA: Oh, it's purring. Listen, it's purring. 
JONES: It's only saying that it likes you. 
UHURA: Are you selling them? 
BARMAN: That's what we're trying to decide right now. 
JONES: My friend, 10 credits apiece is a very reasonable price. Now you can see for yourself how much the lovely little lady appreciates the finer things. 
BARMAN: One credit apiece. 
CHEKOV: He won't bite, will he? 
JONES: Sir, transporting harmful animals from one planet to another is against regulations, or weren't you aware of that? Besides, tribbles have no teeth. 
BARMAN: All right. I'll double my offer 2 credits. 
JONES: Twice nothing is still nothing. 
UHURA: If you're not going to take him, I'm going to take him. I think he's cute. 
BARMAN: Four credits. 
JONES: Is that an offer or a joke? 
BARMAN: That's my offer. 
JONES: That's a joke. 
BARMAN: Five? 
JONES: You're an honest man. I'll tell you what I'm going to do I'm going to lessen my price to eight and a half credits. 
BARMAN: You're talking yourself out of a deal, friend. Six credits. Not a credit more. 
JONES: Seven and a half. Seven? All right, you robber, six credits. 
BARMAN: Done. When can I have them? 
JONES: Right away. 
UHURA: All right, what are you selling them for? 
BARMAN: Well, let me see, little lady. Six credits. Figure a reasonable mark-up for a reasonable profit, say ten percent mark-up. Ten credits. 
JONES: Thief. 
BARMAN: In fact, I'll sell you this one. 
(the tribble is eating grain spilt from the packet Kirk gave Chekov) 
CHEKOV: Hey! He's eating my grain. 
BARMAN: That'll be ten credits. 
JONES: That happens to be my sample, and I'll do with it as I please. And I please to give it to the lovely lady. 
UHURA: Oh, I couldn't. Could I? 
JONES: I insist. 
BARMAN: What are you trying to do, ruin the market? 
JONES: Once this lovely little lady starts to show this precious little darling around, you won't be able to keep up with them.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Yes, what is it? 
UHURA [OC]: Message from Starfleet, Captain. Priority channel. Admiral Fitzpatrick speaking. 
KIRK: Put it on visual, Lieutenant. 
ADMIRAL [on monitor]: Captain Kirk? 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
ADMIRAL [on monitor]: Captain, it is not necessary to remind you of the importance to the Federation of Sherman's Planet. The key to our winning of this planet is the grain quadrotriticale. The shipment of it must be protected. Effective immediately, you will render any aid and assistance which Undersecretary Baris may require. The safety of the grain and the project is your responsibility. Starfleet out. 
KIRK: Now, that's just lovely. 
SPOCK: But not totally unexpected. 
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk! Captain Kirk! 
KIRK: Yes, Lieutenant, what is it? 
UHURA [OC]: Sensors are picking up a Klingon battle cruiser rapidly closing on the station. 
KIRK: Go to Red Alert. Notify Mister Lurry. We'll be right up.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What is the position of the Klingon ship? 
CHEKOV: A hundred kilometres off K7. It's just sitting there. 
UHURA: Captain, I have Mister Lurry. 
KIRK: Put him on visual. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Lurry, there's a Klingon warship hanging one hundred kilometres off your station. 
LURRY [on viewscreen]: I don't think the Klingons are planning to attack us. 
KIRK: Why not? 
LURRY [on viewscreen]: Because at this moment the captain of the Klingon ship is sitting right here in my office. 
KIRK: Cancel Red Alert. We'll beam right down. 
UHURA: Security, cancel Red Alert.

Captain's log, stardate 4524.2. A Klingon warship is hovering only a hundred kilometres from Deep Space Station K7 while its captain waits in the station manager's office. Their intentions are unknown.

[Lurry's office]

(False smiles all round as Kirk and Spock are greeted by a Klingon who very closely resembles the Squire of Gothos...) 
KOLOTH: Ah, my dear Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: My dear Captain Koloth. 
KOLOTH: Let me assure you that my intentions are peaceful. As I've already told Mister Lurry, the purpose of my presence is to invoke shore leave rights. 
KIRK: Shore leave? 
KOLOTH: Captain, we Klingons are not as luxury-minded as you Earthers. We do not equip our ships with, how shall I say it, non-essentials. (makes an hour-glass gesture with his hands) 
KORAX: We have been in space for five months. What we choose as recreation is our own business. 
KOLOTH: I might also add that under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, you cannot refuse us. 
KIRK: Yes, well, I don't make those decisions. Mister Lurry is in charge of those matters. 
LURRY: Captain, may I speak to you a minute? (takes him aside) Look, I don't want them here, but I don't have the authority to refuse. 
KIRK: Well, I have the authority to act, and I'm going to use it. My dear Captain Koloth, you may indeed bring your men down on shore leave, but only twelve at a time. And I assure you, for every man you bring down here, I shall have one security guard. There will be no trouble. 
KOLOTH: Captain Kirk, there's been no formal declaration of hostilities between our two respective governments. So, naturally, our relationship will be a peaceful one. 
KIRK: Let us both take steps to keep it that way. 
KOLOTH: Of course.

[Rec room]

(Scott is at a monitor, reading, when Spock and Kirk enter.) 
KIRK: Another technical journal, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Aye. 
KIRK: Don't you ever relax? 
SCOTT: I am relaxing. 
(There is a crowd at a long table, and there are purring sounds.) 
MCCOY: How long have you had that thing, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Since yesterday, Doctor. This morning, I found out that he, I mean she, had had babies. 
MCCOY: Well, in that case, you got a bargain. 
KIRK: You running a nursery, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Oh, Captain. Well, I hadn't intended to, sir, but the tribble had other plans. 
KIRK: Did you get this at the space station? 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: (stroking a tribble) A most curious creature, Captain. Its trilling seems to have a tranquillising effect on the human nervous system. Fortunately, of course, I am immune to its effect. 
(Everyone stares, he suddenly realises what he is doing, and puts it down. Spock and Kirk leave.) 
MCCOY: Lieutenant, do you mind if I take one of these down to the lab to see what makes it tick? 
UHURA: Well, all right, Doctor, but if you're going to dissect it, I don't want to know about it. 
MCCOY: I won't harm a hair on its head, wherever that is. 
FREEMAN: Say, Lieutenant. Seeing as you're giving them away, can I have one? 
UHURA: Sure, why not? I think they're old enough. (to all) Go ahead.

[Corridor]

CHEKOV [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Mister Baris waiting is on channel E to speak to you, sir. 
KIRK: Pipe it down here will you, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Aye, sir. Mister Baris is coming on. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Baris. What can I do for you?

[Lurry's office]

BARIS: Kirk, this station is swarming with Klingons.

[Corridor]

KIRK: I was not aware, Mister Baris, that twelve Klingons constitutes a swarm.

[Lurry's office]

BARIS: Captain Kirk, there are Klingon soldiers on this station. Now, I want you to keep that grain safe.

[Corridor]

KIRK: Mister Baris, I have guards around the grain. I have guards around the Klingons. The only reason those guards are there is because Starfleet wants them there. As for what you want (pauses at a look from Spock) It has been noted and logged. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: Captain, may I ask where you'll be? 
KIRK: Sickbay with a headache.

[Sickbay]

(There are eleven fluffy tribbles of various sizes and colour in a large container.) 
MCCOY: Hi, Jim. 
KIRK: Bones, what have you got for a headache? 
MCCOY: Let me guess. Klingons? Baris? 
KIRK: Both. How many of these did Uhura give you? 
MCCOY: Just one. 
KIRK: But you've got, er, eleven. 
MCCOY: You noticed that, huh? Here. This ought to take care of it. 
KIRK: How do they? How do they? 
MCCOY: I haven't figured that out yet, but I can tell you this much. Almost fifty percent of the creature's metabolism is geared for reproduction. Do you know what you get if you feed a tribble too much? 
KIRK: A fat tribble. 
MCCOY: No. You get a bunch of hungry little tribbles. 
KIRK: Well, Bones, all I can suggest is you open up a maternity ward.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: All you men going on shore leave to stay in groups. Avoid trouble with the Klingons. 
SCOTT: I'll tell them before they go, sir. 
KIRK: Aren't you going on shore leave, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Why, no, sir. 
KIRK: I want you to go on shore leave. Make sure that everybody stays out of trouble. 
SCOTT: But, Captain. Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, enjoy yourself.

[K7 Bar]

(Business is good. Scott, Chekov and Freeman take the last vacant table. Two security men leave and Jones enters, whistling.) 
JONES: Ah, friend. Can I offer you a charming little tribble? 
SCOTT: Uh, no, thanks. 
JONES: Oh. Perhaps one of you other gents? 
(No reply) 
JONES: Ah, friend Klingon. Can I interest you in a harmless tribble? 
(The tribble screeches.) 
KORAX: Get it away from me. 
JONES: I'm sorry. I can't understand it. I've never seen them act this way before. 
KORAX: Get out of here with that parasite. 
JONES: He's only a harmless little 
KORAX: Take it away! 
JONES: Yes. Ah, my good friend. How would you like to enter another little transaction? This time, a tribble for a spot 
BARMAN: A tribble. 
JONES: Indeed. 
BARMAN: (starts producing tribbles from all over the place and putting them on the bar) A tribble? 
(The pretty lady in yellow brings our group their drinks.) 
SCOTT: When are you going to get off that milk diet, lad? 
CHEKOV: This is vodka. 
SCOTT: Where I come from, that's soda pop. This is a drink for a man. 
CHEKOV: Scotch? 
SCOTT: Aye. 
CHEKOV: It was invented by a little old lady from Leningrad. 
(Korax goes over to the bar and shares his drink with Jones.) 
KORAX: The Earthers like those fuzzy things, don't they? 
JONES: Oh, yes. 
KLINGON: Frankly, I never liked Earthers. They remind me of Regulan blood worms. 
CHEKOV: That Cossack. 
SCOTT: Easy, lad. You ought to be more forgiving. 
KORAX: No. I just remembered. There is one Earthman who doesn't remind me of a Regulan blood worm. That's Kirk. A Regulan blood worm is soft and shapeless, but Kirk isn't soft. Kirk may be a swaggering, overbearing, tin-plated dictator with delusions of godhood, but he's not soft. 
(Chekov leaps to his feet) 
SCOTT: Take it easy, lad. Everybody's entitled to an opinion. 
KORAX: That's right, and if I think that Kirk is a Denebian slime devil, well that's my opinion too. 
SCOTT: Don't do it, mister, and that's an order. 
CHEKOV: You heard what he called the captain. 
SCOTT: Forget it. It's not worth fighting for. We're big enough to take a few insults. Now, drink your drink. 
(swaps Chekov's vodka for Freeman's red wine.) 
KORAX: Of course, I'd say that Captain Kirk deserves his ship. We like the Enterprise. We, we really do. That sagging old rust bucket is designed like a garbage scow. Half the quadrant knows it. That's why they're learning to speak Klingonese. 
CHEKOV: Mister Scott! 
SCOTT: Laddie, don't you think you should rephrase that? 
KORAX: You're right, I should. I didn't mean to say that the Enterprise should be hauling garbage. I meant to say that it should be hauled away as garbage. 
(There's a fight, of course. Scott's first right cross sends Korax flying over a table. After that, it's the Klingons versus Starfleet, with the barman beating a retreat and Jones taking the opportunity to help himself to drinks from the dispensing machine. Finally he decides to leave with his spoils and is about to enjoy his last glass when the Security guards rush in followed by the Barman, who takes the glass just before it reaches Jones' lips. So he takes another out of his pocket instead.)

Captain's Log, stardate 4525.6. A small disturbance between the Klingon crew and members of the Enterprise crew has broken out aboard Space Station K7. I am forced to cancel shore leave for both ships.

[Briefing room]

(Ten men are lined up. Chekov has a nice bruise on his cheek.) 
KIRK: I want to know who started it. I'm waiting. Freeman, who started the fight? 
FREEMAN: I don't know, sir. 
KIRK: All right. Chekov. I know you. You started it, didn't you? 
CHEKOV: No, sir, I didn't. 
KIRK: Who did? 
CHEKOV: I don't know, sir. 
KIRK: I don't know, sir. I want to know who threw the first punch. All right. You're all confined to quarters until I find out who started it. Dismissed. (the men file out) Scotty, not you. You were supposed to prevent trouble, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. 
KIRK: Who threw the first punch, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Um. 
KIRK: Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: I did, Captain. 
KIRK: You did, Mister Scott? What caused it, Scotty? 
SCOTT: They insulted us, sir. 
KIRK: Must have been some insult. 
SCOTT: Aye, it was. 
KIRK: You threw the first punch. 
SCOTT: Aye. Chekov wanted to, but I held him back. 
KIRK: You held? Why did Chekov want to start a fight? 
SCOTT: Well, the Klingon, sir. Is this off the record? 
KIRK: No, this is not off the record. 
SCOTT: Well, Captain, the Klingons called you, uh a tin-plated, overbearing, swaggering dictator with delusions of godhood. 
KIRK: Is that all? 
SCOTT: No, sir. They also compared you with a Denebian slime devil. 
KIRK: I see. 
SCOTT: And then they said you 
KIRK: I get the picture, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: After they said all this, that's when you hit the Klingons? 
SCOTT: No, sir. 
KIRK: No? 
SCOTT: No, I didn't. You told us to avoid trouble. 
KIRK: Oh, yes. 
SCOTT: And I didn't see that it was worth fighting about. After all, we're big enough to take a few insults. Aren't we? 
KIRK: What was it they said that started the fight? 
SCOTT: They called the Enterprise a garbage scow, sir. 
KIRK: I see. And that's when you hit the Klingons? 
SCOTT: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: You hit the Klingons because they insulted the Enterprise, not because they 
SCOTT: Well, sir, this was a matter of pride. 
KIRK: All right, Scotty. Dismissed. Scotty, you're restricted to quarters until further notice. 
SCOTT: (big grin) Yes, sir. Thank you, sir. That'll give me a chance to catch up on my technical journals.

[Sickbay]

(There are a lot more than eleven tribbles now.) 
MCCOY: What's the matter, Spock? 
SPOCK: There's something disquieting about these creatures. 
MCCOY: Don't tell me you've got a feeling. 
SPOCK: Don't be insulting, Doctor. They remind me of the lilies of the field. They toil not, neither do they spin. But they seem to eat a great deal. I see no practical use for them. 
MCCOY: Does everything have to have a practical use for you? They're nice, soft, and furry, and they make a pleasant sound. 
SPOCK: So would an ermine violin, but I see no advantage in having one. 
MCCOY: It's a human characteristic to love little animals, especially if they're attractive in some way. 
SPOCK: Doctor, I am well aware of human characteristics. I am frequently inundated by them, but I've trained myself to put up with practically anything. 
MCCOY: Spock, I don't know too much about these little tribbles yet, but there's one thing that I have discovered. 
SPOCK: What is that, Doctor? 
MCCOY: I like them better than I like you. 
SPOCK: Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes? 
SPOCK: They do have one redeeming characteristic. 
MCCOY: What's that? 
SPOCK: They do not talk too much. If you'll excuse me, sir.

[Bridge]

(Kirk walks to his chair, preoccupied by his last conversation. When he sits, there is a squeak. He has sat on a large tribble. Then he notices that there are fluffy balls everywhere.) 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy, would you mind coming up to the bridge? (he takes a walk around then) Lieutenant Uhura, how did all these tribbles get on the bridge? 
UHURA: I don't know, sir. They do seem to be all over the ship. 
(McCoy enters, stroking a tribble.) 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Yes? Did you want to see me, Jim? Don't look at me. It's the tribbles who are breeding. If we don't get them off this ship, we're going to be hip deep in them. 
KIRK: Explain that. 
MCCOY: The nearest thing I can figure out is they're born pregnant, which seems to be quite a time saver. 
KIRK: I know, but really 
MCCOY: And from my observations, it seems they're bisexual, reproducing at will. And, brother, have they got a lot of will. 
SPOCK: Captain, I am forced to agree with the doctor. I've been running computations on their rate of reproduction. The figures are taking an alarming direction. They're consuming our supplies and returning nothing. 
UHURA: But they do give us something, Mister Spock. They give us love. Well, Cyrano Jones says a tribble is the only love that money can buy. 
KIRK: Too much of anything, Lieutenant, even love, isn't necessarily a good thing. 
UHURA: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Get the maintenance crew to clean up the entire ship, and then contact Mister Lurry and tell him I'm beaming down. 
UHURA: Aye, aye. 
KIRK: Have him find Cyrano Jones and hold him. 
UHURA: Aye. 
KIRK: And get these tribbles off the bridge. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, Captain.

[Lurry's office]

JONES: Captain Kirk, I'm mystified at your tone of voice. I've done nothing to warrant such severe treatment. 
KIRK: Oh, really? 
SPOCK: Surely you must have realised what would happen if you removed the tribbles from their predator-filled environment into an environment where their natural multiplicative proclivities would have no restraining factors. 
JONES: Of course. What did you say? 
SPOCK: By removing the tribbles from their natural habitat, you have, so to speak, removed the cork from the bottle and allowed the genie to escape. 
JONES: If by that, you mean do they breed quickly? Of course, that's how I maintain my stock. Breeding animals is not against regulations, only breeding dangerous ones. And tribbles are not dangerous. 
KIRK: Just incredibly prolific. 
JONES: Precisely, and at six credits a head, well, that is, a body, it mounts up. Now if you'll excuse me. 
KIRK: You should sell an instruction and maintenance manual for this thing. 
JONES: If I did, what would happen to man's search for knowledge? Well, I must be tending my ship. Au revoir. 
(He meets Baris and Darvin at the door.) 
DARVIN: Go ahead, sir. Tell him. 
BARIS: Captain Kirk, I consider your security measures a disgrace. In my opinion, you have taken this important project far too lightly. 
KIRK: On the contrary, sir. I think of this project as very important. It is you I take lightly. 
BARIS: I am going to report fully to the proper authorities that you have given free and complete access to this station to a man who is quite probably a Klingon agent. 
KIRK: That's a serious charge. To whom are you referring? 
BARIS: To that man who just walked out of here. 
KIRK: Cyrano Jones, a Klingon agent? 
BARIS: You heard me. 
KIRK: I heard you. 
SPOCK: He simply could not believe his ears. 
KIRK: What evidence do you have against Mister Jones? 
BARIS: My assistant here has kept Mister Jones under close surveillance for quite some time, and his actions have been most suspicious. I believe he was involved in that little altercation between your men and the men from 
KIRK: Yes, yes. Go on. What else do you have? 
DARVIN: Well Captain, I've checked his ship's log, and it seems that he was within the Klingon's sphere of influence less than four months ago. 
BARIS: The man is an independent scout, Captain. It is quite possible he is also a Klingon spy. 
SPOCK: We have already checked on the background of Mister Cyrano Jones. He is a licensed asteroid locator and prospector. He's never broken the law, at least not severely. For the past seven years, with his one-man spaceship, he's obtained a marginal living by engaging in the buying and selling of rare merchandise, including, unfortunately, tribbles. 
BARIS: But he is after my grain! 
KIRK: Do you have any proof of that? 
DARVIN: You can't deny he's disrupted this station. 
KIRK: People have disrupted stations before without being Klingon agents. Sometimes, all they need is a title, Mister Baris. Unfortunately, disrupting a space station is not an offence. Now, if you'll excuse me, I have a ship to tend to. Au revoir.

[Rec room]

(There are tribbles on the walls, the floor, the tables, even as chess pieces. Kirk gets a tray from the food dispenser. It has tribbles on it.) 
KIRK: My chicken sandwich and coffee. This is my chicken sandwich and coffee. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: I want these off the ship. I don't care if it takes every man we've got, I want them off the ship. 
(Scott enters, carrying an armful of fluff.) 
SCOTT: They're into the machinery, all right, and they're probably in all the other food processors too. 
KIRK: How? 
SCOTT: Probably through one of the air vents. 
SPOCK: Captain, there are vents of that type on the space station. 
KIRK: And in the storage compartments. (goes to a table monitor) This is Kirk. Contact Manager Lurry and Nilz Baris. Have them meet us near the storage compartments. We're beaming down. Come on, Spock.

[Transporter room]

(The tribbles are all over the pads too. Kirk picks one up but there's nowhere else to put it.) 
KIRK: Energise. 

[Lurry's office]

LURRY: What's wrong? 
KIRK: Plenty, if what I think's happened has happened.

[Storage compartments]

KIRK: Is that door secure? 
GUARD: Yes, sir. Nothing could get in. 
KIRK: Good. Open it. 
GUARD: It's not working, sir. It seems to be stuck. 
KIRK: Here. Let me try it. 
(But he can't open it either, so he tried one of the overhead doors instead. That does open, and a whole load of tribbles fall out, burying the gallant Captain up to his shoulders. Spock examines one.) 
SPOCK: They seem to be gorged. 
BARIS: Gorged? On my grain? Kirk, I am going to hold you responsible. There must be thousands of them. 
KIRK: Hundreds of thousands. 
SPOCK: One million seven hundred seventy one thousand five hundred sixty one. That's assuming one tribble, multiplying with an average litter of ten, producing a new generation every twelve hours over a period of three days. 
KIRK: That's assuming they got here three days ago. 
SPOCK: And allowing for the amount of grain consumed and the volume of the storage compartment. 
BARIS: Kirk, you should have known. You are responsible for turning the development project into a total disaster. 
KIRK: Mister Baris 
BARIS: And I'm through being intimidated, Kirk. You have insulted me, you have ignored me, you've walked all over me. You have abused your authority, and you've rejected my requests. And this, this is the result. I'm going to hold you responsible. 
KIRK: Mister Baris, I'll hold you in irons if you don't shut up. 
MCCOY: Jim, I think I've got it. All we have to do is quit feeding them. We quit feeding them, they stop breeding. 
KIRK: Now he tells me. 
SPOCK: Captain this tribble is dead. And so are these. 
MCCOY: A lot of them are dead. A lot of them are alive, but they won't be for long. 
SPOCK: The logical assumption is that there is something in the grain. 
KIRK: Yes. Bones, I want the tribbles, the grain, everything analysed. I want to know what killed these tribbles. 
MCCOY: I haven't figured out what keeps them alive yet. All right, if I find out anything, I'll let you know. (leaves) 
BARIS: That isn't going to do you any good, Kirk. This project is ruined, and Starfleet is going to hear about it. And when they do, they will have a board of inquiry and they will roast you alive. And I am going to be there, Kirk, to enjoy every minute of it. 
KIRK: Until that inquiry, I'm still the captain. And as Captain, I want two things done. First, find Cyrano Jones, and second (as another tribble hits him on the head) close that door.

[Lurry's office]

(A security guard is picking up tribbles.) 
JONES: Really, Captain Kirk, I must protest this treatment. 
KIRK: Ah, Mister Jones, with an armful. A few questions. 
KOLOTH: Captain Kirk! 
KIRK: What do you want? 
KOLOTH: An official apology addressed to the Klingon High Command. I expect you to assume full responsibility for the persecution of Klingon nationals in this quadrant. 
KIRK: An apology? 
KOLOTH: Yes. You've harassed my men. You've treated them like criminals. You've been most uncourteous, Captain Kirk. If you wish to avoid a diplomatic incident 
BARIS: No, Kirk. You can't let him. That will give them the wedge they need to claim Sherman's Planet. 
SPOCK: I believe that more than the word of an aggrieved Klingon commander would be necessary for that, Mister Baris. 
KOLOTH: Mister Spock, as far as Sherman's Planet is concerned, Captain Kirk has already given it to us. 
KIRK: Well, we'll see about that, but before I take any official action, I'd like to know Just what happened. Who put the tribbles in the quadrotriticale? What was in the grain that killed them? 
KOLOTH: Captain Kirk, before you go on, may I make a request? 
KIRK: Yes. 
KOLOTH: Can you get those things out of here? 
(The guards take Jones' tribbles from him. They get to the door as Darvin enters, and the tribbles shriek.) 
SPOCK: Remarkable. 
KIRK: Hold on a minute. I thought you said tribbles liked everybody. 
JONES: They do. I can't understand it. The last time I saw one act this way was at the bar. 
KIRK: What was in the bar? 
JONES: Klingons. Him, for one. (points at Korax) 
(Kirk takes two tribbles from the guards and brings them near Korax. They shriek.) 
KIRK: You're right, Mister Jones. They don't like Klingons. (McCoy enters) But they do like Vulcans. I didn't know you had it in you. 
SPOCK: Obviously tribbles are very perceptive creatures, Captain. 
KIRK: Obviously. Mister Baris, they like you. Well, there's no accounting for taste. (and back to Darvin) They don't like you, Mister Darvin. I wonder why. Bones? 
MCCOY: (scanning him) Heartbeat is all wrong. His body temperature is. Jim, this man is a Klingon. 
BARIS: A Klingon? 
KIRK: I wonder what Starfleet Command will say about that. What about the grain, Bones? 
MCCOY: Oh, yes. It was poisoned. 
BARIS: Poisoned? 
MCCOY: Yes. It's been impregnated with a virus. The virus turns into an inert material in the bloodstream. The more the organism eats, the more inert matter is built up. So after two or three days, they reached a point where they couldn't take in enough nourishment to survive. 
KIRK: They starved to death. In a storage compartment full of grain, they starved to death. 
MCCOY: That is essentially it. 
KIRK: Mister Darvin, are you going to talk? 
DARVIN: I have nothing to say. (Kirk thrusts the tribbles into his face) All right, I poisoned the grain! Take them away. 
KIRK: And the tribbles had nothing to do with it? 
DARVIN: I don't know. I never saw one before in my life, and I hope I never see one of those fuzzy miserable things again. 
BARIS: I'm certain that can be arranged, Darvin. Guards? If you'll excuse me, Captain. 
(Baris leaves with the security guards and Darvin.) 
KIRK: Captain Koloth. About that apology. 
KOLOTH: Yes? 
KIRK: You have six hours to get your ship out of Federation territory. 
(The tribbles shriek, Koloth makes a hasty bow and practically runs out of the room with Korax.)
KIRK: You know, I think I could learn to like tribbles.

[K7 Bar]

(The face of an unhappy barman peers out from a pile of tribbles.) 
JONES: Well, Captain, I suppose I'm free to go now. 
KIRK: No, you're not. There's something I want to show you. You know what the penalty is for transporting an animal proven harmful to human life? 
JONES: Captain, one little tribble isn't harmful. Captain, you wouldn't do a thing like that to me, now would you? Would you? 
SPOCK: The penalty is twenty years in a rehabilitation colony. 
JONES: Captain Kirk. Friend. Friend Kirk. Surely we can come to some sort of mutual understanding. After all, my tribbles did put you wise to the poisoned grain, and they did help you to find the Klingon agent. You saved a lot of lives that way. 
KIRK: There is one thing you can do. 
JONES: Yes? 
KIRK: Pick up every tribble on the space station. If you do that, I'll speak to Mister Lurry about returning your spaceship. 
JONES: It would take years. 
SPOCK: Seventeen point nine, to be exact. 
JONES: Seventeen point nine years. 
KIRK: Consider it Job security. 
JONES: Captain, you're a hard man. All right! All right! 
KIRK: You'll do it?
SPOCK: He'll do it. 
JONES: I'll do it. 
(He starts stuffing tribbles into his many pockets.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain, Starfleet was able to divert that freighter. 
KIRK: Good. That means Sherman's Planet will get its quadrotriticale only a few weeks late. I don't see any tribbles around here. 
MCCOY: And you won't find a tribble on this entire ship. 
KIRK: Bones, how did you do it? 
MCCOY: I cannot take credit for another man's work. Scotty did it. 
KIRK: Scotty! Where are the tribbles? 
SCOTT: Oh, er, Captain, it was really Mister Spock's recommendation. 
KIRK: Of course. Spock. 
SPOCK: Based on computer analysis, of course, taking into account the possibilities of 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I don't want to interrupt this mutual admiration society, but I'd like to know where the tribbles are. 
MCCOY: Tell him, Spock. 
SPOCK: Well, it was Mister Scott who performed the actual engineering. 
KIRK: Mister Scott. Where are the tribbles? 
SCOTT: I used the transporter, Captain. 
KIRK: You used the transporter? 
SCOTT: Aye. 
KIRK: Where did you transport them? Scott, you didn't transport them into space, did you? 
SCOTT: Captain Kirk, that'd be inhuman. 
KIRK: Where are they? 
SCOTT: I gave them a good home, sir. 
KIRK: (shouting) Where? 
SCOTT: I gave them to the Klingons, sir. 
KIRK: (a whisper) You gave them to the Klingons? 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. Before they went into warp, I transported the whole kit and caboodle into their engine room, where they'll be no tribble at all.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Wolf In The Fold
Stardate: 3614.9
Original Airdate: 22 Dec, 1967

[Cafe]
(A woman is doing a belly-dance, complete with finger-cymbals, while the patrons lounge on cushions. The audience are appreciating the show.) 
SCOTT: Captain, I think I'm going to like Argelius. 
KIRK: Obviously a man of good taste. 
SCOTT: You mean to tell me all these women, that all this is 
KIRK: Yes, yes, yes. The Argelians think very highly of their pleasure. 
MCCOY: That's an understatement if I ever heard one. This is a completely hedonistic society. 
KIRK: Do you like her, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Aye. Why shouldn't I? 
KIRK: Good. I've invited her to join us at the table. I thought you might like to meet her. 
SCOTT: Now that's what I call a real Captain. Always thinking of his men. 
(The dancer comes over, bends over backwards then does a shimmy before returning to the small stage to finish. Scotty bangs on the table in applause.) 
KIRK: Scotty, Scotty. In Argelius they use the lights. 
SCOTT: Now no one has to tell an old Aberdeen pub-crawler how to applaud, Captain. 
(She comes over, but the man at the next table doesn't look too pleased with the situation.) 
KIRK: Have one of our pillows? 
(The man leaves as she sits.) 
SCOTT: 'Tis a fine foggy night tonight, and I doubt if anyone's ever told you of the marvellous fogs we have in Aberdeen. 
KARA: Never a word, but I'm dying to learn. 
SCOTT: Well then, why don't I show you? There's nothing like a walk in the fog with a bonny lass. 
KARA: Or a handsome gentleman. Why don't we? 
SCOTT: You don't mind, do you? I might even get back to the ship on time. 
KIRK: We won't leave without you, Scotty. Relax and enjoy yourself. (Scott and Kara leave) My work is never done. 
MCCOY: My work, Jim. This is prescription stuff. Don't forget, the explosion that threw Scotty against a bulkhead was caused by a woman. 
KIRK: Physically he's all right. Am I right in assuming that? 
MCCOY: Oh, yes, yes. As a matter of fact, considerable psychological damage could have been caused. For example, his total resentment toward women. 
KIRK: He seems he's overcoming his resentment. 
MCCOY: Of course, in my professional opinion, when he gets back to the ship, he's going to hate you for making him leave Argelius. But then he will have lost total resentment toward women. 
KIRK: Mission accomplished as far as Scotty is concerned. Bones, I know a little place across town where the women 
MCCOY: Oh yes. I know the place. Let's go.

[Street]

(The fog hangs very low on Argelius - somewhere just below knee level. Couples are meandering along lost in each other. Kirk works out which way to go, then suddenly - a scream splits the night. They run towards it and find the dancer on the ground.) 
MCCOY: She's dead, Jim. 
KIRK: Stabbed, a dozen times. 
(And standing by a wall, groaning, with a bloody knife in his hand, is Montgomery Scott.

Captain's log, stardate 3614.9. Planet Argelius Two. While on therapeutic shore leave, Mister Scott has fallen under suspicion of having brutally murdered an Argelian woman. The chief city administrator, Mister Hengist, has taken charge of the investigation, but has learned little of value.

[Cafe]

HENGIST: (a neat man in a suit) I don't know what to say, gentlemen. Argelius is the last planet in the galaxy I'd expect a thing like this to happen. 
KIRK: We're just as shocked as you are, Mister Hengist. 
HENGIST: If this was my home planet, Rigel Four, I'd have a dozen investigators working on the matter, but they don't exist here. 
MCCOY: You're not a native of Argelius, sir? 
HENGIST: Oh, no. Argelius hires its administrative officers from other planets. The Argelians aren't very efficient, you know. Gentle, harmless people. Mister Scott. Mister Scott? Now, are you sure you've never seen this before? (the knife) 
SCOTT: I, I don't remember. 
HENGIST: Really, sir. That is hardly helpful. 
KIRK: Scotty, you left the cafe with the girl. Do you remember that? What happened next? 
SCOTT: We were walking in the fog. I was up ahead trying to lead the way. I heard the girl scream. I remember starting to turn. I don't remember another thing. 
KIRK: Scotty, you've got to remember. 
MCCOY: Jim. (they move off a little way) If he says he can't remember, he probably doesn't. You know Scotty. 
KIRK: I know a murder's been committed. 
MCCOY: You don't think by any chance that Scotty 
KIRK: It doesn't make any difference what I think. 
MCCOY: But you don't just throw him to the wolves. 
KIRK: Bones, I have a diplomatic responsibility. This happened under Argelian jurisdiction. If they want to arrest him, try him, even convict him, I have to go along with it. 
MCCOY: But he's suffering from a severe concussion. 
KIRK: We'll do what we can. 
HENGIST: It's not promising, Captain. Mister Scott insists he remembers nothing, but my detector readings indicates that only his fingerprints are on the murder weapon. 
KIRK: Yes. Mister Hengist, there were other people in the cafe about the time of the murder. Several of them left just before Mister Scott and the girl did. 
HENGIST: So I've been informed by the staff. They're being located and we will question them. But the outlook for your friend is quite grim. 
KIRK: What's the law in these cases? 
JARIS: The law of Argelius is love. 
(An elegant grey-haired man enters, with a woman.) 
HENGIST: Gentlemen, our prefect, Jaris. Sir, Captain Kirk, Doctor McCoy. 
JARIS: And this is my wife, Sybo. 
HENGIST: And this man is Scott, the one I sent you the message about. 
JARIS: He does not look like a man capable of such an act. Still, it's been so long. Gentlemen, before our great awakening two hundred years ago, we had ways of learning the truth in such matters. We shall return to them. 
MCCOY: The Argelian empathic contact? 
JARIS: You know of this? 
KIRK: Yes, we've heard of it. I assumed it was a lost art. 
JARIS: My wife is a descendent of the ancient priestesses of our land. She has the ancestral gift. Gentlemen, I have come to invite you to my home. 
HENGIST: Prefect, don't you think this should be handled in an official manner through my office? 
JARIS: It shall be handled in an official manner, Mister Hengist, since I am the highest official. Gentlemen, let us proceed to my home where, with the aid of my wife, we shall learn the truth. Please.

[Jaris' home]

(The middle eastern theme continues with spiral columns, onion-dome arches, latticed windows and plenty of cushions.) 
KIRK: Depending on your wife's empathic abilities is all very well, Prefect, but there's only one way we can find out what it is Mister Scott cannot remember. Since you find it impossible to let us go back up to our ship, I can beam down a technician with a psycho-tricorder. 
MCCOY: Prefect, it will give us a detailed account of everything that's happened to Mister Scott in the last twenty four hours. 
HENGIST: Oh, I'd advise against it, Prefect. This is purely an Argelian matter. 
JARIS: My wife must meditate for a time before she's ready. I see no reason why we should not use that time to good advantage. Very well, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Enterprise. Spock here.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: Mister Spock, beam down a technician with a psycho-tricorder, please. Use these co-ordinates.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Acknowledged. Co-ordinates received.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: Kirk out. 
MCCOY: Prefect, the psycho-tricorder will require privacy to be effective. 
JARIS: There is a small chamber below this room. Perhaps that will suffice. Captain, news of this frightful murder is spreading among my people. They're greatly disturbed. I have already heard talk of closing Argelius to space vehicles. 
KIRK: Well, that would be most unfortunate. Argelian hospitality is well-known, as well as its strategic importance as a space port. 
JARIS: Yes. I believe it's the only one in the quadrant. (hands out drinks) Captain. 
HENGIST: There are other people we should question. Perhaps I should go expedite their arrival here? 
JARIS: Yes, please do so, Mister Hengist. Anyone with any connection with this murder should be present at the ceremony. 
(A woman beams down as Hengist leaves.) 
KAREN: Lieutenant Karen Tracy reporting as ordered, Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, I want a twenty four hour regressive memory check made on Mister Scott. 
KAREN: Yes, Captain. Where shall I set up? 
JARIS: If you'll Just follow me, Lieutenant. 
(Jaris and Karen leave.) 
KIRK: Scotty, co-operate completely with Lieutenant Tracy. Maybe we'll clear this thing up. 
SCOTT: I certainly hope so, sir. I can't stand this not knowing. (leaves) 
MCCOY: Captain, under normal conditions, Scotty would have never done such a thing. 
KIRK: But that blow on the head. It could put all his previous behaviour patterns into the junk heap. 
MCCOY: Of course, there's another possibility. 
KIRK: Explain. 
MCCOY: Hysterical amnesia. When a man feels guilty about something, something too terrible to remember, he blots it out of his conscious memory. 
(Jaris returns and crosses to another doorway.) 
JARIS: Are you ready, Sybo? 
SYBO: I am ready. May I have the knife, please? 
JARIS: Certainly. Among other gifts, Sybo has the ability to receive impressions from inanimate objects. Do you have it, Captain? 
KIRK: The knife? No. 
JARIS: But I put it here when we arrived. It's gone. 
(A woman's scream fills the air.)

[Chamber]

(Karen Tracy is lying face down on the floor, and Scott is slumped unconscious in a chair.) 
KIRK: Scotty. 
MCCOY: She's dead, Jim. Just like the other one. 
KIRK: Stabbed over and over again.

[Jaris' home]

JARIS: (to Scott) Drink this. An Argelian stimulant, Doctor. Quite effective and quite harmless. 
MCCOY: Go ahead, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Lieutenant? Captain? Where's 
KIRK: Lieutenant Tracy is dead, Scott. You were found alone in the room. 
SCOTT: Dead? But I 
KIRK: What happened down there? 
SCOTT: I was sitting there. She was taking her readings, and now I'm sitting here. 
MCCOY: Is that all that happened? 
SCOTT: I tell you, I don't remember. I must have passed out. 
MCCOY: It could be, Jim. That head injury. 
KIRK: That head injury. Think, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Captain, I've been trying. I can't even believe this is really happening. 
KIRK: There's no way into that place from up here. Prefect, is there another entrance to that chamber? 
JARIS: Yes, there's a door that leads into the garden, but it's been locked for years. 
MCCOY: Locks can be picked, Jim. 
KIRK: Check it. 
(McCoy leaves and Hengist enters. He is accompanied by the man from the next table and one of the musicians.) 
HENGIST: Prefect, both of these men were at the cafe the night of the murder. 
KIRK: Where've they been during the past few minutes? 
HENGIST: Captain, if you don't mind please. 
KIRK: There's been another murder, Hengist. One of my crew. 
JARIS: The same as Kara. 
HENGIST: Why, that's terrible. (to the man from the next table) You, my men picked you up near there. What were you doing? 
MORLA: Please, I know nothing about it. I didn't kill anyone. 
HENGIST: Well, how was the girl killed? 
KIRK: Stabbed. And there's no sign of the weapon. 
HENGIST: If only I had facilities. 
KIRK: You. You were a musician at the cafe. You played for the murdered girl. 
TARK: Since she was a little girl, she danced for me. She was my daughter. Prefect, how could this thing have happened here? The man who did it must be found. He must be punished. 
KIRK: And you. You left the cafe before Scott and Kara. 
JARIS: Is this true? Who are you? 
MORLA: Morla of Cantaba Street, Prefect. I was there. I have nothing to hide. 
KIRK: Did you know Kara? 
TARK: Of course he knew her. They were to be married, but he behaved disgracefully. Unheard of. He was jealous of her. 
JARIS: That is very disquieting. 
MORLA: I know it was wrong, but I just couldn't help myself. I loved her, and when she went over to the table with these men, I could not stand to watch, so I left and went home. 
KIRK: Jealousy has often been a motive for murder. 
JARIS: Yes, I know. That is why the emotion is so strongly disapproved of here. 
MORLA: Prefect, I didn't kill anyone. I couldn't. 
JARIS: We shall see, Morla. 
MCCOY: Sorry, Jim. The lock may or may not have been picked. It would be hard to tell even with the tricorder. 
KIRK: Can you prove you went directly home? 
HENGIST: Captain, may I continue with the questions please? 
KIRK: Well get on with it, man. Just don't stand there. 
JARIS: Captain, Captain. You're behaving very much like a man who is desperately trying anything to save his friend. Would you be as desperate to save Argelius as a space port for your Starfleet? 
KIRK: Well of course I'm trying to save my friend, if he's innocent. And he hasn't been proven guilty. 
HENGIST: Need I remind you of the circumstances, Captain? In both cases, your friend Scott was discovered over the body and later claimed to remember nothing. 
SYBO: I am ready, Jaris. 
JARIS: Gentlemen, sit down please. 
(Everyone sits around the central brazier.) 
KIRK: On one condition, Prefect. That the room be sealed so that no one can leave or enter while the ceremony is going on. 
JARIS: (he flicks a row of switches and the doorways are closed) The room is sealed. 
SCOTT: Captain, you mean my neck is going to have to depend on some spooky mumbo jumbo? 
(Kirk's communicator beeps.) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain. May I have a word with you? 
KIRK: Yes. Excuse me, gentlemen. (moves away from the group) Yes, Mister Spock?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Concerning the situation you related to us. In my opinion, the Argelian empathic contact is an interesting phenomenon, but the technique is not sound enough to risk a man's life.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: What do you suggest, Mister Spock?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Simply that we beam Mister Scott on board the Enterprise and employ our computers to learn the truth.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: These are a proud people. They have their own customs, their own laws, and while we're here we're subject to them. It is absolutely imperative that this matter be resolved according to Argelian law. Is that clear?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Quite clear, Captain.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: I don't like it any more than you do, Spock, but there's nothing we can do about it. Kirk out, 
(Everyone is holding hands around the brazier.) 
SYBO: Let us begin. Let the circle not be broken. Concentrate upon the flame which burns upon the altar of truth. 
Yes, there is something here. Something terrible. I feel its presence. Fear, anger, hatred. Anger feeds the flame. Oh! Oh! There is evil here. Monstrous, terrible evil. Consuming hunger. Hatred of all that lives. Hatred of women. A hunger that never dies. It is strong, overpowering. An ancient terror. It has a name. Beratis, Kesla, Redjac! Devouring all life, all light. A hunger that will never die! Redjac! Redjac! 
(The lights go out, and she screams. When the lights come on again, the flame has gone out. Scott is standing holding Sybo in his arms, then he lets her go and she falls forward across McCoy's lap. There is a knife in her back. 
Later...)
KIRK: Three murders, and Scotty the only possible answer each time. 
MCCOY: I don't care what the circumstances indicate, Jim. Scotty simply could not have done it. 
KIRK: Normally, no, but that blow on his head could 
SCOTT: No, Captain. 
KIRK Scotty, I'm sorry. You don't even remember whether you did it or not. 
HENGIST: I agree with you, Captain. I'm perfectly satisfied Mister Scott is guilty. 
KIRK: But not responsible. 
HENGIST: That is unproven, sir. 
KIRK: We can prove it, if he's insane. 
JARIS: Gentlemen, please. How could any man do such monstrous things? 
KIRK: That's what we hope to find out, sir. 
JARIS: Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Sir, I swear to you I did not kill your wife or the other ladies. 
HENGIST: By your own admission, you don't know whether you did or didn't. Your so-called failing memory 
KIRK: Mister Hengist. On the Enterprise, we can make a recording of the registrations of Mister Scott's conscious and subconscious mind. They will tell us what happened to him in the recent past. 
MCCOY: There would be no room for doubt. We would know. And after all, that's what we're after, isn't it, Prefect? To know? 
JARIS: You, sir, claim to remember nothing about the murders. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
JARIS: If this is so, you may have killed without knowing it. Will your machines tell us this? 
KIRK: No doubt will remain. 
JARIS: Very well. We will go to your ship, and he who is guilty will face the ancient penalties, barbaric and horrible though they may be. The ancient penalty for murder was death by slow torture. That law has never been changed. Do you understand that, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Aye. I understand.

Captain's log, stardate 3615.4. With Mister Scott in a technical state of arrest, we have beamed aboard the Enterprise to continue the investigation.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Each testifier will sit here, place his hand on this plate. Any deviation from factual truth will be immediately detected and relayed to this computer which will in turn notify us. Doctor McCoy has already fed the computer his medical reports. Our laboratory experts are examining the murder weapon and will give their data to the computers for analysis. Shall we begin? 
(Jaris nods.) 
KIRK: Mister Scott, will you take the stand? 
(Scott sits on the raised chair and puts his right hand on the sensor plate. Yet at no time does the camera let us see all his finger.) 
KIRK: Computer, identify verification. 
COMPUTER: Working. Lieutenant Commander Montgomery Scott. Serial number SE-19754-T. Verified. 
KIRK: Subject's present physical condition. 
COMPUTER: Working. Subject recently received severe blow on skull. Damage healing. Some peripheral abnormalities. 
KIRK: Sufficient abnormalities to account for periods of functional amnesia? 
COMPUTER: Working. Negative. 
MCCOY: Captain, I don't see how that can be. 
KIRK: Unless Scotty's lying about his loss of memory. 
SCOTT: I'm not lying, Captain. I don't remember a thing about the first two murders. 
KIRK: Computer, accuracy scan. 
COMPUTER: Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes. 
SCOTT: Captain? I didn't black out when Mister Jaris' wife was killed. 
KIRK: All right, Scotty, let's have it. 
SCOTT: We were holding hands. When the lights went out, the circle was broken. I heard the poor lady scream, and as I was near the head of the table anyway I went toward her. But there was something in my way. 
KIRK: Something? You mean someone. 
SCOTT: No, Captain, some thing. Cold, it was, like a stinking draught out of a slaughterhouse, but it wasn't really there. Like it. (lost for words) If you know what I mean. 
KIRK: Computer. 
COMPUTER: Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes. 
KIRK: All right. Let's hit it on the head. Scotty, did you kill Sybo? 
SCOTT: No, Captain. That I'm sure of. 
HENGIST: He's been saying that right along. It means no more now than it did before. 
KIRK: Scotty, lie to me. How old are you? 
SCOTT: Twenty two sir. 
COMPUTER: Inaccurate. Inaccurate. Data in error. 
KIRK: After the lights went out, Mister Scott, who was holding your hand? 
SCOTT: Morla on the one side and you on the other, sir. 
MORLA: But that doesn't mean anything, Captain, with a room that small. The lights were out. Anyone would've had time to kill the lady. 
HENGIST: But I remind you we found Mister Scott holding her in his arms, the knife still (to Jaris) I'm sorry, sir, but I must. The knife still in her back and blood on his hands. 
KIRK: The verifier showed that he was telling the truth when he said he didn't kill her. 
HENGIST: There were two other women murdered. 
KIRK: Mister Scott. Did you kill Kara? 
SCOTT: I don't remember. 
KIRK: Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy? 
SCOTT: I don't remember. 
KIRK: Computer, accuracy scan. 
COMPUTER: Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes. 
JARIS: All that proves is that he's telling the truth when he says he doesn't remember. 
HENGIST: This is a waste of time. 
KIRK: After we take the testimony here, we'll run a psycho-tricorder analysis of Mister Scott's memory, which is what we wanted to do on the surface. That will give us a complete record. Will that satisfy you, Mister Hengist? 
HENGIST: Well, if you can convince me that the machine is incapable of error, and if it shows he did not kill the women. 
KIRK: There will be no error. As for the rest of it, the readings will show. You can step down, Mister Scott, if there are no objections. 
HENGIST: I object to the entire procedure. 
JARIS: Mister Hengist, we are here on my authority. We will co-operate. 
HENGIST: Prefect, I know you mean well, but I've had experience 
JARIS: For the time being, we will accept Captain Kirk's explanation of the machine's accuracy as factual. I do, however, reserve to myself the right to make the final determination. 
KIRK: We can ask no more. Mister Morla, will you take the stand? 
(He does so.) 
KIRK: Where were you at the time that Kara was murdered? 
MORLA: I'm not sure. Walking home, I assume. I was angry. 
SPOCK: Anger is a relative state, sir. Were you angry enough to do violence? 
MORLA: I've never done violence in my life. I don't think I could. You've got to believe me. I wouldn't kill her. I couldn't. I loved her, and she loved me. 
TARK: That's not true! He might think she loved him, but she didn't. She told me. He was jealous. All the time. They fought constantly. 
KIRK: Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy? 
MORLA: No. 
KIRK: Did you kill Sybo? 
MORLA: No. 
KIRK: Computer, verification scan. 
COMPUTER: Subject relaying accurate account, though some statements subjective. No physiological changes. 
KIRK: All right, Mister Morla, I think you can step down now. Sybo spoke of a hunger that never dies. Something that thrives on fear, terror, death. Mister Spock, maybe we're going about it in the wrong way. Let's assume that Sybo was a sensitive. That she did sense something, something evil. 
SPOCK: Sensitivity of certain Argelian women is a documented fact, Captain. 
JARIS: My poor Sybo's talent was genuine, gentlemen. What she told you was true. 
KIRK: All right, then, what was it she said, exactly? A monstrous evil, ancient terror. 
MCCOY: That devours all life and light. 
KIRK: She said something else, words that didn't make sense. 
MCCOY: Yes. Redjac, Beratis and, er, Kesla. 
KIRK: Obscure, meaningless words. 
SPOCK: To us, perhaps, but to the computer? 
KIRK: Ah. Mister Spock, check them out. 
SPOCK: Computer, linguistic bank. Definition of following word. Redjac. 
COMPUTER: Working. Negative finding. 
SPOCK: There is no such word in the linguistics bank? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. 
SPOCK: Scan all other banks. 
COMPUTER: Working. Affirmative. A proper name. 
SPOCK: Define. 
COMPUTER: Redjac. Source Earth, nineteenth century. Language, English. Nickname for mass murderer of women. Other Earth synonym, Jack the Ripper. 
KIRK: Jack the Ripper? 
HENGIST: That's ridiculous. He lived hundreds of years ago. 
TARK: A man couldn't survive all these centuries. 
JARIS: Just before she died, my wife said, it is a hunger that never dies. 
TARK: But all men die. 
KIRK: Yes, all men die. And Jack the Ripper couldn't be alive if he were a man. But everything we've uncovered points to Jack the Ripper, which is an impossibility, isn't it? Or is it? 
SPOCK: Humans and humanoids make up only a small percentage of the life forms we know of. There are entities possessed of extremely long life spans, virtually immortal. 
KIRK: We know that someone or something killed three women. If it's impossible for it to be human, it has to be something else. Something driven to kill. 
MCCOY: Sybo said it feeds on death. 
SPOCK: In the strict scientific sense, Doctor, we all feed on death. Even vegetarians. 
MCCOY: Yes, but she said more than that. Not just death, but fear. She said it also feeds on fear. 
SPOCK: Which would tend to support the proposition that the murderer was not human. Deriving sustenance from emotion is not unknown in the galaxy, and fear is among the strongest and most violent of the emotions. 
HENGIST: Surely, Prefect, this has gone far enough. Someone, some man has killed three women. We have the prime suspect in our hands. Are we going to let him go and start chasing ghosts? 
KIRK: No, Mister Hengist, not ghosts. Possibly not human, but not ghosts. Mister Spock, check out the possibilities. 
SPOCK: Computer, digest log recordings for past five solar minutes. Correlate hypotheses. Compare with life forms register. Question. Could such an entity within discussed limits exist in this galaxy? 
COMPUTER: The Drella of Alpha Carinae Five derives nourishment from the emotion of love. There is sufficient precedent for existence of creature, nature unknown, which could exist on emotion of fear. 
SPOCK: Computer, extrapolate most likely composition of such entity. 
SPOCK: Working. To meet with specified requirements, entity would exist without form in conventional sense. Most probable mass of energy of highly cohesive electromagnetic field. 
KIRK: Computer, could the described entity assume physical form? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. Precedent, mellitus, cloud creature of Alpha Majoris One. 
HENGIST: Fairy tales. Ghosts and goblins. 
KIRK: No, I've seen the mellitus myself. In its natural state, it's gaseous. When it's at rest, it's solid. Mister Spock, let's assume the existence of this creature. 
SPOCK: I point out that Jack the Ripper slew at will in the heart of the most populous city of old Earth and was never identified. 
KIRK: Doesn't seem likely, does it? 
SPOCK: I suggest the possibility of a hypnotic screen, which blinds all but the victim to the presence of the killer. 
JARIS: Is that possible? 
MCCOY: Extremely possible There are many such examples that exist in nature. 
HENGIST: This is fantasy! We all know the murderer is sitting right here. You're trying to cloud the issue. I've got a mind to 
JARIS: I am satisfied the course of this investigation is valid enough. Please be seated, Mister Hengist. 
KIRK: All right, Mister Spock, what do we have? A creature without form, that feeds on horror and fear, that must assume a physical shape to kill. 
SPOCK: And I suspect preys on women because women are more easily and more deeply terrified, generating more sheer horror than the male of the species. 
KIRK: Computer. Criminological files. Cases of unsolved mass murders of women since Jack the Ripper. 
COMPUTER: Working. 1932. Shanghai, China, Earth. Seven women knifed to death. 1974, Kiev, USSR, Earth. Five women knifed to death. 2105. Martian colonies. Eight women knifed to death. 2156. Heliopolis, Alpha Eridani Two. Ten women knifed to death. There are additional examples. 
SPOCK: Captain, those places are aligned directly between Argelius and Earth. 
KIRK: Yes. When man moved out into the galaxy, that thing must've moved with him. Computer, identify the proper names Kesla and Beratis. 
COMPUTER: Working. Kesla. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Deneb Two. Beratis. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Rigel Four. Additional data. Murders on Rigel Four occurred one solar year ago. 
(All heads turn towards Mister Hengist) 
KIRK: You come from Rigel Four. 
HENGIST: Well, many people do. It's not a crime. 
KIRK: No, but what we're investigating is. Would you mind taking the stand, Mister Hengist? 
HENGIST: I will not. 
JARIS: Mister Hengist. 
HENGIST: Prefect, this has gone far enough. I will not take the stand. 
SPOCK: I can appreciate your position, sir. You are in charge of civil disturbances locally. If you are the entity for which we search, what better position from which to kill with impunity? 
MCCOY: Just after you left Jaris' house, we discovered the murder knife was missing. 
KIRK: And you were unaccounted for when Lieutenant Tracy was murdered. 
SPOCK: An entity which feeds on fear and terror would find a perfect hunting ground on Argelius, a planet without violence, where the inhabitants are as peaceful as sheep. The entity would be as a hungry wolf in that fold. 
HENGIST: Gentlemen, I know something of the law. You're engaging in sheer speculation. 
KIRK: Perhaps. Mister Spock. The murder weapon. 
SPOCK: Computer. Report on analysis of Exhibit A. 
COMPUTER: Working. Exhibit A on visual. Composition of blade, boridium. Composition of handle, murinite. Details of carving on handle conform to folk art forms, indicating place of origin. 
SPOCK: Specify. Point of origin. 
COMPUTER: Artefact produced by hill people of Argus River region, planet Rigel Four. 
KIRK: Now then, Mister Hengist 
(But Hengist tries to make a break for it, even landing a very good kick on Kirk, who repays him with an even better right cross. Hengist falls to the floor.) 
MCCOY: He's dead, Jim. 
KIRK: But that's impossible. 
(The lights dim eerily.) 
VOICE [OC]: Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! (maniacal laughter) 
(The lights come back.) 
SPOCK: The computer will not respond to these controls. The entity is unquestionably controlling it. 
KIRK: And the computer controls the ship. 
VOICE [OC]: Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! 
MCCOY: Scotty, give me a hand. (They prop Hengist up on a chair, leaning against the table.) 
SPOCK: It's no use, Captain. The bypass circuits are blocked. 
KIRK: Audio cut off, Spock. 
SCOTT: Captain! 
(The viewscreen has an image of hot swirling flames or lava. Anyway, it is fear-inducing.) 
TANKRIS: (a lady yeoman) What's happening, Captain? 
JARIS: What does it mean? 
KIRK: It means that thing can control the entire operation of the ship, including the life support systems. 
MORLA: You mean it could kill us all? 
SPOCK: Indeed, it will try, but not immediately. We know it feeds on fear and terror. There are nearly four hundred and forty humans aboard this ship. Surely it will try to breed fear and terror before it kills. 
KIRK: All hands, this is the captain. Stay at your posts. Remain calm. Captain out. Bones. What's the sedative situation? 
MCCOY: I've got some stuff that would tranquillise an active volcano. 
KIRK: Good. Start distribution immediately. The longer we can hold back that fear, the more time we'll have to get that thing out of the computer. Prefect, you'll all be safer here. Spock, come with me.

[Corridor]

KIRK: Spock, don't you have a compulsory scan unit built into the computer banks? 
SPOCK: Yes we do, Captain, but with the entity in control 
KIRK: Aren't there certain mathematical problems which simply cannot be solved? 
SPOCK: Indeed. If we could focus the attention of the computer on one of them. 
KIRK: That ought to do it.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Spock! 
(The door nearly closes before he is inside.) 
SPOCK: Apparently our friends learned very quickly. 
KIRK: Too quickly. Bridge. 
(But the lights indicate they are going down quickly, not up.) 
SPOCK: Freefall! 
KIRK: Out of control. Put it on manual. Bridge. 
(They start going up, then an alarm goes off.) 
KIRK: That was due to be next. Life-support malfunction. 
SPOCK: We don't have much time, Captain. 
KIRK: You said it yourself, Spock. It wants terror, not just death.

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, the life-support system override jammed. 
KIRK: All right. Man your station, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
VOICE [OC]: Captain, you're wasting your time. 
KIRK: Cut that thing off. 
VOICE [OC]: You and all aboard your ship are about to die! 
KIRK: Try and cut that thing off. 
SULU: This is the first time I heard a malfunction threaten us. 
KIRK: Man your post, Mister Sulu. (to all the crew) Prepare your manual overrides. You may need them. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
(Kirk crouches down by Spock under the life-support station.) 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: Normal environmental levels have been restored, Captain, but it will not last long. A few hours at best. 
KIRK: That should be enough time. Let's get at it. 
SULU: What's going on, Captain? 
KIRK: Never mind, Mister Sulu. 
(A nurse enters.) 
KIRK: Tranquilliser? 
NURSE: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Everyone, including yourself. 
NURSE: Yes, sir. 
VOICE: You cannot stop me now, Captain. It will do you no good. I control all circuits. You cannot silence me. You cannot reach me. Your manual overrides are extremely limited in life. 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Proceeding, Captain, but I will need some time. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. 
VOICE [OC]: Soon all control will be restored to me! There is nothing you can do to prevent it! 
KIRK: If you destroy this ship, you destroy yourself. 
VOICE [OC]: I am without ending. I have existed from the dawn of time, and I shall I live beyond its end! In the meantime, I shall feed, and this time I do not need a knife. You will all die horribly in searing pain! 
SPOCK: It is attempting to generate terror, Captain. 
VOICE [OC]: I can cut off your oxygen and suffocate you! 
SULU: Captain? (gets his injection, and grins) Who ever he is, he sure talks gloomy. 
KIRK: Man your post, Mister. If any of the other systems go out, switch to manual override, and above all, don't be afraid. 
SULU: With an armful of this stuff, I wouldn't be afraid of a supernova. 
SPOCK: Ready. 
KIRK: Implement. 
SPOCK: Computer, this is a Class A compulsory directive. Compute to the last digit the value of pi. 
VOICE [OC]: No, no, no, no! No, no! 
SPOCK: As we know, the value of pi is a transcendental figure without resolution. The computer banks will work on this problem to the exclusion of all else until we order it to stop. 
KIRK: Yes, that should keep that thing busy for a while. The Argelians will be the first to panic. Let's get back to the briefing room. 
SULU: I wonder who it is we're not supposed to be afraid of.

[Briefing room]

(McCoy is in the process of inoculating the group. Scott feels no pain, that's for sure.) 
SCOTT: Well, sir? 
KIRK: I doubt very much whether the computers will be inhabited by more than a group of figures for a while. 
SPOCK: There is resistance, Captain, but the directive is succeeding. Bank after bank is turning to the problem. 
MCCOY: If you drive it out of the computers, it'll have to go somewhere else. 
KIRK: How are you doing? 
MCCOY: I'm almost finished. Just Jaris and me. 
(Maniacal laughter over the intercom.) 
SPOCK: Complete computer control, Captain. The entity has fled. 
KIRK: Yes, but where to? Bones, what would happen if that thing entered a tranquillised body? 
MCCOY: Well, it might take up knitting, but nothing more violent than that. 
KIRK: You say everyone's had a shot but you and Jaris? 
MCCOY: And you and Mister Spock, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, I'm willing to take a chance on Mister Spock. Better give yourself a shot, Doc. 
MCCOY: No, I don't think so. I think I ought to stay clear. 
KIRK: Do as I say. 
(McCoy injects himself.) 
KIRK: Extend your arm, Mister Jaris. 
JARIS: (grabs Kirk's throat) No, no, kill you all! Die! Make you suffer! 
(Spock administers a neck-pinch. Hengist comes back to life, snatches up the knife and grabs Yeoman Tankris.) 
HENGIST: Everybody keep back or I'll kill her! I'll kill her! Keep back! 
MCCOY: You'd better be careful. You're going to hurt somebody with that thing. 
(Hengist pushes his hostage at McCoy then tries to attack Kirk. He's easily defeated.) 
HENGIST: You'll suffer! You'll suffer. (Spock injects him) I'll kill all of you. 
KIRK: Let's get him to the Transporter Room, quick! 
HENGIST: You'll die, die, die. Everybody will die.

[Corridor]

(Kirk carries the giggling Hengist in a fireman's lift, while Spock follows.) 
HENGIST: Kill, kill, kill you all.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Deep space. Full power. Widest angle of dispersion. Maintain. 
KYLE: No need to get excited, Captain. I'll do it. 
(They lay Hengist on the pad.) 
KIRK: You do it, Spock. 
HENGIST: Everybody die. You'll all suffer. 
(He is beamed out.) 
KYLE: You didn't have to shove me, Mister Spock. I'd have gotten round to it. 
(McCoy and Scott enter, with big grins.) 
MCCOY: Well, Jaris is all right. 
SCOTT: What did you do with that thing, Captain? Did you send it back to the planet? 
KIRK: No. We beamed it out into open space, Scotty. Widest possible dispersion. 
MCCOY: That thing can't die. 
SPOCK: Possibly, Doctor. Its consciousness may continue for some time, consisting of billions of separate bits of energy, floating forever in space, powerless. 
KIRK: But it will die finally. You seem very happy about the whole thing. 
SCOTT: Why not? For a while there I didn't know whether I was innocent or guilty. 
KIRK: Bones, how long will it take for this tranquilliser to wear off? 
MCCOY: I don't know. Five or six hours. I gave them a pretty big shot, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, I can see that. Well Mister Spock, for the next five or six hours, we're going to have the happiest crew in space. Of course, we won't get much work done. 
SPOCK: Captain, since you came to Argelius to rest, I suggest you take advantage of the opportunity. 
KIRK: That's a splendid idea, Mister Spock. I know a cafe where the women are so 
MCCOY: I know the place, Jim. 
SCOTT: Let's go see! 
KIRK: You, gentlemen? In your condition? Don't be ridiculous. Mister Spock, this cafe has women that are so. (met with a Look) No, I guess not. Alone? 
(Kirk goes to the door and gestures for everyone to leave.) 
KIRK: Gentlemen. 

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Obsession
Stardate: 3619.2
Original Airdate: 15 Dec, 1967

[Planet surface]
(Kirk and Spock are standing by a large purple boulder.) 
SPOCK: Our scanner survey was correct, Captain. There it is. Pure tritanium. 
KIRK: Fantastic. 20 times as hard as diamond. 
SPOCK: Twenty one point four times as hard, to be exact. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. (into communicator) Scotty, you can mark this vein as confirmed. Inform Starfleet I recommend that they dispatch a survey vessel immediately. 
(Unseen by the landing party, a cloud of smoke is coming out of another rock and heading for them.) 
SCOTT [OC]: Acknowledged, Captain. They'll send one fast enough for this rich a find. 
SPOCK: We won't be able to break it, Captain. I'll phaser off a specimen. 
(He does so, and the smoke retreats.) 
KIRK: Lesley. 
(He is handed a pair of tongs to pick up the sample with.) 
KIRK: Do you smell that? A sweet odour like honey. It was years ago, on another planet. A thing with a an odour like that. 
SPOCK: We're in the growing season in this hemisphere of this planet. There are doubtless many pollen aromas. 
KIRK: Rizzo. 
RIZZO: Yes, sir? 
KIRK: Take your men. Make a swing around our perimeter. Scan for dikironium in the atmosphere. Set your phasers on disrupter-B. If you see any gaseous cloud, fire immediately. You're on Red Alert. Make a sweep. 
SCOTT [OC]: Ready to beam back aboard, Captain? 
KIRK: Negative, Scotty. We're checking something out. 
SCOTT [OC]: The USS Yorktown is expecting to rendezvous with us in less than eight hours, Captain. That doesn't give us much time. 
KIRK: Acknowledged. Continue standing by. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: Captain, dikironium exists only in laboratory experiments. 
KIRK: It's gone. I could have been wrong. The last time I caught an odour like that was eleven years ago.

[Clearing]

(The three red-shirts have run into a clearing.) 
RIZZO: Seemed to read dikironium for a minute, and then I lost it. It's almost like something out there knows I'm scanning it. It kind of keeps changing itself into something different. That isn't possible. Nothing can do that. 
(All together now - It's Behind You! The other two security men fall to the ground, choking in the cloud. Rizzo can't get a clear shot.)
RIZZO: Captain?

[Boulder]

KIRK: Kirk here.

[Clearing]

RIZZO: Captain.

[Boulder]

RIZZO [OC]: There's a strange cloud, sir.

[Clearing]

(It reaches him and he starts choking too) 
RIZZO: Cloud, cloud.

[Boulder]

KIRK: Fire into it immediately! 
RIZZO [OC]: Help me. Help!

[Clearing]

(But by the time they get there, the cloud has gone.) 
KIRK: Spock. Dead. And you'll find every red corpuscle gone from their body. 
SPOCK: Rizzo's alive, barely. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, lock in on us. Medical emergency. 
SPOCK: You think you know what it was, Captain? 
KIRK: Something that can't possibly exist, but it does.

Captain's log, stardate 3619.2. With the mysterious death of two crewmen, all personnel on the planet have been evacuated back to the ship.

[McCoy's office]

CHAPEL: Autopsy report, Doctor. 
KIRK: How's Ensign Rizzo? 
CHAPEL: Still unconscious, sir. 
MCCOY: Transfusions? 
CHAPEL: Continuing as rapidly as possible. His blood count is still sixty percent less than normal. (leaves) 
KIRK: Kirk to bridge. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: Spock here. Ready to leave orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Hold your position. 
SCOTT [on monitor]: Cutting in if I may, Captain. The USS Yorktown is expecting to rendezvous with us in less than seven hours. 
KIRK: Then you'll inform them that we might be a little late. 
MCCOY: Jim, the Yorktown's ship surgeon will want to know how late. Those vaccines he's transferring to us are highly perishable. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: Spock again, Captain. Those medical supplies are badly needed on planet Theta Seven. They are expecting us to get them there on time. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, we are remaining in orbit until I find out more about those deaths, on my responsibility. I am perfectly aware that it might cost lives on Theta Seven. Kirk out. Autopsy report. 
MCCOY: You saw their colour. There wasn't a red corpuscle left in their bodies. 
KIRK: Marks, cuts, incisions of any kind? 
MCCOY: Not a one. What happened is medically impossible. 
KIRK: I suggest you look at the record tapes of past similar occurrences. You'll find the USS Farragut lists casualties eleven years ago from exactly the same impossible causes. 
MCCOY: Thank you, Captain. I'll check those tapes immediately. 
KIRK: First, can you bring Ensign Rizzo to consciousness for a moment? 
MCCOY: Yes, but it 
KIRK: Will it hurt him if you do so? 
MCCOY: In his present condition, I don't think it would make much difference. 
KIRK: Then do so.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Transfusion completed, sir. His pulse and respiration are still far below normal. 
MCCOY: Give him one cc of cordazine, nurse. 
CHAPEL: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Rizzo. This is the captain. Can you hear me? Do you remember what happened to you? 
RIZZO: Remember. I'm cold. I'm so cold. 
KIRK: You were attacked by something. When it happened, did you notice an odour of any kind? Rizzo. Rizzo! Do you remember a sickly sweet odour? Did you smell it? 
RIZZO: Yes. Yes. A smell. A strange smell. It was like being smothered in honey. 
KIRK: Did you feel a presence, an intelligence? 
RIZZO: It was trying to draw strength from us. I felt it. It was, it was, it was there. 
MCCOY: He's beginning to sleep again. I can't risk another shot. 
KIRK: He's already told me what I wanted to know. 
MCCOY: I wouldn't depend too much what he says in that half-conscious state. He could be dreaming, saying what he thought you wanted to hear. 
KIRK: You check those record tapes. I want your medical analysis as quickly as possible. (leaves) 
CHAPEL: What's with the captain? I've never seen him like that before. 
MCCOY: I intend to find out. I'll be in the medical record library.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Oh, Captain. Subspace message from Starfleet. They're inquiring 
KIRK: Not now. Have the security duty officer report to me immediately. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Continuing scanning. Still no readings of life forms on the planet. 
KIRK: Let's assume that it's something so completely different that our sensors wouldn't identify it as a life form. 
SPOCK: You mentioned dikironium, Captain. 
KIRK: Suppose it was composed of that rare element. A strange, gaseous creature. 
SPOCK: I've scanned for that element, Captain. There's no trace of dikironium on the planet surface or in the atmosphere. 
KIRK: Suppose it camouflaged itself. Let's assume that it's intelligent, that it knows we're looking for it. 
SPOCK: To hide from a sensor scan, it would have to be able to change its molecular structure, like gold changing itself to lead or wood changing itself to ivory. 
KIRK: You've just suggested something that never occurred to me. It may provide some answers to a tape record which I think you'll find Doctor McCoy is looking at this very moment. 
SPOCK: Chekov, take over on scanner. 
(As Spock steps into the turbolift, Garrovick steps out onto the bridge.) 
GARROVICK: Ensign Garrovick reporting, sir. 
KIRK: Are you the new security officer? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Was your father 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir, but I don't expect any special treatment on that account. 
KIRK: You'll get none aboard this ship, Mister. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
UHURA: Captain, I have a report on Ensign Rizzo. He's dead, sir. 
KIRK: You knew Rizzo? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. We were good friends, graduated the Academy together. 
KIRK: You'll get a crack at what killed him. Interested? 
GARROVICK: Yes, I am, sir. 
KIRK: I want four men armed with phaser two set for disrupter effect. Join me in the transporter room in five minutes. You'll accompany me to the planet surface. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir.

[Planet surface]

GARROVICK: Reading is changing, sir. 
KIRK: Spock was right. Notice the molecular shift? 
GARROVICK: Dikironium reading now, sir. Bearing ninety four mark seven, angle of elevation six degrees. Holding steady. 
KIRK: Over that rise. Take two men, circle around to the left. I'll take the other two and go the other way. That creature is dangerous. If you see it, fire full phasers. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Swensen, Bardoli come with me. 
(Garrovick and his group go into a clearing, and the cloud emerges. Garrovick fires at it after a slight hesitation.) 
KIRK: A phaser! Come on! (arriving at the scene) Garrovick, did you? 
(But then he sees the other two security men, lying on the ground, skin pale as snow.)

Captain's log, stardate 3619.6. One of the men in critical condition, the other is dead. And I, I am now even more convinced that this is not only an intelligent creature, but the same which decimated the crew of the USS Farragut eleven years ago in another part of the galaxy. Both Spock and McCoy are doubtful of this, and I sense they also doubt my decision to stay and fight the thing. Why am I keeping the ship here?

[Briefing room]

(Kirk is already there when Spock, McCoy and Garrovick enter.) 
KIRK: Mister Garrovick, we've studied your report. Mister Spock, begin. 
SPOCK: What was the size of the thing you saw, Ensign? 
GARROVICK: I'd say it measured from ten to sixty cubic metres, sir. It varied in size, fluctuated as it moved. 
SPOCK: Composition? 
GARROVICK: It was like a, a gaseous cloud. Parts of it I could see through. Other parts were more dense. 
MCCOY: Ensign, did you sense any intelligence in this gaseous cloud? 
GARROVICK: Did I what, sir? 
MCCOY: Did you get any subconscious impressions that this was a creature. A living, thinking thing, rather than just a strange cloud of chemical elements? 
GARROVICK: No, sir. 
KIRK: But you didn't come to actual contact with it, did you? 
GARROVICK: No, sir. I was furthest away from it. It seemed to come out of nowhere, hovered for a moment, then moved toward my men. It was fast, incredibly fast. 
KIRK: Did you say it hovered? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: You did fire at it, didn't you? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir, I did. 
KIRK: What distance were you from the creature? 
GARROVICK: About twenty yards, sir. 
KIRK: You fired at a large, hovering target at that distance and missed? 
GARROVICK: Yes. I, er, well, I didn't fire while it was hovering, sir. 
KIRK: You mean you froze? 
GARROVICK: No, sir. I didn't exactly freeze. 
KIRK: What exactly were you doing? 
GARROVICK: Well, I was startled for a second. And then by the time I fired, the thing was already moving. 
KIRK: Do you have any further information? 
GARROVICK: No, sir. 
KIRK: Do you gentlemen have any further questions? 
GARROVICK: I only hesitated for a moment, sir. I'm sorry. 
KIRK: Ensign, you're relieved of all duties and confined to quarters until further notice. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. (leaves) 
MCCOY: You were a little hard on the boy, Jim. 
KIRK: He froze. One man was killed. Another may die. 
SPOCK: Captain, scientifically 
KIRK: You'll both be filing reports. Make your comments and recommendations then.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain, while we're waiting I've taken the liberty of cleaning the radioactive disposal vent on number two impulse engine, but we'll be ready to leave orbit in under half an hour. 
KIRK: We're not leaving orbit, Mister Scott. Not that quickly. 
UHURA: Captain, the Yorktown requesting information on how soon we expect to rendezvous with them. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
SCOTT: The medicine for Theta Seven colony is not only needed desperately and has limited 
KIRK: I'm aware of the situation, Engineer, and I'm getting a little tired of my senior officers conspiring against me. Forgive me. Perhaps I shouldn't have used the word conspire. 
SCOTT: Agreed, sir. 
KIRK: Scanner readings? 
CHEKOV: Nothing, sir. Continuing to scan. 
KIRK: Are you aware it can change its molecular structure? 
CHEKOV: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Are you scanning for any unusual movement? 
CHEKOV: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Any type of gaseous cloud? 
CHEKOV: We've run a full scanner probe twice. 
KIRK: Then run it twenty times if that's what it takes!

[McCoy's office]

SPOCK: I hope I'm not disturbing you, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Interrupting another autopsy report is no disturbance, Mister Spock. It's a relief. 
SPOCK: I need your advice. 
MCCOY: Then I need a drink. 
SPOCK: I do not understand your reasoning. 
MCCOY: You need advice from me? You must be kidding. 
SPOCK: I do not joke, Doctor. Perhaps I should rephrase my statement. I require an opinion. There are many aspects of human irrationality I do not yet comprehend. obsession, for one. The persistent, single-minded fixation on one idea. 
MCCOY: Jim and his creature? 
SPOCK: Precisely. Have you studied the incident involving the USS Farragut? 
MCCOY: No. With all these deaths and injuries, I've only had a chance to scan the tapes. There are eight or ten hours of record tape there. 
SPOCK: Fortunately, I read somewhat faster. In brief, Doctor, nearly half the crew and the captain were annihilated. The captain's name was Garrovick. 
MCCOY: The same as our Ensign. 
SPOCK: His father. Among the survivors was a young officer on his first deep-space assignment, James T. Kirk. And there is still more. I suggest you study this.
(Spock hands over a record tape.)

[Kirk's quarters]

(The Captain is lying on his bed, staring at the ceiling) 
KIRK [OC]: Personal log, stardate 3620.7. Have I the right to jeopardise my crew, my ship for a feeling I can't even put into words? No man achieves Starfleet command without relying on intuition, but have I made a rational decision? Am I letting the horrors of the past distort my judgment of the present? 
MCCOY: Mind if I come in? 
(Kirk gets up and goes to his desk.) 
KIRK: Kirk to bridge. Scanning report. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Continued scanning, sir. No unusual readings. 
KIRK: Maintain search. Kirk out. It can't have just vanished. 
MCCOY: Sometimes they do, if we're lucky. Monsters come in many forms. You know the greatest monster of them all, Jim? Guilt. 
KIRK: Get to the point. 
MCCOY: Jim, When a young officer is exposed to unknown dangers for the first time, he's under tremendous emotional stress. Now we all know that. 
KIRK: Ensign Garrovick is a ship-command decision. You're straying out of your field, Doctor. 
(He returns to his bed.) 
MCCOY: Am I? I was speaking of Lieutenant James T. Kirk of the starship Farragut. Eleven years ago, you were the young officer at the phaser station when something attacked. According to the tapes, this young Lieutenant Kirk insisted upon blaming himself. 
KIRK: Because I delayed in firing at it. 
MCCOY: You had a normal emotion. You were startled. You delayed firing for a grand total of perhaps two seconds. 
KIRK: If I hadn't delayed, it would have been killed. 
MCCOY: The ship's exec didn't seem to think so. His log entry was quite clear on the subject. Lieutenant Kirk is a fine young officer who performed with uncommon bravery. 
KIRK: Don't you understand? It killed two hundred crewmen. 
MCCOY: Captain Garrovick was very important to you, wasn't he, Jim? 
KIRK: Yes. He was my commanding officer from the day I left the Academy. One of the finest men I ever knew. I could have killed that thing if I'd fired soon enough the first time. 
MCCOY: You don't know that, Jim. You don't know that any more than you know that Garrovick could have destroyed it. 
KIRK: I can't help how I feel. There's an intelligence about it, Bones. A malevolence. It's evil. It must be destroyed. 
MCCOY: To be so obsessed. 
KIRK: Obsessed? 
MCCOY: That you could destroy yourself, your career, a young boy who reminds you of yourself eleven years ago. 
KIRK: Don't push our friendship past the point where I have to take official 
MCCOY: I'm not, Jim. This is professional, Captain. I am preparing a medical log entry on my estimation of the physical and emotional condition of a starship captain. Which requires a witness of command grade. 
(McCoy goes to the door and opens it to admit Spock.) 
KIRK: Do I take it, Doctor, Commander, that both of you or either of you consider me unfit or incapacitated? 
SPOCK: Correctly phrased, Captain. As recommended in the manual. Our reply, also as recommended, is, sir, we have noted in your recent behaviour certain items, which, on the surface, seem unusual. We respectfully ask permission to inquire further 
KIRK: Blast it! Forget the manual! Ask your questions. 
SPOCK: Sir, the USS Yorktown is waiting now at the rendezvous point. It carries perishable drugs 
KIRK: Skip the recitation, Spock. I know the facts. 
MCCOY: They need those vaccines on Theta Seven, Captain. Now why are we delaying here? 
KIRK: Because I'm convinced that this is the same creature that attacked the Farragut eleven years ago. 
SPOCK: Creature, Captain? 
KIRK: My report is on the tapes. As it attacked us eleven years ago, as I lost consciousness, I could feel the intelligence of the thing. I could sense it thinking, planning. 
SPOCK: You say you could sense its intelligence, Captain? How did it communicate with you? 
MCCOY: You state that it happened just as you lost consciousness. A semiconscious mind is a very tricky thing. A man never knows how much is real or how much is imagination. 
KIRK: Whatever it is, Doctor, whatever it is, wouldn't you call it deadly? 
MCCOY: Yes, there's no doubt about that. 
KIRK: And what if it is the same creature that attacked eleven years ago from a planet over a thousand light years from here? 
SPOCK: Obviously, Captain, if it is an intelligent creature, if it is the same one, if it therefore is capable of space travel, it could pose a great threat to inhabited planets. 
KIRK: A lot of ifs, I agree, but in my command judgment, they out weigh other factors. Intuition, however illogical, Mister Spock, is recognized as a command prerogative. 
MCCOY: Jim, we're not trying to gang up on you. 
KIRK: And you haven't, Doctor. You've expressed the proper concern, you've asked the proper questions. You've both done your duty. Now may I ask what medical log entry you intend to make? 
MCCOY: At this point, my medical log remains open. 
KIRK: In that case, gentlemen 
CHEKOV [OC]: Bridge to Captain. Come in. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
CHEKOV: I have a reading on the whatever it is, Captain. Leaving the planet surface, heading into space. 
KIRK: All decks, Red Alert. Red alert. Prepare to leave orbit.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain, we can't maintain warp eight speed much longer. Pressures are approaching the critical point. 
KIRK: Range, Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV [OC]: Point zero four light years ahead. Our phasers won't reach it, sir. 
SPOCK: We are barely closing in on it, Captain. We could be pursuing it for days. 
KIRK: If necessary. Do what you can to increase our speed, Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Extreme magnification, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Magnification twelve. There, sir. Got it. 
KIRK: Spock, how do you read that? 
SPOCK: Conflicting data, Captain. It seems to be in a borderline state between matter and energy. Elements of both. It could possibly use gravitational fields for propulsion. 
KIRK: And you don't find that sophisticated, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Extremely efficient, Captain. Whether that indicates intelligence is another matter. 
CHEKOV: Open hatch on impulse engine number two. Mister Scott was doing an AID clean-up on it. 
KIRK: We won't be using the impulse engines. Turn the alarm off. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. 
SCOTT: Captain, we can't do it. If we keep this speed, we'll blow up any minute now. 
(Scott looks frantic, Spock almost concerned, everyone else is worried. Kirk looks as if he might burst into tears of frustration.) 
KIRK: Go to warp six.

[Garrovick's quarters]

CHAPEL: Hi. Everyone else is at alert station, so I brought you some dinner. 
GARROVICK: I'm not hungry. 
CHAPEL: Doctor's orders. 
GARROVICK: What's happening? 
CHAPEL: Are we still chasing that thing half way across the galaxy? Yes. Has the captain lost his sense of balance? Maybe. Is the entire crew about ready to explode? Positively. You're lucky you're out of it. 
GARROVICK: What do you mean, out of it? I caused it. You know that, too, don't you? If I'd fired my phaser quickly enough on Argus Ten, this wouldn't have happened. 
CHAPEL: You know, self-pity's a terrible first course. Why don't you try the soup instead? 
GARROVICK: I told you, Christine, I'm not hungry. 
CHAPEL: Doctor McCoy thought you might say something like that. This is his officially logged prescription for you. It has one word on it. Eat. Now if you don't follow his orders, Doctor McCoy could and possibly would have you hauled down to Sickbay and fed intravenously. 
(She leaves, carrying the record tape.)

[McCoy's office]

(Chapel puts the record tape in McCoy's in-tray.) 
MCCOY: What's that? 
CHAPEL: Hmm? (picks up the tape again) This? 
MCCOY: (reading) A survey on Cygnian Respiratory Diseases? I thought you took Garrovick some food. What were you doing with this? 
CHAPEL: Applying psychology.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: The creature is slowing. It's down to warp two. 
KIRK: Reduce speed. Approach slowly. 
CHEKOV: I don't understand. It was outrunning us. 
KIRK: Maybe it's decided to fight. Phasers ready? 
CHEKOV: Phasers show ready, sir.

[Garrovick's quarters]

(Garrovick takes the lid off his meal and throws it across the room. It knocks the switch on his ventilation filter to 'bypass'.) 
KIRK [OC]: Battle stations. All decks to battle stations. This is not a drill. All decks to battle stations. 
(Garrovick dashes out into the corridor.)

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: It's coming to a full halt, sir. Magnification one. 
KIRK: Move in closely, Mister Chekov. Sublight one quarter speed. 
GARROVICK: Captain, request permission to return to my post. 
(He is totally ignored.) 
CHEKOV: Within phaser range, sir. 
KIRK: Lock all phasers on target. 
CHEKOV: Locked on target. 
KIRK: Fire phasers, Mister Chekov. 
(The beams of deadly light go straight through the cloud.)
CHEKOV: Phasers ineffectual, sir. 
KIRK: Photon torpedoes. Minimum spread pattern. 
CHEKOV: Minimum pattern ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire photon torpedoes. 
(The ship is rocked by the blasts at such close quarters.) 
UHURA: There. It's coming, sir. 
KIRK: Deflectors up. 
CHEKOV: Deflectors up, sir. 
SPOCK: The deflectors will not stop it, Captain. 
SCOTT: That's impossible. 
SPOCK: I should have surmised this. For the creature to be able to use gravity as a propulsive force, it would have to have this capacity. 
CHEKOV: Five seconds to contact. All hatches and vents secure. All lights on the board show green. Sir! The number two impulse vent! we have a red light! 
KIRK: (over Chekov's speech) Lieutenant Uhura, all decks (rest of speech lost under Chekov's increasing volume) 
SCOTT: Captain, something's entered through the number two impulse vent. 
KIRK: Negative pressure in all ship's vents. Alert all decks.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Report. 
SCOTT: When it entered impulse engine number two's vent, it attacked two crewmen. It then got into the ventilating system, and now we have air for only two hours. 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: One man has a chance for survival. The other is dead. You can add that little price tag to your monster hunt. 
KIRK: That's enough, Bones. 
MCCOY: It's not enough! You didn't care as long as you could hang your trophy on the wall. Well, it's not on it, Captain, it's in it.
SPOCK: May I suggest that we no longer belabour the question of whether or not we should have gone after the creature. The matter has now been rendered academic. The creature is now after us. 
MCCOY: Creature, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: It turned and attacked, Doctor. Its method was well-considered and intelligent. 
KIRK: Yes, well, it could have been many light years away from us. Instead it chose to turn and attack here. Why? 
SPOCK: Impossible to tell, Captain, until I can make a closer survey of the creature. 
KIRK: Scotty, try flushing the radioactive waste into the ventilation system. See what effect that has. 
SCOTT: Aye. (leaves) 
MCCOY: I'm sorry, Jim. I was wrong. (leaves) 
SPOCK: Captain, the creature's ability to throw itself out of time sync makes it possible for it to be elsewhere in the instant the phaser hits. There is therefore no basis for your self-recrimination. If you had fired on time and on target eleven years ago, it would have made no more difference than it did an hour ago. Captain Garrovick would still be dead. The fault was not yours, Jim. In fact, there was no fault. 
KIRK: If you want to play analyst, Spock, use someone else, not me. My concern is with the ship and the crew.

[Garrovick's quarters]

GARROVICK: Come in. 
SPOCK: Ensign, am I correct in my assumption that you've been disturbed by what you consider to be a failure on your part? (a nod) I would like you to consider that the hesitation for which you are blaming yourself is an hereditary trait of your species. When suddenly faced by the unknown or imminent danger, the human will experience a split second of indecision. He hesitates. Do I have your attention, Ensign? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: I know you would prefer to wallow in emotion rather than 
GARROVICK: Mister Spock, it's very kind of you to come here 
SPOCK: Kindness, Mr. Garrovick, is another human emotion, and I believe we have enough of that. I simply would like you to accept the fact that your reaction has its basis in physio. (suddenly stops and sniffs) Do you smell something? 
GARROVICK: Sir, it's coming through the vent. 
SPOCK: Get out of here! I'll attempt to seal it off. 
(Spock literally throws Garrovick out into the corridor. He then goes to the vent, but the damaged switch breaks off in his hand.)

[Corridor]

GARROVICK: (into intercom) Sir, the creature's in my cabin. It's got Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

KIRK: On my way, Garrovick. Security to three four one. Medical alert. Scotty, reverse cabin pressure three four one. 
(He does so, and the gas is sucked back into the vent.)

[Corridor]

KIRK: Security, hold it. Tricorder. 
MCCOY: Jim, Spock may be dying. 
KIRK: If we let that thing into the ship, he'll have a lot of company. 
GARROVICK: I must have jammed the vent control when I hit it. 
KIRK: See if the reverse pressure has pulled it back into the ventilation system. 
GARROVICK: He saved my life, Captain. I should be lying dead in there, not him. 
(The cabin door opens.) 
SPOCK: Fortunately, neither of us is dead, Ensign. The reverse pressure worked. The vent is closed. 
KIRK: Don't misunderstand my next question. Mister Spock, why aren't you dead? 
MCCOY: It's that green blood of his. 
SPOCK: My haemoglobin is based on copper, not iron. 
MCCOY: I'll bet he left a bad taste in the creature's mouth, too. 
SPOCK: Colloquially expressed, but essentially correct. 
KIRK: Yes. The scent is different. I think I understand something now. 
SPOCK: Do you believe you're in communication with the creature? 
KIRK: I don't know what it is, Mister Spock, but you remember I said the thing was alive. It may not be communication as we understand it, but I did know it was alive and intelligent, and I think I know something else now. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering to Captain Kirk. Engineering to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott, Captain. The creature's moving back toward the number two impulse vent. The radioactive flushing may be affecting it. 
KIRK: Open the vent. On my way to the bridge. Kirk out. Ensign Garrovick. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: You were on the bridge when we were attacked. 
GARROVICK: Yes, I'm sorry, sir. I know I was confined to quarters, but when the alert sounded 
KIRK: Very commendable, Ensign. What was your impression of the battle? 
GARROVICK: I don't understand, sir. 
KIRK: I'm asking for your military appraisal of the techniques used against the creature. 
GARROVICK: Ineffective, Captain. I realise, Captain, you did everything you could do. I know that. It's just that nothing works against a monster that can do the things that thing does. 
KIRK: And Ensign, what is your appraisal of your conduct on the planet? 
GARROVICK: I delayed firing. 
KIRK: If you hadn't delayed firing? No difference, Ensign. No weapon known would have made any difference. Then or eleven years ago. Report for duty, Ensign. 
GARROVICK: Yes, Captain. Thank you, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Report, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Results positive, Captain. The creature has left the ship at high warp speed and is already nearly out of scanner range. The way that thing can move, Captain, I wouldn't believe it. 
KIRK: Direction, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: It was bearing one two seven mark nine, but I've lost it now. 
KIRK: (into intercom) Mister Scott, I'll need all the speed you can deliver. Keep at it until we begin to shake apart. Kirk out. I believe I know where it's going. 
SPOCK: It has changed course before to mislead us, Captain. Logic would dictate that 
KIRK: No, I'm playing intuition. Mister Chekov, compute a course for Tychos star system. 
CHEKOV: Computed and on the board. 
KIRK: Ahead full. 
CHEKOV: Ahead full, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, contact Starfleet and the USS Yorktown. 
UHURA: Frequency open and clear, sir. 
KIRK: Inform them that we are pursuing the creature to planet four of that system. That's the location of its attack on the USS Farragut eleven years ago. 
SPOCK: I do not understand, Captain. 
KIRK: In Garrovick's quarters, I said the scent of the creature was somehow different. Something in my mind said home. 
SPOCK: And you know where home is, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes, I think I do. I don't know how I know, but home is where it fought a starship once before. Ito Uhura) Inform them of our tactical situation and inform them I'm committing this vessel to the destruction of the creature. We will rendezvous. Round-trip time, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: One point seven days, sir. 
KIRK: We will rendezvous with the USS Yorktown in forty eight hours. 
(later) 
MCCOY: I assume that you now believe we should pursue the creature and destroy it. 
SPOCK: Precisely. 
KIRK: You don't agree with Mister Spock? 
MCCOY: It's the time factor that bothers me. Those drugs are perishable. 
SPOCK: Doctor, evidence indicates the creature is here to spawn. If so, it will reproduce by fission, not just into two parts, but thousands. 
KIRK: Antimatter seems our only possibility. 
SPOCK: An ounce should be sufficient. We can drain it from the ship's engines and transport it to the planet surface in a magnetic vacuum field. 
KIRK: Contact medical stores. I want as much haemoplasm as they can spare in the transporter room in fifteen minutes. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: I presume you intend to use that haemoplasm to attract the creature? 
KIRK: We must get it to the antimatter. It seems attracted to red blood cells. What better bait could we have? 
SPOCK: There is still one problem, Captain. 
KIRK: The blast, yes. 
SPOCK: Exactly. A matter-antimatter blast will rip away half the planet's atmosphere. If our vessel is in orbit and encounters those shock waves 
KIRK: A chance we'll have to take, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Also, we cannot be certain the transporter will operate under those conditions. If a man is beaming up when that hits, we may lose him. 
KIRK: That's exactly why I've decided to set the trap myself. 
SPOCK: Captain, there is so little hemoglobin in my green blood, the creature could not harm me extensively. It therefore seems logical for me to be the one 
KIRK: Negative, Mister Spock. In case this plan fails, I'll need you aboard the ship. In that event, we'll need another plan. 
SPOCK: It will require two men to transport the antimatter unit. 
GARROVICK: I'd like permission to go with you, sir. 
KIRK: I had you in mind, Mister Garrovick.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk, Garrovick and a blue ball under a floating carrying device beam down.) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain. 
KIRK: Proceed immediately to maximum orbit. 
SPOCK [OC]: Acknowledged. 
GARROVICK: Just think, Captain, less than one ounce of antimatter here is more powerful than ten thousand cobalt bombs. 
KIRK: Let's hope it's as powerful as man will ever get. Detonator. 
GARROVICK: Aye, sir. 
(He primes and sets it on the anti-grav unit.) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Spock here, Captain. Holding at thirty thousand kilometres.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Antimatter container positioned and armed. I'll call you back when it's baited. Kirk out.
GARROVICK: Captain, look! 
(The cloud is already over the bottle of blood. Within moments it is empty.) 
GARROVICK: The haemoplasm. The bait's already taken. 
KIRK: We'll need something else for bait. 
GARROVICK: Sir, that thing only feeds on blood. 
KIRK: Garrovick, get back to the ship. Tell them to prepare to detonate. 
GARROVICK: Captain, you're not going to be the bait. 
KIRK: I said, get back to the ship. Ensign, I gave you an order. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
(A quick karate chop knocks Kirk down but not out. He lands a couple of punches on Garrovick.) 
KIRK: Consider yourself on report. This is no time for heroics. I have no intention of sacrificing myself, at least not yet. (into communicator) Spock? Spock? 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here. 
KIRK: Scan us and lock on to us. It's going to be close. Very, very close. Stand by. Stand by, Enterprise. 
(The cloud approaches.) 
GARROVICK: I can smell it, Captain. It's sickening. Honey sweet. 
KIRK: Stand by, Enterprise. (The cloud reaches them) Now! Energise and detonate! 
(BANG!)

[Transporter room]

(Spock and Scott are at the controls with McCoy watching.) 
SPOCK: Reset. Energise. 
CHEKOV [OC]: All decks, stand by. Shock waves. 
(The ship is shaken, and still nothing appears on the transporter pad.) 
MCCOY: Do something. 
SPOCK: We are, Doctor. Cross-circuiting to A. 
SCOTT: Got them. A piece of them, anyway. 
SPOCK: Cross-circuiting to B. 
MCCOY: Crazy way to travel, spreading a man's molecules all over the universe. 
(Finally the swirly bits solidify into two men.) 
SCOTT: Captain, thank heaven. 
SPOCK: Mister Scott, there was no deity involved. It was my cross-circuiting to B that recovered them. 
MCCOY: Well then, thank pitchforks and pointed ears. As long as it worked, Jim. 
KIRK: That's a fair statement, Bones. Now that the creature is dead, let's save some lives. We'll deliver your medicine. Bridge, this is Kirk. 
UHURA [OC]: Uhura here. 
KIRK: Have Mister Chekov lay in a course for a rendezvous with the Yorktown, maximum warp. 
UHURA [OC]: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Oh, Ensign, meet me in my quarters when you've cleaned up. I'd like to talk to you about your father. Several tall stories I think you'd like to hear. 
GARROVICK: Thank you, sir. I would.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Deadly Years
Stardate: 3478.2
Original Airdate: 8 Dec, 1967

[Settlement]
(Kirk, Spock, McCoy, Scott, Chekov and Galway beam down to a group of pre-fabricated buildings. The sky is orange.) 
KIRK: Where is everyone? 
MCCOY: Perhaps they weren't expecting us. 
SPOCK: Our arrival was scheduled well in advance, Doctor. The annual check of every scientific expedition is routine. 
KIRK: I had a subspace contact with a Robert Johnson, the leader of this expedition, an hour ago. 
MCCOY: Did he report anything wrong? 
KIRK: No, yet there was something wrong. I can't pin it down. His conversation was disjointed, his thoughts a little foggy, unrelated. Chekov, check that building. Mister Spock and I will check this one. The rest of you, take a look around. See if you can find anyone. 
(Chekov goes into the dark building - it has no windows - and the light comes on as he bumps up against a table bearing the body of a very old man. He panics and runs out again.) 
CHEKOV: Captain! Captain! Captain! Captain! 
KIRK: What is it? 
CHEKOV: A man, sir. In there. A dead man.

[Building]

(Again, the lights only come on when the party reaches the table in the middle of the room.) 
KIRK: Well? 
MCCOY: Exactly what it looks like. Death by natural causes. Old age. 
SPOCK: Quite impossible, Doctor. I ran a personnel check on this expedition before we beamed down. I assure you that none of them were 
(He is interrupted by the entrance of an old man and woman. ROBERT: (to the woman) They've come to pay their respects to Alvin. 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk of 
ROBERT: You'll have to speak louder. 
KIRK: I say I'm Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise. Who are you? 
ROBERT: I'm Robert Johnson. This is my wife, Elaine. 
KIRK: How old are you? How old are you? 
ROBERT: I'm, er, let me see. I am twenty nine, and Elaine is 
ELAINE: I'm twenty seven.

Captain's log, stardate 3478.2. On a routine mission to re-supply the experimental colony at Gamma Hydra Four, we discovered a most unusual phenomenon. Of the six members of the colony, none of whom were over thirty, we found four had died and two were dying of old age.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Mister Johnson, can you hear me? 
ROBERT: I can hear you. Not deaf yet, you know. Not yet. 
KIRK: Can you tell me what happened? 
ROBERT: What happened? 
KIRK: Did your instruments show anything? 
ROBERT: Elaine was so beautiful. So beautiful. So beautiful. 
MCCOY: He can hear you, Jim, but he doesn't understand. Let's let him rest. 
KIRK: (to nurse) If they seem lucid, I'll be in the briefing room.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Stay seated. Commodore Stocker, I've asked you to be part of this briefing because Gamma Hydra Four falls in your administrative area. 
STOCKER: I appreciate that, sir. 
KIRK: Doctor Wallace, as an expert in endocrinology, I'd appreciate you working very closely Doctor McCoy. 
WALLACE: (a young blonde woman in a pink dress) Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy, would you fill them in? 
MCCOY: The expedition is suffering from extreme old age, and they're growing older by the minute. Much older. My examinations have turned up absolutely nothing. In fact, I don't have a clue. 
KIRK: What about the atmosphere and environment, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Sensors reveal nothing which is inimical to human life. The atmosphere screens out the usual amount of harmful cosmic rays. 
KIRK: We're close to the neutral Zone between our Federation and the Romulan empire. It's possible the Romulans have a new weapon and are using this colony as guinea pigs. 
SPOCK: I have already begun investigation into that possibility, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. I want you all to check out everything in your own departments. No matter how remote, how far-fetched the notion, I want it run down. We'll stay in orbit until we have the answer. 
STOCKER: I'm sure you understand that I'm anxious to get to Starbase Ten to assume my new post. 
KIRK: Yes, Commodore. We'll do everything we can to make sure you make your duty. 
STOCKER: Thank you, sir. 
(Everyone leaves, but Doctor Wallace remains seated.) 
KIRK: Doctor, is there something I can do for you? 
WALLACE: Well, be a little less the cool, efficient Captain and a little more the old friend. 
KIRK: How long has it been? 
WALLACE: Six years, four months, and an odd number of days. You mean you don't know? 
KIRK: Well, it's been a long time. Things wouldn't change if it started all over again, would it? You have your job, I have my ship, and neither one of us will change. 
WALLACE: You said it. I didn't. In all those years, I only heard from you once. A stargram when my husband died. You know, you never asked me why I got married after we called it off. 
KIRK: Well, I supposed that you met someone you loved. 
WALLACE: I met a man I admired. A great man. 
KIRK: And in your field as you. You didn't give up a thing. 
WALLACE: No. Just you. 
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk, Mister Spock would like to see you on the Bridge. 
KIRK: I'm on my way.

[Bridge]

SULU: Standard orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Maintain. 
SPOCK: I've rechecked the sensors, Captain. Gamma Hydra Four checks out as a Class M planet with a conventional oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere and normal mass. I can find nothing at all out of the ordinary. 
KIRK: What about the comet that astrophysics reported? 
SPOCK: We're checking it on it. I've reached no conclusions as yet. The comet was a rogue and has never been investigated. 
STOCKER: Captain Kirk? 
KIRK: Yes, Commodore. 
STOCKER: Facilities at Starbase Ten are much more complete than those on board ship. It seems to me that your investigations would be facilitated if we proceeded there. I assure you all co-operation. 
KIRK: Thank you. You're anxious to get to the base, but we have a few facilities of our own here. I think the Enterprise will do quite nicely. I'll be in engineering, Mister Spock. Maintain standard orbit, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: You already gave that command, sir. 
KIRK: Oh? Well, follow it.

[Sickbay]

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Lieutenant Galway. 
GALWAY: (a petite woman) Doctor, may I speak to you for a moment, please? 
MCCOY: Of course. Go right ahead. 
GALWAY: I know this is going to sound foolish, but I seem to be having a little trouble hearing. 
MCCOY: It's probably nothing important. 
GALWAY: I never had trouble before. 
MCCOY: Well, don't worry about it. Perhaps a little hypersonic treatment might clear it up. 
GALWAY: Thank you.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Progress report, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: All research lines negative, Captain. 
KIRK: Astronomical section reports that a comet recently passed by. Check into that. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: I'm doing that, Captain, as per your previous order. We discussed that earlier. 
KIRK: Oh, yes. Let me know what you come up with. I'll be in the Sickbay. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: Acknowledged. 
(Kirk turns to put on a clean shirt and jerks, putting a hand to his back.)

[Sickbay]

(McCoy and Chapel are putting a sheet over the face of a patient.) 
MCCOY: The last one. Robert Johnson. Cause of death, old age. 
KIRK: You did what you could. 
MCCOY: Which adds up to absolutely nothing.

[McCoy's office]

SCOTT [OC]: Doctor McCoy, this is Scott. May I come see you? 
MCCOY: All you need are vitamins, but you can come up anyhow. 
KIRK: Bones, I believe you're getting grey. 
MCCOY: You take over my job and see what happens to you. 
KIRK: I see what you mean. 
MCCOY: What's your problem, Jim? 
KIRK: Shoulder. Just a twinge. Probably muscular strain. 
MCCOY: You're probably right, Doctor. By the way, I don't like how you've been running this ship lately. 
KIRK: All right. Reprimand received. Go ahead. 
(McCoy scans his arm, then takes hold of a finger. Kirk pulls back in pain.) 
MCCOY: Jim, I think we better'd run a complete physical on you. 
KIRK: Why? Just muscular strain, isn't it? 
MCCOY: No, Jim. It's advanced arthritis, and it's spreading. 
KIRK: That's impossible. 
MCCOY: I can run it through again, but I'll come up with the same thing. 
(Scott enters, his hair light grey and his face deeply lined.) 
KIRK: Scotty!

Captain's log, stardate 3579.4. The Enterprise personnel who beamed down to the planet's surface, Doctor McCoy, Engineer Scott, Mister Spock, Lieutenant Galway, and myself are all showing definite signs of aging. Only Ensign Chekov appears to be normal.

[Sickbay]

(Chekov is on the stamina machine, Spock is on a bio-bed, Kirk and McCoy are definitely looking older. Chapel and Wallace are also present.) 
KIRK: Report, Bones. 
MCCOY: All of us who went down to the surface, with the exception of Chekov, are aging at various rates. Approximately thirty years for each day. I don't know what's causing it. A virus, a bacteria, or evil spirits, but I'm trying to find out. 
KIRK: Spock, could I ask for some figures? 
SPOCK: (looking about the same as usual) Based on what Doctor McCoy gave me, I estimate that physically we each have less than a week to live. Also, since our mental faculties are aging faster than our bodies, we will be little better than mental vegetables in considerably lesser time. 
KIRK: Total senility? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. In a very short time. 
KIRK: What a way to die. All right. I want all the research facilities, all the scientific technicians, to start round-the-clock research immediately. I want the answers, and I want the remedy. Let's start by finding out why Chekov hasn't been affected. 
MCCOY: I'm doing what I can. (to Spock) You're perfectly healthy. 
SPOCK: (sitting up) I must differ with you, Doctor. I'm having difficulty concentrating, which is most disturbing, my eye sight appears to be failing, and the normal temperature of the ship seems to me to be increasingly cold. 
MCCOY: I did not say you weren't affected, Mister Spock. You are perfectly healthy, that is, for any normal Vulcan on the high side of a hundred. 
SCOTT: Captain, can I go back to my station? 
KIRK: You feel up to it? 
SCOTT: Of course I do. I just need a wee bit of rest, that's all. 
(He leaves, with Spock giving him a hand.) 
MCCOY: You can leave, too, Lieutenant Galway. Lieutenant Galway? 
GALWAY: What? You spoke to me, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes, I spoke to you. I said that you could leave, too. Now why don't you go down to your quarters and get some sleep. 
GALWAY: No. I don't want to sleep. Can't you understand? If I sleep, what will I find when I wake up? 
(Camera finally pans over to show us an old woman with a dowagers hump.) 
KIRK: Lieutenant Galway, assume your position. Start your duties. 
GALWAY: Thank you, sir. (on her way out) What a stupid place to hang a mirror. 
KIRK: She's ten years younger than I am, and she looks, 
MCCOY: People age normally at different speeds, Jim. 
KIRK: Why hasn't he aged? 
MCCOY: I don't know. 
KIRK: Well I want to know! Is it his youth, his blood type, his heritage, his glands, his genes? 
MCCOY: His genes. All right, nurse. Prepare Chekov for another complete physical. 
CHAPEL: Come along, Ensign. This won't hurt. Much. 
CHEKOV: Promises.

[McCoy's office]

WALLACE: A few years ago on Aldebaran Three, my husband and I tried various carbohydrate compounds to slow down the degeneration of plant life. 
MCCOY: Then try that, Doctor Wallace. Try anything, but do it quickly. 
WALLACE: Yes, sir. (leaves) 
KIRK: I'll be on the Bridge. Keep me posted as to Chekov.

[Corridor]

(Doctor Wallace is waiting for Kirk.) 
KIRK: I thought you were on your way to the biochemistry lab, Doctor. 
WALLACE: We both go in the same direction. 
KIRK: So we do. 
WALLACE: Look, we know the problem. We know the progress of the affliction. Therefore, once we find the proper line of research, it's only logical we find the solution. 
KIRK: You sound like my first officer. 
WALLACE: No problem is insoluble. Not even ours. 
KIRK: That didn't spring from logic. 
WALLACE: Our situation doesn't have its roots in logic. The heart is not a logical organ. When I married Theodore Wallace, I thought I was over you. I was wrong. 
KIRK: When did you realise that? Today? 
WALLACE: What? 
KIRK: How much older was your husband than you? 
WALLACE: What difference does that make? 
KIRK: Answer me. 
WALLACE: Twenty six years. 
KIRK: That's quite a difference. 
WALLACE: Jim, he was a brilliant man. We were stationed on a lonely outpost. We were working together. I don't want to talk about him. I want to talk about us. 
KIRK: Look at me. Look at me. What do you see? 
WALLACE: I see Captain James Kirk, a man of morality, decency, handsome, and strong. 
KIRK: And old. And rapidly growing older. 
WALLACE: Jim, please. 
KIRK: What are you offering me, Jan? Love, or a going away present?

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Give us some more blood, Chekov. The needle won't hurt, Chekov. Take off your shirt, Chekov. Roll over, Chekov. Breathe deeply, Chekov. Blood sample, Chekov. Marrow sample, Chekov. Skin sample, Chekov. If I live long enough, I'm going to run out of samples. 
SULU: You'll live. 
CHEKOV: Oh, yes. I'll live, but I won't enjoy it. 
SULU: Maintaining standard orbit, Captain. 
(Kirk enters.) 
KIRK: Increase orbit to twenty thousand perigee, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
ATKINS: (a blonde yeoman) Will you sign this, sir? 
(He drops the pen, she starts to stoop to pick it up.) 
KIRK: Yeoman. (picks the pen up) You have a reason for being on the Bridge, Commodore Stocker? 
STOCKER: I'd hoped for a few words with you at your convenience. 
KIRK: I have very little time. 
STOCKER: If I may say so sir, we have a due date at Starbase Ten. 
KIRK: We're going to be late. I don't intend to leave this area until we've found the solution for this problem. 
STOCKER: Captain, I'm watching four very valuable and one almost irreplaceable members of the Starfleet failing before my eyes. I want to do something to help. 
KIRK: Yes, yes. If you're so concerned, I'll send a message to Starbase Ten. 
SPOCK: Captain, you sent such a message this morning. 
KIRK: Yeoman? Where's that 
ATKINS: Sir? 
KIRK: Fuel consumption report? 
ATKINS: I gave it to you. You signed it. 
KIRK: If I'd signed it, I wouldn't have asked for it, now would l? 
ATKINS: Your signature, Captain. 
(Later, everyone is tip-toeing around an obviously sleeping Captain in his comfy chair. Spock enters, unaware.) 
SPOCK: Captain, I believe (notices, and wakes him gently) Captain. Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. I was just thinking. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. Quite understandable. 
KIRK: You have something to report? 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. We have the cause of the affliction. 
KIRK: What is it? 
SPOCK: The orbit of Gamma Hydra Four carried the planet directly through the comet's trail. On conventional radiation settings, we discovered nothing. On resetting our sensors to the extreme lower range of the scale, undetected radiation appeared. Below normal radiation levels but definitely present, and undoubtedly residue from the comet. 
KIRK: Good, Spock. Well done. Let's get this to Doctor McCoy immediately. Oh. Lieutenant, take a message to Starfleet Command. Due to the proximity of the Romulans, you'd better use Code two. 
UHURA: But, Captain, the Romulans have broken Code two. If you remember the last bulletin 
KIRK: Then use Code three. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. Code three. 
KIRK: Message. Key to affliction may be comet which passed by Gamma Hydra Four. Said comet is now, 
SPOCK: (consulting PADD) Quadrant four four eight, sir. 
KIRK: Quadrant. All units are to be alerted for complete analysis of radiation and means found to neutralise it. Comet is highly dangerous. Kirk, commanding Enterprise. Immediately, Lieutenant. Let's go. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Oh, Mister Sulu. Increase orbit to twenty thousand mile perigee. 
SULU: You mean another twenty thousand, Captain? 
KIRK: I fail to understand why each one of my commands is being questioned. Now do as you're told, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, what is our present position? 
SULU: Orbiting at twenty thousand, sir. 
KIRK: Maintain. 
SULU: Maintaining, sir.

[Biochemistry lab]

MCCOY: Radiation? That's as good an answer as any, but why didn't we know about it earlier? 
SPOCK: Possibly, Doctor, because my thinking processes are not as efficient as before. 
MCCOY: (to Wallace) Run this through, Doctor. 
KIRK: All right, Bones, I'm going up to the Bridge. Keep me posted. Spock? 
SPOCK: I have a question for the doctor. (Kirk leaves) Doctor, the ship's temperature is increasingly uncomfortable for me. I've adjusted the environment in my quarters to one hundred twenty five degrees, which is at least tolerable. However, I 
MCCOY: Well, I see I'm not going to be making any house calls on you. 
SPOCK: I wondered if perhaps there was something which could lower my sensitivity to cold. 
MCCOY: I'm not a magician, Spock, just an old country doctor. 
SPOCK: Yes. As I always suspected. (leaves) 
WALLACE: Doctor McCoy, none of our usual radiation therapies will have any effect on this radiation sickness. 
MCCOY: Well, then we just start over, that's all. We work harder, faster, and we start completely from scratch if we have to. But we find something.

[Corridor]

STOCKER: Spock, can I have a word with you? 
SPOCK: Commodore? 
STOCKER: Mister Spock, a starship can function with a Chief Engineer, a Chief Medical Officer, even a First Officer under physical par. But it's disastrous to have a commanding officer whose condition is any less than perfection. 
SPOCK: I am aware of that. 
STOCKER: Please understand me. My admiration for Captain Kirk is unbounded. He is a great officer. But Mister Spock, I need your help and your co-operation. 
SPOCK: For what, sir? 
STOCKER: I would like you to take over command of the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: On what grounds, Commodore? 
STOCKER: On the grounds that the captain, because of his affliction, is unable to perform his duties. 
SPOCK: Need I remind you, sir, that I too have contracted the same affliction? 
STOCKER: Yes, but you're a Vulcan. You have a much greater life span. You show the affects to a much smaller degree. 
SPOCK: I'm half human, sir. My physical reflexes are down, my mental capacity is reduced. I tire easily. No, sir. I am not fit for command. 
STOCKER: Well, if you are not, with your Vulcan physique, then obviously Captain Kirk cannot be. 
SPOCK: Sir, I do have duties to perform. 
STOCKER: Mister Spock. I do not like what I'm about to say but regulations demand it. And as a Starfleet flag officer, I must follow regulations. As second in command of the Enterprise, you must convene an extraordinary competency hearing. 
SPOCK: I resist that suggestion, Commodore. 
STOCKER: It's not a matter of choice. When a captain is unfit, physically or mentally, a competency hearing is mandatory. Please don't make me quote a regulation which you know as well as I do. 
SPOCK: Very well, sir. The hearing shall convene at fourteen hundred hours.

[Sickbay]

(Chekov is back on the biobed.) 
MCCOY: Now this isn't going to hurt a bit. 
CHEKOV: That's what you said the last time. 
MCCOY: Did it hurt? 
CHEKOV: Yes. 
GALWAY: Doctor. 
(She collapses in Kirk's arms.) 
KIRK: Bones. 
MCCOY: She's dead. Her metabolism caused her to age more rapidly than the rest of us, but the same thing's going to happen to us unless 
KIRK: How long have we got, Bones? 
MCCOY: Oh, a matter of days. Perhaps hours.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Let it read that this competency hearing was ordered by Commodore Stocker and reluctantly called by myself. 
KIRK: Let it also read that I consider it invalid. 
STOCKER: Mister Spock, may I make a statement? I have had to resort to these legal grounds in order to save the lives of some very valuable members of the Starfleet. I have tried to convince Captain Kirk of the necessity of proceeding to Starbase Ten, but I've been overruled in each case. The responsibility of this hearing is mine. 
SPOCK: On the contrary, Commodore. As presiding officer and as second in command of the Enterprise, the responsibility is mine. Captain Kirk, would you like to make a statement? 
KIRK: Yes, I would like to make a statement. I am the captain of this ship and am totally capable of commanding her. Let's call this whole thing off and get back to work. 
SPOCK: It is quite impossible, Captain. The regulations are quite specific. You are entitled to direct examination of all witnesses immediately after the board has questioned them. 
KIRK: Very kind of you, Spock. 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, how long have you served with Captain Kirk? 
SULU: Two years, sir. 
SPOCK: To your knowledge, has he ever had any difficulty making decisions? 
SULU: No, sir. 
SPOCK: Did he order you to maintain standard orbit around Gamma Hydra Four? 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Did he not, several minutes later, repeat that order? 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Did he order you to increase orbit? 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Did he not several minutes later repeat that order? 
KIRK: He did not. When I give an order, I expect it to be obeyed. I don't have to repeat myself. 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, please answer the question. 
SULU: Yes, sir. Captain Kirk repeated his order. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Mister Sulu. Yeoman Atkins, you handed Captain Kirk a fuel consumption report in the presence of witnesses, which he read and signed. Is that correct? 
ATKINS: Sir, he had more important things on his mind. 
SPOCK: Yeoman, you will simply answer the question. 
ATKINS: I, I guess he forgot he'd signed it. 
SPOCK: You guess? 
ATKINS: He'd forgot he'd signed it. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Yeoman. You may leave. Lieutenant Uhura. I have here a bulletin from Starfleet Command which states that the Romulans have broken Code two. Are these your initials which appear at the bottom? 
UHURA: They are. 
SPOCK: And whose initials are those which appear directly below yours? 
UHURA: Those of Captain Kirk. 
SPOCK: Did Captain Kirk ask you to send a message about the comet which passed Gamma Hydra Four? 
UHURA: He did. 
SPOCK: Using Code two. 
UHURA: Oh, yes, but he changed it to Code three. 
SPOCK: After you reminded him that the Romulans had broken Code two. 
UHURA: Yes. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Lieutenant. Doctor McCoy, Doctor McCoy! 
MCCOY: (waking up) Yes, Spock? What is it? 
SPOCK: Several hours ago, at the request of this board, you ran a complete physical examination of Captain Kirk. 
MCCOY: I did. 
SPOCK: Medical banks, compute described subject's physical age, using established norms as comparative base. 
COMPUTER: Working. Subject's physical age based on physiological profile, between sixty and seventy two. Aging rapidly. 
KIRK: No, I'm thirty four. I'm thirty four years old. 
STOCKER: The computer differs with you, Captain. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Yes. 
SPOCK: Will you give us your professional evaluation of Captain Kirk's present physical condition. 
MCCOY: Captain Kirk is suffering from a, a peculiar physical degeneration which strongly resembles aging. 
SPOCK: Is not his mental capacity degenerating even more rapidly? 
MCCOY: Yes, yes, but he's a better man right now 
SPOCK: Doctor, you heard the computer's analysis of Captain Kirk's physical age. Do you agree with it? 
MCCOY: It's a blasted machine, Spock! You can't argue with a machine. 
SPOCK: Do you agree with it, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes. Yes, I do, agree. And I am sorry, Jim. 
SPOCK: This board has no further questions. Unless you, Commodore Stocker, have something that you would like to add. 
STOCKER: No. I am quite satisfied, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Do you wish to call any witnesses, Captain Kirk? 
KIRK: I am perfectly capable of speaking in my own defence, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Captain, I would suggest 
KIRK: No, no, no. It's all right, Spock. It's all right. There's only one reason, and one reason alone, for having this, hearing. I refused to leave Gamma Hydra Two 
SPOCK: Gamma Hydra Four, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes. A slip of the tongue. 
SPOCK: You're inability to remember having given commands, reading and signing important orders and then forgetting them, your physical analysis as compiled by our own chief surgeon. All these things would appear to be irrefutable proof of failing physical and mental conditions. 
KIRK: So I'm a little confused. Who wouldn't be at a time like this? My ship's in trouble, my senior officers are ill. And this nonsense about a competency hearing is enough to mix up any man. Trying to relieve a captain of his command is, well, that's, that's. Spock, I wouldn't have believed it of you. Go ahead. Ask me questions. I'll show you what I'm capable of. There's nothing wrong with my memory. Go ahead! Ask me anything! We're in orbit around Gamma Hydra Two, right? Anyhow, it doesn't matter. There's a lot more to running a starship than answering a lot of fool questions. A lot more. Go ahead. Ask me questions. 
SPOCK: We have no more questions, Captain. 
KIRK: Ask me anything. Anything. 
SPOCK: There'll be no more questions, Captain. If you would leave the room so the board can vote 
KIRK: Good idea. Get this stupid voting over with so I can get back to running the ship. The most fool thing I ever heard of. Competency hearing when there's work to be done. I'll be in my quarters, awaiting your decision. (leaves) 
STOCKER: Well, since the senior officers are incapable and I am of flag rank, I am forced by regulations to assume command. 
SPOCK: Sir, you have never commanded a starship. 
STOCKER: What would you have, a junior officer with far less experience than I have? 
SPOCK: The danger from the Romulans 
STOCKER: Mister Spock, we have to save these people. Mister Sulu, set a direct course for Starbase Ten. Warp five. 
SULU: Across the Neutral Zone? 
STOCKER: Immediately, Mister Sulu. All officers are to return to their posts.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Wallace and Spock enter.) 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: So, I've been relieved. 
SPOCK: I'm sorry, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes. You should've been a prosecuting attorney. 
SPOCK: Regulations require 
KIRK: Regulations. Don't give me regulations. You've wanted command all along. First little excuse you get 
SPOCK: Captain, I have not assumed command. 
KIRK: I hope you're proud of. What do you mean, you've not assumed command? 
SPOCK: I suffer the same affliction as you, sir. 
KIRK: If you're not in command, who is? 
SPOCK: Commodore Stocker. 
KIRK: Stocker? Are you crazy? He's never had a field command. 
SPOCK: Mister Scott was unfit for command. Commodore Stocker is ranking officer 
KIRK: No! Don't talk to me about rank! The man's a chair-bound paper-pusher. I order you to take command. 
SPOCK: I cannot, Captain. 
KIRK: Are you refusing a direct order? 
SPOCK: No, sir. Only Commodore Stocker can give a command order onboard this ship. 
KIRK: You traitorous, disloyal, you stab me in the back the first chance you get? Spock. Get out. I never want to have to look at you again. 
(Spock leaves.) 
KIRK: Jan, Jan. 
WALLACE: Oh, Jim. I'm sorry. Truly I am. 
KIRK: I made a fool of myself in there. I shouldn't have let them confuse me, rattle me. 
WALLACE: Everybody understood. 
KIRK: But I'm not old, Jan. I'm not. A few muscular aches doesn't make a man old. And you don't run a starship with your arms. You run it with your head. My brain's as sharp as it ever was. A simple case of radiation poisoning, and they relieve me of my command. I admit I'm getting a little grey, but radiation will do that to you. 
WALLACE: Oh, Jim, will you forgive me? I have work to do. 
KIRK: Jan, you know me. Look at me closely. Tell me. Am I getting old?

[Doctor's office]

KIRK: What are you doing here? 
SPOCK: It would seem to be the place where I can be of the most use. 
KIRK: Maybe you'd like to relieve Doctor McCoy. What about Chekov? 
MCCOY: Nothing. Absolutely nothing. 
KIRK: Bones, there has to be. There has to be. We beamed down together. We were on the surface together. The same spot. We were together all the time. 
SPOCK: No, not all the time. Captain, he left us for a few moments. 
KIRK: He left us? He left us. He went into the building. Spock, something happened. 
SPOCK: Yes. Yes, indeed, Captain. Doctor, you remember 
KIRK: He was scared! He saw the dead body and he ran out of the building and he was scared to death. 
MCCOY: Yes, yes. Now that could be. Right. Scared. Heart beats faster, breathe gets short, and there's cold sweats and adrenaline flows. Adrenal activity. Now hold on Just a minute. There was something that I read once. It was ancient history, just after the atomic age. Used for radiation sickness. Adrenaline. 
WALLACE: Doctor, hyronalin is the specific accepted for all radiation sickness. 
MCCOY: Yes, yes. Now. But before, adrenaline. Highly promising. Early research, but they abandoned it when hyronalin was discovered. 
SPOCK: Quite possible, Doctor. Perhaps a sufficiently efficacious compound could be developed. 
MCCOY: Don't just stand there jawing, Spock. You and Doctor Wallace get cracking.

[Bridge]

SULU: Entering Romulan Neutral Zone, sir. All sensors on maximum. 
STOCKER: Thank you, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant Uhura, let me know if we contact any Romulan. 
(The ship is shaken by an impact.) 
UHURA: I think we just made contact, sir. 
SULU: Romulans approaching from both sides. We're bracketed, sir. 
UHURA: Engineering wants instructions, sir. 
CHEKOV: Commodore Stocker, what are your orders? Commodore! (But he is transfixed by the sight of another weapon blast heading for them on the viewscreen.)

[Doctor's office]

KIRK: I'm going up to the bridge. 
MCCOY: No, Jim. You can't do it. 
KIRK: I have to go to the bridge. We're under attack. 
MCCOY: Nurse? Doctor Wallace! 
KIRK: Let me go. 
MCCOY: Nurse. 
WALLACE: Jim. 
CHAPEL: Easy, Captain. 
KIRK: We're under attack. I have to go to the Bridge. I've got to go to the bridge. 
(But they bustle him into the ward instead.)

[Bridge]

STOCKER: Keep trying to raise the Romulans. 
UHURA: I'm trying, Commodore. 
STOCKER: If I could talk to them, explain to them why we violated the Neutral Zone. 
UHURA: The Romulans are notorious for not listening to explanations. 
SULU: Lieutenant Uhura is right, sir. We've tangled with them before.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Greenhorn, up there ruining my ship. 
WALLACE: Jim, if I have to give you a shot 
MCCOY: Jim-boy, you just lay quiet. You can't do no good. We're both through. 
KIRK: No. No. My ship. My ship. 
(Spock totters in carrying a small beaker.) 
SPOCK: Doctor, I made the necessary computations and produced this serum. It is crude and dangerous, but we have no time for refinements. 
MCCOY: All right. Let's, let's go. 
SPOCK: It could cure or kill, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Don't give me any Vulcan details. Just give me the shot. 
KIRK: No. I'll take the first shot. 
MCCOY: You can't. 
KIRK: How long do you think this ship can take the pounding? I've got to get up there. 
WALLACE: Jim, it could kill you. 
KIRK: I'll die anyway. Do it. 
SPOCK: Doctor Wallace, give him the shot. 
KIRK: Quickly. Quickly. 
(She does, and he goes into convulsions. Fortunately he is already strapped down.)

[Bridge]

SULU: Sir, they've fired another.

[Sickbay]

(As the Enterprise continues to be battered, Kirk is writhing and groaning.) 
MCCOY: Well, well, what's happening? 
WALLACE: The ageing process has stopped. His bodily functions are getting stronger.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Sir, I've tried all known hailing frequencies. They simply ignore us. 
STOCKER: Opinion, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: They know they have us. They know our shields will give out. 
STOCKER: Well then, we have no alternative but to surrender. 
CHEKOV: Sir, the Romulans do not take captives. 
SULU: We're losing power, sir. 
STOCKER: What am I going to do? I've got to do something. 
KIRK: Report, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: We're surrounded by Romulan vessels. Maximum of ten. Range fifty to a hundred thousand kilometres. 
KIRK: Engineering, this is the captain. I want full emergency power. I want everything within about two minutes. I want the warp drive engines on full standby. Kirk out. Open up a special channel to Starfleet Command. Code two. 
UHURA: But, Captain, Code 
KIRK: That's an order, Lieutenant. Code two. 
UHURA: Yes, Captain. Code two. 
KIRK: Message. From Enterprise to Starfleet Command this sector. Have inadvertently encroached upon Romulan Neutral Zone. Surrounded and under heavy Romulan attack. Escape impossible, shields failing. Will implement destruct order using corbomite device recently installed. Since this will result in the destruction of the Enterprise and all matter in a two hundred thousand kilometre diameter and establish a corresponding dead zone, all Federation ships will avoid this area for the next four solar years. Explosion will take place in one minute. Kirk, commanding Enterprise, out. Mister Sulu, course one eight eight degrees, mark fourteen. Speed, warp factor eight. Stand by. 
SULU: Standing by, sir. 
SPOCK: Romulans giving ground, Captain. Obviously, they tapped in as you expected them to. 
KIRK: A logical assumption, Mister Spock. Are they still retreating? 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Good. All hands, stand by. Warp factor eight, now. 
SPOCK: The Romulans were caught off guard, Captain. They're falling behind. 
KIRK: Are we out of range, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Yes, sir. And out of the Neutral Zone. 
KIRK: Secure from Red Alert. Adjust a new course, two five seven degrees, mark three. Heading for Starbase Ten. 
SULU: Two five seven degrees, mark three. 
STOCKER: Captain, I just wanted to assure you that I did what I thought best to save you and the men. 
KIRK: Noted. You should know, however, that there's very little a Starbase can do that a starship can't. 
STOCKER: If I may say so, Captain, I am now quite aware of what a starship can do with the right man at the helm. 
(McCoy enters) 
KIRK: You're looking good, Doc. 
MCCOY: Feeling fine. So is Scotty. The serum worked. He pulled a muscle during the reaction, but otherwise he's feeling fine. 
KIRK: And yourself? 
MCCOY: Oh, very well. A few bruises here and there. Oh. Anytime you're ready, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: I am quite ready now, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Because of your Vulcan physique, I have prepared an extremely potent shot for you. However, you might like to know I've removed all the breakables from Sickbay. 
SPOCK: That is very considerate of you, Doctor. 
MCCOY: I thought you'd be pleased to hear that. 
(Spock, McCoy and Stocker leave as Wallace enters.) 
KIRK: Well, gentlemen, all and all, an experience we'll remember in our old age. Which won't be for some while, I hope. Take over, Mister Sulu. Steady as she goes. 
SULU: Steady as she goes, Captain. 
KIRK: I thought I said that.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Friday's Child
Stardate: 3497.2
Original Airdate: 1 Dec, 1967

[Briefing room]
MCCOY: They're quite large. Seven feet tall is not unusual. They're extremely fast and strong. Lieutenant? 
(Uhura turns on a monitor) Make no mistake. They can be highly dangerous. The Capellans' basic weapon, the kligat. At any distance up to a hundred yards, they can make it almost as effective against a man as a phaser. 
(On the monitor, we see McCoy being given a demonstration in which a small sapling is cut in half by one of these hand-thrown objects.) 
MCCOY: In addition, an assortment of swords and knives. 
UHURA: Call from the bridge, Captain. 
SULU [OC]: Bridge, Helm, sir. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Sulu. Report. 
SULU [on monitor]: Now in standard orbit, sir. I've pinpointed their encampment below. 
KIRK: Very good. Have the transporter room stand by. 
SULU [on monitor]: Aye, sir. 
SCOTT: How long were you stationed on the planet, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Only a few months. We found them totally uninterested in medical aid or hospitals. They believe only the strong should survive. 
KIRK: Analysis, gentlemen. 
SPOCK: Ordinarily, under these circumstances, I would recommend a large, well-armed landing party. 
KIRK: Yes, but in this case, with the more people we take down, the greater chance we have of violating one of their taboos. 
MCCOY: Agreed. Once they've got it into their heads we're showing force, you can forget them signing any mining treaty. 
KIRK: Very well. Scotty, you're in command. Bear in mind that the Klingons have been sighted in this sector. While we're negotiating down there, we don't want the Enterprise to become an incident up here. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. We'll keep on our toes.

[Settlement]

(Kirk, Spock, McCoy and one security guard beam down.) 
MAAB: Halt! You are of the Earth vessel? 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk. 
MCCOY: We come with open hearts and hands. 
GRANT: A Klingon! 
KIRK: Grant, no! 
(Too late. A Capellan kills him with a kligat.) 
MCCOY: Don't move a muscle.

Captain's log, stardate 3497.2. Planet Capella Four. The rare mineral topaline, vital to the life-support systems of planetoid colonies, has been discovered in abundance here. Our mission, obtain a mining agreement. But we've discovered a Klingon agent has preceded us to the planet. A discovery which has cost the life of one of my crewmen.

[Settlement]

KRAS: I am unaware of any state of war between our peoples, Captain. 
MCCOY: Jim! 
KRAS: Or is it your policy to kill Klingons on sight? 
KIRK: He was young, and inexperienced. 
MCCOY: Does Maab know that the Klingons are our sworn enemies by their own words? 
MAAB: We understand only that he also offers things of value for our rocks, and he has freely handed us his weapons and other devices. Will you do the same? 
KIRK: Let me call my ship and inform them 
KRAS: To bring down an attack upon their village? It is as I told you, Maab. Earthmen fear to bargain honestly. 
MAAB: Will you hand us your weapons? 
(Phasers and communicators are thrown down at Maab's feet.)

[Tent]

(Traces of bedouin-style, with low furniture, plenty of furs and a metal brazier providing warmth and light. There are two guards outside.) 
KIRK: So they keep their word scrupulously. They're unusually honest. Is that what I heard you say, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes, I mentioned that. 
SPOCK: He also mentioned that they can be highly dangerous. 
KIRK: Dangerous if lied to, if their customs are violated. We lied to no one, Doctor. We violated no customs. Perhaps you'll explain to me why one of my men is dead. 
MCCOY: Because he was drawing a weapon on another of their guests. 
KIRK: Grant looked up, saw a Klingon, made a purely instinctive defensive move. What's a Klingon doing down here among your scrupulously honest friends anyway? 
MCCOY: Look, Jim. I know what it means to you to lose a crewman. 
KIRK: That's only one down, Doctor. There's over four hundred more up there in orbit. And if there's a Klingon down here, there might be a Klingon ship up there somewhere.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Mister Scott. I'm picking up something on the sensors, sir. Seems to be another ship. 
SCOTT: Well, let's put it on the screen. 
(A small dot on the monitor above the science station.) 
CHEKOV: It's just at the edge of our sensor range, sir. Hard to get an exact reading. 
SULU: You think it's a Klingon ship? 
SCOTT: Who else would be playing cat and mouse with a starship? Well, they can't hurt us much out there, bobbing about like that. No need to call the captain yet.

[Tent]

KIRK: Bones. 
MCCOY: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: I shouldn't have chewed you out. I'm sorry. 
MCCOY: I understand. 
SPOCK: Inefficient, however. Emotion, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, you're quite right, Mister Spock. Inefficient and illogical. 
(A woman enters with a large bowl of fruit.) 
MCCOY: You've shown friendship by handing over our weapons. She's making a gesture in return. 
(She offers Kirk a piece.) 
MCCOY: Jim! You touch it, her nearest male relative will have to try to kill you. They're offering you a chance for combat. They consider it more pleasurable than love. 
MAN: Chur-ah. 
SPOCK: It would appear, Captain, that he finds you a disappointment.

[Teer's tent]

(A middle-aged man sits on a throne, surrounded by his guards.) 
AKAAR: I am the teer Akaar. I lead the Ten Tribes of Capella. 
(A heavily pregnant woman enters and sits.) 
AKAAR: And this is Eleen, a young wife to give an old man a son to rule these tribes. 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk. First of all, I must protest the killing of my crewman. 
AKAAR: If it was your man, wasn't it his privilege to die for you? I do not understand. 
MAAB: Their customs are different, Teer. 
KRAS: And different from those of my people, too, Teer. The sight of death frightens them. 
MCCOY: Let me take this, Jim. What Maab has said is true. Our customs are different. What the Klingon has said is unimportant, and we do not hear his words. I just called the Klingon a liar. 
MAAB: Laughter, Teer? Is not the Klingon an honoured guest also? 
AKAAR: It was the Earth people who first bargained for our rocks. 
MAAB: Is it not best to have two who bargain for the same goods? 
AKAAR: It is I who speak for the tribe, Maab. 
MAAB: I speak for many, Teer. Hear the words of the Klingon. 
KRAS: What do Earth men offer you? What have you obtained from them in the past? Powders and liquids for the sick? We Klingons believe as you do. The sick should die. Only the strong should live. Earthmen have promised to teach the youth of your tribes many things. What? What things? Cleverness against enemies? The use of weapons? 
ELEEN: The Klingon speaks the truth, Akaar. 
KIRK: The Earth Federation offers one other thing, Akaar. Our laws. And the highest of all our laws states that your world is yours and will always remain yours. This differs us from the Klingons. Their empire is made up of conquered worlds. They take what they want by arms and force. 
MAAB: Good, good. Let the Klingons and the Earthmen offer us amusement. Capellans welcome this. 
AKAAR: The Earth men have different customs, but never have they lied to our people. 
MAAB: There are those of us who won't bargain with Earthmen, Akaar. 
AKAAR: Do you say you will fight me, Maab? 
MAAB: Let that be your choice, Teer. 
(Maab, Kras and the Orange man leave.) 
KIRK: We need our communicators, those devices on our belts. If there's a Klingon ship somewhere 
AKAAR: The sky does not interest me. I must consider the words I have heard. 
ELEEN: Leave him.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: The ship's disappeared, sir. Gone out of range. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, I'm getting a call from a vessel. It's so faint I can't make it out. 
SCOTT: Put a booster on it, Lieutenant. Try to pull it in. 
UHURA: I've lost it. It sounded like a distress signal from an Earth vessel.

[Settlement]

(There is a big fight going on, and Kirk joins in when a Capellan comes to their tent. Maab and Akaar's factions are fighting each other. Kras takes the opportunity to search the landing party's tent.)

[Tent]

KIRK: Klingon! Communicators, weapons. 
KRAS: I have no quarrel with you, Captain. I wish merely to return to my vessel. 
(He grabs a knife and lunges at Kirk, who throws him easily and turns the weapon on the Klingon.) 
KIRK: Type of vessel. Location. 
KRAS: A small scout ship, Captain. We need the mineral, too. I was sent to negotiate. 
MAAB: Release him. (Kirk does so.) Akaar is dead. I am the teer. 
KRAS: Kill them now. 
KIRK: Wait. If you lead these people now, be certain you make the right decisions. 
KRAS: Is the new leader of the Ten Tribes afraid? Let me kill him for you. 
KIRK: Or let the Klingon and me fight. It might amuse you. 
MAAB: Perhaps to be a teer is to see in new ways. I begin to like you, Earthman, and I saw fear in the Klingon's eye. 
KRAS: We had an agreement. 
MAAB: That too may change, Klingon.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I have the signal clear now, Mister Scott. It is a distress call. It's from the SS Dierdre. 
SCOTT: Dierdre? That's a freighter. 
UHURA: Reporting they're under attack. They're running, trying to manoeuvre. It's a Klingon vessel attacking. 
SCOTT: Helm? 
SULU: Picking it up, sir. Taking a fix. 
SCOTT: Try the captain. 
UHURA: Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain.

[Teer's tent]

(Eleen is brought in. One of Maab's guards trips her with his sword, and she burns her hand the brazier. Kirk moves to help, but) 
MCCOY: Captain, careful. 
MAAB: You carry a child who would be teer. 
ELEEN: I must die. 
(Maab raises his knife, and Kirk pulls her away. 
KIRK: No! 
(There's a fight. Starfleet loses.) 
MAAB: No man may touch the wife of a teer. 
KRAS: She was prepared to die, Earthman. 
ELEEN: I was proud to obey the laws. Kill him first. He laid hands upon me. It is my right to see him die.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Enterprise to Mister Spock. Doctor McCoy, come in please. 
CHEKOV: I have it on the sensors, sir. Tie into my channel, Lieutenant. 
VOICE [OC]: Commanding. We are under heavy attack by Klingon vessels. Two convoy ships are already damaged. We must have help. Enterprise, acknowledge. Please acknowledge. Repeat 
SULU: Interception course computed and laid in, sir. 
SCOTT: Prepare to take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
UHURA: Scotty, the captain. 
SCOTT: We have a distress call from a Federation ship under attack. That's where our duty lies. Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Ahead warp five.

Captain's log, stardate 3498.9. Lieutenant Commander Scott in temporary command.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We were forced to leave Capella to aid a Federation vessel under attack by a Klingon vessel. We were unable to contact our landing party before we were forced to answer the distress signal. Our inability to reach the landing party is strange and I am concerned.

[Tent]

(Eleen is with the three men, and the guards are now inside the doorway.) 
SPOCK: Our check-in signal is one hour, twelve minutes overdue. Since no reconnaissance party has appeared, and since Mister Scott is notably efficient in such matters 
KIRK: I must assume that something's keeping them busy up there. The Klingon ship. 
SPOCK: That would seem a logical conclusion. 
MCCOY: Captain, I'm going to fix that woman's arm. They can only kill me once for touching her. 
KIRK: That's a very good idea, Bones. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain, an excellent idea. 
MCCOY: Let me see that arm. 
ELEEN: You will not touch me. 
(The guards are distracted by McCoy and Eleen, so Kirk and Spock overpower them while McCoy keeps her quiet.) 
KIRK: (knife at her throat) You said you're prepared to die. Does that mean you'd prefer to die? I think we can get you safely to the ship. Your choice. Bones. 
ELEEN: To live is always desirable. 
KIRK: All right. Let's go.

[Settlement]

(Maab is sitting on his throne out in the fresh air as Kras paces near him.) 
MAAB: Klingon. There's nothing to concern you there. 
KRAS: We made an agreement, Maab. I have a right to my weapons. 
MAAB: (taking a disrupter from under his cloak) We have them well cared for, Klingon. Your weapon will be returned when our business is completed. That was our agreement.

[Bridge]

SULU: Approaching the freighter's last reported position, sir. 
SCOTT: Sensor report, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Negative, sir. No debris, no residual particles, no traces. 
SCOTT: Mister Sulu, begin a standard search pattern. All scanners full intensity, Mister Chekov. (to Uhura) No signal at all? 
UHURA: Negative, sir. 
CHEKOV: It should be on our screens by now. 
SULU: At best, a freighter might travel warp two. 
SCOTT: I'm well aware of a freighter's maximum speed, Mister Sulu.

Captain's log, stardate 3499.1. Before leaving the Capellan encampment, we managed to retrieve our communicators. Our phasers were not to be found. We've fled into the hills, yet we know the Capellans will eventually find us by scent alone, if necessary. And we've learned one thing more. The girl, Eleen, hates the unborn child she is carrying.

[Hillside]

(It is, of course, a place with plenty of rocks and cliff faces.) 
KIRK: Stay with her, Bones. Nice place to get trapped in. 
SPOCK: But a defensible entrance, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, I see. Scout up the trail that way. See what we have in the way of an exit. I'll take a look around. 
MCCOY: Now listen, you may be a Capellan woman and the widow of a high teer, but I'm a doctor, and it's my tradition to care for the sick and injured. Now, let me see that arm. 
(She does, and he treats the burn. Meanwhile, Kirk spots the posse coming after them.) 
(McCoy scans Eleen's belly, then puts his hand on it.) 
ELEEN: You will not touch me in that manner. 
MCCOY: You listen to me, young woman. I'll touch you in any way or manner that my professional judgment indicates. 
(She slaps his face, twice, so he slaps her in return.) 
MCCOY: Just as I thought. It can come anytime now. 
ELEEN: How do you know? 
MCCOY: Because I'm a doctor, that's how I know. 
ELEEN: Even the women of our village cannot tell so much with a touch. Strange hand. Very soft. 
(Spock and Kirk meet up.) 
SPOCK: The walls get higher and narrower, but there is a way out. 
KIRK: Good. If we could block off that entrance, hold them off, it'd give us more time. They'd have to go around these hills. 
SPOCK: There is enough loose rock and shale. 
KIRK: Do you think we could create a sonic disruption with two of our communicators? 
SPOCK: Only a very slight chance it would work. 
KIRK: Well, if you don't think we can, maybe we shouldn't try. 
SPOCK: Captain, I didn't say that exactly. 
(The Capellans are getting close to the canyon entrance.) 
SPOCK: The sound beams should produce a sympathetic vibration on the weak area of that slide. 
(The party is led by Maab, who senses something is wrong but keeps coming forward until the rock face explodes. Kras hides but other Capellans are crushed by the falling boulders. When the dust starts to clear, Kras takes the Federation phasers from a wounded Capellan then kills him with his own knife. The remaining members of the posse move on.) 
KIRK: Worried about the delivery? 
MCCOY: Capellans aren't human, Jim. They're humanoid. There's certain internal differences. I don't have equipment to handle an emergency. 
KIRK: Well, if you don't think you can handle it 
MCCOY: Forget it. I can do it. The last thing I want around is a ham-handed ship's captain. 
(They continue their climb up the canyon. It is steep and Eleen is struggling. Kirk goes to help.) 
ELEEN: No! Only McCoy. 
KIRK: There's a cave in there. Probably the only shelter around here. 
MCCOY: I'll need help getting her in there. 
ELEEN: No! 
MCCOY: Look, I'm a doctor, not an escalator! Spock, give me a hand! 
ELEEN: No! I will allow only your touch.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: A vessel doesn't just disappear. 
UHURA: There's nothing, Mister Scott. All channels and frequencies are clear. 
SCOTT: Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV: Nothing, sir. If it were destroyed, I'd pick up debris readings of some sort. 
SULU: It couldn't have run away from us, sir. Not a freighter. 
SCOTT: Mister Chekov, pull the microtape on that distress call. I want it replayed. 
VOICE [OC]: Commanding. We are under heavy attack by Klingon vessels. Two convoy ships are already damaged. We must have help. 
Enterprise, acknowledge. Please acknowledge. 
SCOTT: Did you hear it? They called us by name. Not a general distress signal, but one aimed right at us. 
SULU: Wouldn't they normally call for the nearest starship? 
SCOTT: How would a freighter know we were ordered into this sector? 
SULU: A trap. We were diverted from the planet. 
UHURA: Or it could be an authentic distress call. 
SCOTT: We'll stay long enough to make certain. Continue search pattern. 
SULU: Yes, sir. Continuing.

[Cave]

(Dark, with convenient flat-topped rocks studding the smooth floor.) 
KIRK: Bones, you've got one of those magnesite-nitron tablets in your kit. Give me one. 
MCCOY: Just a minute. Let me get her on the rock. There you go. 
(Kirk puts the tablet on a rock and hits it with his knife. It bursts into flame and the whole cave is illuminated. Eleen is in pain.) 
ELEEN: No, no. Pain is here. 
KIRK: How did you arrange to touch her, Bones, give her a happy pill? 
MCCOY: No a right cross. 
KIRK: Never seen that in a medical book. 
MCCOY: It's in mine from now on. 
ELEEN: No, no. It's there. The The pain is there.

[Cave entrance]

KIRK: Vegetation, Captain. Evidently there's water nearby. 
KIRK: Good, but we need weapons just as much as we need water, Spock. 
SPOCK: There would seem to be little weapon potential at hand. 
KIRK: Follow me.

[Cave]

ELEEN: No! McCoy! 
MCCOY: Easy, easy. I'm here. Now you must want the child! 
ELEEN: No. Here, child belongs to husband. 
MCCOY: So they take all the credit here. Poppycock! Answer me. Do you want my help? Answer me. Do you want my help? (she nods) All right. Say to yourself, The child is mine. The child is mine. It is mine! 
ELEEN: Yes, it's yours. 
MCCOY: No, no. You've got it all wrong. 
ELEEN: Yes, McCoy. It's yours. 
MCCOY: No. Say to yourself, The child is mine. It is mine. It is 
(But she has made up her mind, and the child is coming anyway.)

[Cave entrance]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. 
(He gives up and tests a bow they have made.) 
SPOCK: Fortunately, this bark has suitable tensile cohesion. 
KIRK: You mean it makes a good bowstring. 
SPOCK: I believe I said that. 
(A baby cries offscreen.) 
KIRK: That's more like it. Since the Capellans never developed the bow, this may come as big a surprise as gunpowder was on Earth. 
(A beaming McCoy comes to summon the men back indoors.)

[Cave]

(The new-born is proudly shown off by the Doctor, then handed to Spock, who has no idea how to cradle it.) 
MCCOY: No, no, Mister Spock. You place this arm under here to support its back, and this hand here to support its head. 
SPOCK: I would rather, I would rather not. Thank you. 
ELEEN: McCoy. Bring our child. 
KIRK: Our child? 
MCCOY: I'll explain later. 
SPOCK: That should prove very interesting.

[Bridge]

SULU: Still negative, Mister Scott. All sweeps. 
SCOTT: Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV: Nothing. 
SCOTT: We're turning back. Warp five, Helm. 
SULU: Warp five, sir. On course for Capella Four. 
SCOTT: Warp 6 as soon as she'll take it, Mister Sulu. The captain could be in trouble back there. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, another distress call from the USS Carolina. 
SCOTT: Ignore it. 
UHURA: The Carolina is registered in this sector. 
SCOTT: Ignore it, Lieutenant. Log it as my order, my responsibility. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SULU: Scotty, if it should turn out to be real 
SCOTT: There's an old, old saying on Earth, Mister Sulu. Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me. 
CHEKOV: I know this saying. It was invented in Russia. (he smirks to himself)

[Cave]

(Eleen knocks out the sleeping McCoy and leaves.)

[Cave entrance]

(Atop the rocks, Kirk and Spock are keeping lookout for the Capellans when McCoy wakes.) 
MCCOY: Jim! Spock! Jim! Spock! 
KIRK: What happened, Bones? 
MCCOY: My patient spattered me with a rock. She's gone. 
SPOCK: The child? 
MCCOY: It's all right. It's in there. I guess I'll forget psychiatry, stick with surgery. I really thought she'd learned to want it. 
SPOCK: Virtue is a relative term, Doctor. She'll head straight to the warriors. 
MCCOY: I'll go with you. 
KIRK: Bones, you took a medical oath long before you signed aboard my ship. That small patient in there needs you.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Estimating to planet? 
SULU: Thirty one minutes, sir. 
CHEKOV: Mister Scott? Sensors picking up a vessel ahead, cutting across our path. 
SCOTT: Sub-light one half. 
SULU: Reversing to sub-light, one half. 
CHEKOV: It's an alien, sir. By configuration a Klingon warship. Taking position directly in our path. 
SCOTT: Mister Sulu, sound battle stations. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
UHURA: This is the USS Enterprise calling unidentified Klingon vessel. Come in. USS Enterprise calling Klingon vessel. Acknowledge, please. 
SULU: I have it on the viewscreen now, sir. Still distant. Holding a position dead ahead, sir. 
SCOTT: Drawing a line, daring us to step over it. 
SULU: Still closing. The alien's directly in our line of flight. 
SCOTT: This is the commander of the USS Enterprise. Identify yourself and your intention. Acknowledge. Close out the frequency, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Phaser banks are ready, sir. 
SCOTT: And we'll go right down their throat, if necessary. Let's see if they have the belly for it.

[Hillside]

(Kirk and Spock are lying in wait for the Capellans, who are travelling single file. Maab stops the column and sends a scout ahead.) 
KEEL: Behind the rocks up there. 
MAAB: The Earthmen make excellent game. Their cleverness has surprised me. 
KRAS: (slightly out of breath) They must die. That is your law. 
MAAB: We will honour our law, and our word to you, Klingon. 
KEEL: Maab. 
ELEEN: The child is dead, Maab. Do as you will with me. 
KEEL: The Earthmen? 
ELEEN: Dead. I killed them as they slept. 
KRAS: If true, take us to them. 
ELEEN: Do you doubt my word, Klingon? I'm the wife of a teer. I will die in my own tent. 
MAAB: It is in order. She is the wife of a teer. (Kras runs off.) No! 
KRAS: First, we'll verify her story. 
MAAB: Is this what your sworn word means, Klingon? 
(Kirk shoots an arrow into Kras' knee. A kligat is thrown, and Spock shoots the thrower. Kirk downs another. Eleen runs for the Klingon's phaser but he picks it up first and uses it to blast at Spock's hiding place.) 
KIRK: Spock. Spock! 
SPOCK: Here, Captain. Over here, Captain. (into communicator as Kirk joins him.) Spock to Enterprise. 
KIRK: The cavalry doesn't come over the hill in the nick of time anymore. 
SPOCK: If by that you mean we can't expect help from the Enterprise, I must agree. 
MAAB: Naam. 
(But Kras disintegrates him before he can throw his kligat) 
KIRK: There's just one thing I want. 
SPOCK: The Klingon? 
KIRK: One of us must get him. 
SPOCK: Revenge, Captain? 
KIRK: Why not? 
KRAS: The next man who raises a weapon destroys all of you. You and your primitive knives and your weapons, I'll teach you what killing really means. 
KIRK: Klingon! 
ELEEN: Fight! Are you warriors or children? Maab, I will flee. When the Klingon turns to fire, I'll 
MAAB: (drawing his knife) As teer of the Ten Tribes, I give you back your life. Mine is now forfeit. Keel, stand ready. 
(Maab walks forward, arms out to the side.) 
MAAB: Klingon! 
(Kras disintegrates him, and Keel throws his kligat, killing Kras. The two factions gather at the body. Then a bunch of red-shirts run around the corner.)
SCOTT: Hold it there. Drop your weapons. 
(McCoy arrives carrying the baby, and Eleen goes to him.) 
KIRK: We missed you, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Well sir, we had a wee bit of a run-in with a Klingon vessel, but he had no stomach for fighting. We checked the encampment, found out you were here, and had no trouble at all in tracking you down. I could 
(He is interrupted by the baby crying.) 
MCCOY: No, that's not the way to handle it. Here, like this. Here, take his little head like that. There, arm in a. That's it. See how easy? Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. 
SPOCK: Oochy-woochy coochy-coo, Captain? 
KIRK: An obscure Earth dialect, Mister Spock. Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. If you're curious, consult linguistics. 
SPOCK: Well, at any rate, this should prove interesting. 
KIRK: Interesting? 
SPOCK: When the woman starts explaining how the new high teer is actually Doctor McCoy's child. 
SCOTT: What's that again, Mister Spock? 
KIRK: We don't actually understand it ourselves, Mister Scott. 
SPOCK: Nor does Doctor McCoy. 
Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. Oochy-woochy coochy-coo.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Contact Starfleet. Inform them the Federation mining rights on Capella have been secured by treaty, documents signed by the young high chief's regent. Report follows. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: The child's regent? 
KIRK: Yes, Eleen. Remarkable young lady. 
MCCOY: Representing the high teer, Leonard James Akaar. 
SPOCK: The child was named Leonard James Akaar? 
MCCOY: Has a kind of a ring to it, don't you think, James? 
KIRK: Yes. I think it's a name destined to go down in galactic history, Leonard. What do you think, Spock? 
SPOCK: I think you're both going to be insufferably pleased with yourselves for at least a month, sir. 
KIRK: Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Ahead warp factor one.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Journey to Babel
Stardate: 3842.3
Original Airdate: 17 Nov, 1967

[Kirk's quarters]
(Enterprise is orbiting a very red planet, and Kirk is checking his appearance in a mirror.) 
MCCOY: Dress uniforms, spit and polish. I don't know how much longer I'm going to be able to stand this. I feel like my neck's in a sling. 
KIRK: The Vulcans are the last delegates we have to pick up. As soon as we get them aboard, we'll be able to relax. 
(They leave.)

[Corridor]

MCCOY: Sure. A formal reception tonight, a hundred and fourteen delegates aboard for two weeks, thirty two of them ambassadors, (Spock joins them) half of them mad at the other half, and the whole lot touchier than a raw antimatter pile over this Coridan question. 
(Intercom whistles) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Shuttlecraft approaching with Ambassador Sarek's party. Estimate arrival one minute. 
KIRK: Bring them aboard, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Standby to recover shuttlecraft. Honour guard to the hangar deck.

[Hangar deck]

(As the NCC1701/7 arrives, the honour guard smarted themselves up outside.) 
VOICE [OC]: Clear hangar deck. Clear hangar deck. Depressurising. Recovering shuttlecraft. Hangar deck pressurising. 
(The guard line up, holding phasers with arms crossed.) 
MCCOY: How does that Vulcan salute go? 
(Spock demonstrates - right hand with the fingers separated into a V-sign.) 
MCCOY: That hurts worse than the uniform. 
(A couple are escorted from the shuttlecraft.) 
KIRK: Captain James Kirk. 
SAREK: Captain. 
KIRK: My First Officer, Commander Spock. 
SPOCK: Vulcan honours us with your presence. We come to serve. 
SAREK: Your service honours us, Captain. 
KIRK: Thank you. Chief Medical Officer Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Ambassador. 
SAREK: Doctor. My aides and she who is my wife. 
(He holds out his right hand with two fingers extended, and a human woman steps forward to touch them.) 
AMANDA: Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Our pleasure, madam. As soon as you're settled I'll arrange a tour of the ship. Mister Spock will conduct you. 
SAREK: I'd prefer another guide, Captain. 
KIRK: As you wish, Ambassador. Mister Spock, we'll leave orbit in two hours. Would you care to beam down and visit your parents? 
SPOCK: Captain, Ambassador Sarek and his wife are my parents.

Captain's log, Stardate 3842.3. We have departed Vulcan for the neutral planetoid code-named Babel. Since it is in our sector, the Enterprise has been assigned to transport ambassadors of Federation planets to this vitally important council. The issues of the council are politically complex, the passengers explosive.

[Engineering]

(Kirk is conducting Sarek and Amanda's tour himself. Spock is doing something in Engineering when they enter.) 
KIRK: This is the engineering section. There are a number of emergency back-up systems for the main controls. Over here are a number of control computers. 
(Amanda lags behind to talk with her son.) 
AMANDA: After all these years among humans, you still haven't learned to smile. 
SPOCK: Humans smile with so little provocation. 
AMANDA: And you haven't come to see us in four years, either. 
SPOCK: The situation between my father and myself has not changed. 
SAREK: My wife, attend. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. A moment, if you please. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: Explain the computer components. 
SAREK: I gave Spock his first instruction in computers, Captain. He chose to devote his knowledge to Starfleet instead of the Vulcan Science Academy. 
SPOCK: If you will excuse me, Captain. (leaves) 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Ambassador. I did not mean to offend. I thought that 
SAREK: Offence is a human emotion. I'm returning to my quarters. Continue, my wife. (leaves) 
KIRK: Mrs. Sarek, I just don't understand. 
AMANDA: Amanda. I'm afraid you couldn't pronounce the Vulcan name. 
KIRK: Can you? 
AMANDA: After a fashion, and after many years of practice. Shall we continue the tour? My husband did request it. 
KIRK: It sounded more like a command. 
AMANDA: Of course. He's a Vulcan. I'm his wife. 
KIRK: And Spock is his son. 
AMANDA: You don't understand the Vulcan way, Captain. It's logical. It's a better way than ours. But it's not easy. It has kept Spock and Sarek from speaking as father and son for eighteen years. 
KIRK: Spock is my best officer, and my friend. 
AMANDA: I'm glad he has such a friend. It hasn't been easy on Spock. Neither human nor Vulcan. At home nowhere except Starfleet. 
KIRK: I take it that Spock disagreed with his father on a choice of career. 
AMANDA: My husband has nothing against Starfleet. But Vulcans believe that peace should not depend on force. 
KIRK: Starfleet force is used only as a last resort. We're an instrument of civilisation. And it's a better opportunity for a scientist to study the universe than he can get at the Vulcan Science Academy. 
AMANDA: Perhaps. But Sarek wanted Spock to follow his teachings, as Sarek followed the teachings of his own father. 
KIRK: They are both stubborn. 
AMANDA: A human trait, Captain? 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Excuse me. Kirk here. 
UHURA [on monitor]: Captain, I've picked up some sort of signal. Just a few symbols. Nothing intelligible. 
KIRK: Source? 
UHURA [on monitor]: That's what bothers me, sir. Impossible to locate. There wasn't enough of it. Sensors show nothing in the area, but it was a strong signal, as though it was very close. 
KIRK: Go to alert status four. Begin long-range scanning. Kirk out.

Captain's log, Stardate 3842.4. The interplanetary conference will consider the petition of the Coridan planets to be admitted to the Federation. The Coridan system has been claimed by some of the races now aboard our ship as delegates, races who have strong personal reasons for keeping Coridan out of the Federation. The most pressing problem aboard the Enterprise is to make sure open warfare doesn't break out among the delegates before the conference begins.

[Lounge]

(People of all shapes, sizes and colours are helping themselves to drinks and nibbles from buffet tables.) 
MCCOY: Mister Ambassador, I understand you had retired before this conference was called. Forgive my curiosity, but as a doctor, I'm interested in Vulcan physiology. Isn't it unusual for a Vulcan to retire at your age? After all, you're only a hundred and two. 
SAREK: One hundred two point four three seven precisely, Doctor, measured in your years. I had other concerns. 
KIRK: Ambassador. 
GAV: (a stout chap with a porcine nose) Sarek of Vulcan, do you vote to admit Coridan to the Federation? 
SAREK: The vote will not be taken here, Ambassador Gav. My government's instructions will be heard in the council chambers on Babel. 
GAV: No! You! How do you vote, Sarek of Vulcan? 
SHRAS: (thin and blue, with two antennae) Why must you know, Tellarite? 
GAV: In council, his vote carries others. I will know where he stands and why. 
SAREK: Tellarites do not argue for reasons. They simply argue. 
GAV: No. You 
KIRK: Gentlemen. Ambassador Sarek is quite correct when he points out this is not the council chamber of Babel. I'm fully aware that the admission of Coridan is a highly debatable issue, but you won't solve it here. 
SAREK: You are correct, Captain. Quite logical. 
SHRAS: My apologies, Captain. 
GAV: You will excuse me. (stalks away) 
SHRAS: Have you met Gav before, Ambassador? 
SAREK: We debated during my last council session. Ambassador. 
AMANDA: Ambassador Gav lost. 
MCCOY: Spock, I've always suspected that you were a little more human than you let on. Mrs. Sarek, I know about the rigorous training of the Vulcan youth, but tell me, did he ever run and play like the human children, even in secret? 
AMANDA: Well, he, he did have a pet sehlat he was very fond of. 
MCCOY: Sehlat? 
AMANDA: It's sort of a fat teddy bear. 
MCCOY: A teddy bear? 
SAREK: Excuse me, Doctor. It has been a rather long day for my wife. Captain. 
KIRK: Ambassador. 
(Sarek leads Amanda away.) 
MCCOY: A teddy bear. 
SPOCK: Not precisely, Doctor. On Vulcan, the teddy bears are alive, and they have six-inch fangs. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Captain, sensors are registering an unidentified vessel pacing us. 
KIRK: On my way. All duty personnel on Yellow Alert. Don't alarm the passengers. Kirk out.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Report. 
CHEKOV: A small ship, Captain. It's been there five minutes, remaining outside phaser range at extreme limit of sensors. 
KIRK: Identification, Spock? 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate the size of a scout ship, but the configuration is unfamiliar. Most unusual. 
KIRK: Does she answer a hail? 
UHURA: I've tried all frequencies and hooked in the universal translator. No response, sir. 
KIRK; Maintain translator broadcast. Check records for authorised ships. 
SPOCK: Starfleet records no authorised vessel in this quadrant except ours. 
KIRK: Care to guess what she is? 
SPOCK: Guess, Captain? I shall need more data for my estimate. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, plot course to intercept that vessel. I want to see what she looks like close up. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir.

[Sarek's quarters]

SAREK: You embarrassed Spock this evening. Not even a mother may do that. He is a Vulcan. 
AMANDA: He's also human. 
SAREK: He's a Starfleet officer. 
AMANDA: I thought you didn't approve of Starfleet. 
SAREK: It is not a question of approval. The fact exists. He is in Starfleet. He must command respect if he is to function. 
AMANDA: Sarek, you're proud of him, aren't you? You're showing almost human pride in your son. 
SAREK: It does not require pride to ask that Spock be given the respect which is his due. Not as my son, but as Spock. Do you understand? 
AMANDA: Not really, but it doesn't matter. I love you anyway. I know. It isn't logical.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Vessel changing course, heading toward us at high warp speed. 
KIRK: Ready main phasers. 
CHEKOV: Phasers armed and ready, sir. 
(The bright dot on the viewscreen whizzes past them.) 
SPOCK: Interesting. They were travelling at approximately warp ten. 
KIRK: Back on original course, Mister Chekov. Report on intruder's movements. 
UHURA: Captain, Starfleet acknowledges report on our situation and confirms no authorised Federation vessel in this quadrant. 
CHEKOV: Back on original heading, Captain. The intruder changed course immediately after we did. It's paralleling us again. 
KIRK: Well, we have a shadow. Faster, more manoeuvrable and unidentified. Mister Spock, full analysis of sensor readings. I want to know who that intruder is.

[Lounge]

(Sarek enters, and surreptitiously takes a tablet with a drink.) 
GAV: Vulcan, I would speak to you. 
SAREK: It does seem unavoidable. 
GAV: How do you vote on the Coridan admission? 
SAREK: You seem unwilling to wait for the council meeting, Ambassador. No matter. We favour admission. 
GAV: You favour? Why? 
(The room goes silent.) 
SAREK: Under Federation law, Coridan can be protected and its wealth administered for the benefit of its people. 
GAV: That's well for you. Vulcan has no mining interest. 
SAREK: Coridan has nearly unlimited wealth of dilithium crystals, but it is under-populated and unprotected. This invites illegal mining operations. 
GAV: Illegal? You accuse us? 
SAREK: Some of your ships have been carrying Coridan dilithium crystals. 
GAV: You call us thieves? 
(Gav attacks Sarek, who shrugs him off easily.) 
KIRK: Gentlemen. Gentlemen. Whatever arguments you have between yourselves is your business. My business is running the ship. As long as I command, there will be order. 
SAREK: Of course, Captain. 
GAV: Understood. There will be payment for your slander, Sarek. 
SAREK: Threats are illogical. And payment is usually expensive. 
(Gav leaves.)

[Corridor]

(The Tellarite is hanging upside down from a Jefferies tube. He is not doing spine stretching exercises.) 
JOSEPH: Security to Captain Kirk.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Kirk here. 
JOSEPH [OC]: Lieutenant Joseph, sir. I'm on deck eleven, section A3. I've just found one of the Tellarites murdered. I think it's the ambassador himself, sir.

[Corridor]

KIRK: How was he killed? 
MCCOY: His neck was broken. By an expert. 
KIRK: Explain. 
MCCOY: Well, from the nature and location of the break, I'd say the killer knew exactly where to apply pressure to snap the neck instantly. 
KIRK: Who aboard would have that knowledge? 
SPOCK: Vulcans. On Vulcan, the method is called tal-shaya. It was considered a merciful form of execution in ancient times. 
KIRK: Spock. A short time ago, I broke up an argument between Gav and your father. 
SPOCK: Indeed, Captain? Interesting. 
MCCOY: Interesting? Spock, do you realise that makes your father the most likely suspect? 
SPOCK: Vulcans do not approve of violence. 
KIRK: You're saying he couldn't have done it? 
SPOCK: No, Captain. I'm merely saying it would be illogical to kill without reason. 
KIRK: But if he had a reason, could he have done it? 
SPOCK: If there were a reason, my father is quite capable of killing. Logically and efficiently.

[Sarek's quarters]

KIRK: Mrs. Sarek, I'm sorry to disturb you. I must speak to your husband. 
AMANDA: He's been gone for some time. It's his habit to meditate in private before retiring. What's wrong? Spock? 
SAREK: You want something of me, Captain? 
KIRK: Ambassador, the Tellarite. Gav has been murdered. 
MCCOY: His neck was broken, Mister Ambassador, by what Spock describes as tal-shaya. 
SAREK: Indeed? Interesting. 
KIRK: Yes. Ambassador, where were you during the past hour? 
AMANDA: Captain, you're not accusing him? 
SPOCK: Mother. If only on circumstantial evidence, he is a logical suspect. 
SAREK: I quite agree. 
KIRK: Then where were you during the hour? 
SAREK: In private meditation, Captain. Spock will tell you that such meditation is a personal experience, not to be discussed. especially not with Earthmen. 
KIRK: That's a very convenient excuse, Ambassador. 
(Sarek suddenly collapses.) 
AMANDA: Sarek. Sarek. What's wrong? 
MCCOY: It's difficult to say with Vulcan physiology, but I believe it's something to do with his cardiovascular system. 
KIRK: Can you help him? 
MCCOY: I don't know that yet either.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. I get sensor readings of tri-tritanium from the alien ship's hull. 
KIRK: I'm sorry about your father. 
SPOCK: Yes, it could adversely affect our mission. 
KIRK: Aren't you worried about him? 
SPOCK: Worry is a human emotion, Captain. I accept what has happened. The ship's hull seems to have a high density level or is cloaked against sensor probes. It is manned, but sensors cannot make out specifics. 
KIRK: I see. Well, the Romulans have nothing like it. Certainly not the Federation or the neutral planets. What about the Klingons? 
SPOCK: I think it unlikely it is one of theirs. 
KIRK: Who, then? 
UHURA: Captain? I picked up the last part of a transmission. Just like that other one. I put the recorder and the directional locator on it immediately. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, directional locator indicates source bearing twenty seven, mark eight. 
CHEKOV: It's the intruder ship, sir. 
KIRK: Switch recorder to Mister Spock's station for decode, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Sir, the directional locator indicates reception point somewhere within the body of this ship. 
KIRK: A personal receiver? Somebody on board is in contact with that vessel? 
SPOCK: Possibly, Captain. But I cannot decode this transmission. 
KIRK: Why not? 
SPOCK: It is in no known code. There's no detectable pattern. No standard references apply. 
KIRK: Are any conclusions possible from the information? 
SPOCK: Only negative. It fits none of our computer records, and it is alien. 
KIRK: Murder? Someone out there playing tag? Lieutenant, you've got your sensor locator on a wide beam. You've established a receiver on board this vessel. Tighten your field to the interior of the ship. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: If that alien vessel starts transmitting again, I want to know who on board the Enterprise is receiving.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Bones, how is he? 
MCCOY: As far as I can tell from instrument readings, our prime suspect has a malfunction in one of the heart valve. It's similar to a heart attack in a human. But with Vulcan physiology, it's impossible to tell without an operation. Mrs. Sarek, has he had any previous attacks? 
AMANDA: No. 
SAREK: Yes. There were three others. My physician prescribed Benjisidrine for the condition. 
AMANDA: Why didn't you tell me? 
SAREK: There was nothing you could have done. 
KIRK: Ambassador, when did you have these attacks? 
SAREK: Two before we left Vulcan, the third a few hours ago. I was on the observation deck. When the Tellarite was murdered, I was quite incapacitated. 
KIRK: There were no witnesses? 
SAREK: None. 
SPOCK: Doctor, do you propose surgery for the heart defect? 
MCCOY: I'm not sure. It's tough enough on a human. On a Vulcan, an ordinary operation's out of the question. 
KIRK: Why? 
SAREK: Because of the construction of the Vulcan heart. 
SPOCK: I suggest that a cryogenic open-heart procedure would be the logical approach. 
SAREK: Yes, unquestionably. 
KIRK: Bones, what about it? 
MCCOY: Well, I'm glad somebody's asking me something around here. Well, the procedure they're discussing would require tremendous amounts of blood for the patient. 
CHAPEL: Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes. 
CHAPEL: I've checked the blood bank. There isn't enough Vulcan blood and plasma to even begin such an operation of this type. 
KIRK: There are other Vulcans aboard. 
SAREK: My blood type is T-negative. Somewhat rare, even for a Vulcan. 
MCCOY: Yes, I'd say that's rare. 
SPOCK: My blood is T-negative, Doctor. 
CHAPEL: We've run a number of blood tests on Mister Spock. It isn't true Vulcan blood either. It has human blood elements in it. 
SPOCK: It should be possible to filter out the human factors. 
MCCOY: Even you couldn't give that much blood, Spock. It would kill you. 
KIRK: Bones. 
MCCOY: Mrs. Sarek, you must understand the chances are extremely small to find a way to produce sufficient T-negative blood. 
SPOCK: Indeed. I would estimate the odds 
AMANDA: Please don't.

[McCoy's office]

SPOCK: Doctor. 
MCCOY: I see it, Spock, but that was a Rigelian. 
SPOCK: Rigelian physiology is very similar to Vulcan. 
MCCOY: Similar is not good enough. It's still experimental. 
SPOCK: But it does look promising. 
MCCOY: Spock, we would need such great amounts of blood that, even if the drug worked on the Vulcans as well as a Rigelian, which I'm doubtful, it would still drain Sarek to a critical level. 
SPOCK: I consider the safety factor low, but acceptable. 
MCCOY: Plus the fact I've never operated on a Vulcan before. Oh, I've studied the anatomical types. I know where all the organs are. But that's a lot different from actual surgical experience. So if I don't kill him with the operation, the drug probably will. 
AMANDA: What drug, Doctor? My husband is asleep. What drug? 
MCCOY: A chemical stimulant to speed up reproduction and replacement of blood in the body. It's only experimental. 
SPOCK: It has been used successfully on test subjects on Rigel Five. 
MCCOY: It places a tremendous strain on the spleen and the liver. In Sarek's condition, the stimulant would kill him. 
SPOCK: Miss Chapel? I underwent a physical examination last week. Would you pull those records, please? 
CHAPEL: Already pulled. You're perfectly healthy, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: What has that got 
AMANDA: You're going to use it on yourself. A transfusion from you to your father. 
SPOCK: It would seem the only answer. 
MCCOY: It could damage you internally. It could kill you. I'm sorry, Spock. I can't sanction it. 
AMANDA: And I refuse to permit it. I won't risk both of you. 
SPOCK: Then you automatically condemn Sarek to death. And you, Doctor, have no logical alternative either. If you do not operate, Sarek will die. You now have the means to perform the operation. I am volunteering myself as the blood donor. I'll be at my station until you require me.

[Corridor]

(Kirk is in the middle of a vigorous fight with an Andorian (the blue people with antennae). The Andorian pulls a knife and stabs Kirk before getting kicked unconscious.) 
KIRK: Bridge. Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Spock here.

[Corridor]

KIRK: I'm on deck five, near my quarters. I've been attacked by an Andorian. Security. Security team. 
(He passes out.) SPOCK [OC]: Captain? Captain? Captain?

Captain's log, stardate 3843.4. First Officer Spock in temporary command. The captain has been critically wounded by one of the delegates to the Babel conference. The ship is on alert status. We are still being followed by the intruder vessel.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: It's a bad wound. Punctured left lung. A centimetre or so lower, it'd have gone through the heart. 
SPOCK: I'll be in the brig questioning the Andorian prisoner. 
CHAPEL: (monitoring Sarek) Doctor, the K2 factor is dropping. 
MCCOY: Spock, your father is much worse. There's no longer a choice. I have to operate immediately. We can begin as soon as you're prepared. 
SPOCK: No, Doctor. 
MCCOY: What? 
SPOCK: My first responsibility is to the ship. Our passengers' safety is by Starfleet order of first importance. We are being followed by an alien, possibly hostile, vessel. I cannot relinquish command under these circumstances. 
MCCOY: You can turn command over to Scotty. 
SPOCK: On what grounds, Doctor? Command requirements do not recognise personal privilege. I'll be in the brig interrogating the Andorian.

[Brig]

SHRAS: He is Thelev, a minor member of my staff. I know nothing of him except that he has served adequately. 
SPOCK: He has been subjected to questioning under verifier scan and truth drug. He reveals nothing. I suggest his mind has been so conditioned as part of a preconceived plan. 
SHRAS: My people are a violent race, but we've no quarrel with Captain Kirk. 
SPOCK: Apparently Thelev did. 
SHRAS: You suggest a plot. How could it profit us to harm the captain? 
SPOCK: I do not know. There is no logic in Thelev's attack upon the captain. There is no logic in Gav's murder. 
SHRAS: Perhaps you should forget logic and devote yourself to motivations of passion or gain. Those are reasons for murder.

[Spock's quarters]

(The doorbell rings impatiently.) 
SPOCK: Come in. 
AMANDA: Spock, you must turn command over to somebody else. 
SPOCK: Mother, when I was commissioned, I took an oath to carry out responsibilities which were clearly and exactly specified. 
AMANDA: Any competent officer can command this ship. Only you can give your father the blood transfusions that he needs to live. 
SPOCK: Any competent officer can command this ship under normal circumstances. The circumstances are not normal. We're carrying over one hundred valuable Federation passengers. We're being pursued by an alien ship. We're subject to possible attack. There has been murder and attempted murder on board. I cannot dismiss my duties. 
AMANDA: Duty? Your duty is to your father. 
SPOCK: I know, but this must take precedence. If I could give the transfusion without loss of time or efficiency, I would. Sarek understands my reason. 
AMANDA: Well, I don't. It's not human. That's not a dirty word. You're human, too. Let that part of you come through. Your father's dying. 
SPOCK: Mother, how can you have lived on Vulcan so long, married a Vulcan, raised a son on Vulcan, without understanding what it means to be a Vulcan? 
AMANDA: If this is what it means, I don't want to know. 
SPOCK: It means to adopt a philosophy, a way of life, which is logical and beneficial. We cannot disregard that philosophy merely for personal gain, no matter how important that gain might be. 
AMANDA: Nothing is as important as your father's life. 
SPOCK: Can you imagine what my father would say if I were to agree, if I were to give up command of this vessel, jeopardise hundreds of lives, risk interplanetary war, all for the life of one person? 
AMANDA: When you were five years old and came home stiff-lipped, anguished, because the other boys tormented you saying that you weren't really Vulcan. I watched you, knowing that inside that the human part of you was crying and I cried, too. There must be some part of me in you, some part that I still can reach. If being Vulcan is more important to you, then you'll stand there speaking rules and regulations from Starfleet and Vulcan philosophy, and let your father die. And I'll hate you for the rest of my life. 
SPOCK: Mother 
AMANDA: Oh, go to him. Now. Please. 
SPOCK: I cannot. 
(She slaps his face and storms out.)

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Doctor McCoy? 
KIRK: I'd like to get my hands on the guy with the sledgehammer. 
CHAPEL: The one who hit you? 
KIRK: No, the one inside my head. How long have I 
(Tries to sit up and fails.) 
MCCOY: Now let that be a lesson to you. Just lie there and be happy you're still alive. 
KIRK: How's Sarek? 
MCCOY: Not good. If I could only operate. 
KIRK: What's stopping you? I thought you were all ready. 
MCCOY: I was. When you became injured, Spock assumed command. He's going to stay there until you're back on your feet, even if it costs Sarek his life. Regulations. 
KIRK: I can't damn him for his loyalty, for doing his duty, but I'm not going to let him commit patricide. 
MCCOY: Jim, if you stand, you could start to bleed again. 
KIRK: Bones, Sarek will die without that operation, and you can't operate without transfusions from Spock. I'll convince Spock I'm all right and order him to report here. As soon as he leaves the bridge, I'll turn command over to Scotty and report to my quarters. Will that fill your prescription?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: I'll take over, Mister Spock. You report to Sickbay with Doctor McCoy. 
SPOCK: Captain, are you quite all right? 
MCCOY: I've certified him physically fit, Mister Spock. Now since I have an operation to perform and both of us are required 
KIRK: Get out, Spock. Chekov, what's the status of the intruder? 
CHEKOV: No change, sir. Maintaining its distance. 
KIRK: Any further transmissions, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: None, sir. 
(The turbolift doors close on Spock and McCoy.) 
KIRK: Call Mister Scott to the bridge. 
CHEKOV: Captain, the alien vessel is moving closer. 
KIRK: Belay that order. I'll stay here. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm picking up the alien signal again, but it's coming from inside the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Specific origin? 
UHURA: From the brig, sir. 
KIRK: Security? Security to the brig. Search the prisoner immediately.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Readings, Nurse. 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock's blood reproduction rate is up over two hundred percent. Sarek's heartbeat has risen to three hundred and twenty four. Blood pressure ninety over forty, dropping. 
MCCOY: I wish I knew whether that was good or bad. Initiate sterile field. 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock. 
(Spock is starting to get up.)
MCCOY: Where do you think you're going? 
SPOCK: I must see the captain. 
MCCOY: My patients don't walk out in the middle of an operation. 
SPOCK: The alien ship. I've just realised that if their power utilisation curve is not the norm, it should be possible to identify them this way. Very important. 
(Chapel gives him a hypo to put him to sleep.) 
MCCOY: So is your father's life.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk here. 
JOSEPH [OC]: Security here. We had to stun the Andorian. He had some sort of transceiver. It was hidden in his antenna. 
CHEKOV: Captain, the alien ship has changed course and speed. Moving directly toward us at warp eight. 
KIRK: Bring the prisoner to the bridge. Deflectors on. Red Alert. Phasers stand by to fire on my order. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. Shields on. Phasers manned and ready, sir. 
KIRK: Chekov, take over Spock's scanners. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. 
(The little light flashes past and the Enterprise rocks.) 
KIRK: Target, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Moving away. Turning now. He's coming around again. 
KIRK: Fire as he passes, Ensign. 
CHEKOV: A clean miss, sir. 
KIRK: Report on his weaponry, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Sensors record standard phasers, sir. 
KIRK: Standard phasers. Good. They may have more speed, but they're not giants. 
UHURA: Captain, the intercoms are jammed. All the ambassadors are asking what's going on. 
KIRK: Tell them to take a good guess, but clear that board, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
CHEKOV: He's coming around again.
(Another hit and jolt.)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: One more like that, and I'm going to lose both these men.
(Spock is awake again.)

[Bridge]

(Another attack.) 
CHEKOV: Fire control locked into the computers, Captain. 
KIRK: On my order, fire photon torpedoes two, four and six. Widest possible scatter. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
CHEKOV: Full spread missed, sir. They're moving too fast for us.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Doctor, his heart's stopped. 
MCCOY: Cardio-stimulate. 
(Another jolt.) 
CHAPEL: The systems are off. 
MCCOY: Then get me that old portable cardio-stimulator. 
(She fetches a hand-sized device from a trolley.) 
MCCOY: Call engineering and have sickbay systems put on priority.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Number four shield has buckled, sir. 
KIRK: Auxiliary power. 
CHEKOV: Switching over. Shields firming up. Number four is still weak, sir. If they hit us there again, it'll go altogether. 
(Sickbay gets its power back.) 
(Thelev is brought to the Bridge.) 
KIRK: Your friends out there are good. They'll have to destroy this ship to win. 
THELEV: That was intended from the beginning, Captain. 
KIRK: You're not Andorian. Who are you? 
UHURA: Damage reports coming in, Captain. Every deck. 
KIRK: Damage control procedures, all decks. That ship out there has phasers. At least our weapons are alike. 
CHEKOV: Number two shield is gone. 
KIRK: Engineering, this is the Captain. Cut power on port side except for phaser banks. At my signal, cut starboard power. Kirk out. Who are you? 
THELEV: Find your own answers, Captain. You haven't long to live. 
KIRK: You're a spy, surgically altered to pass as an Andorian. Planted in the ambassador's party to use terror and murder to disrupt us and prepare for this attack. 
THELEV: Speculation, Captain. 
KIRK: Engineering, cut power on starboard side. Maintain until further orders. Chekov. 
(In the darkened ship, Chekov takes back his usual station.) 
THELEV: What are you doing? 
KIRK: You speculate. 
CHEKOV: We're starting to drift, sir. Shall I hold her on course? 
KIRK: No. Stand by your phasers, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. Phasers standing by. He's just hovering out there, sir. 
KIRK: Looking us over. We're dead as far as he knows. 
THELEV: You're baiting him. You're trying to lure him in. 
CHEKOV: Here he comes. Range decreasing. Speed dropping close to sublight. 
KIRK: Hold your fire, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Phasers locked on target. Range closing. Seventy five thousand kilometres. 
KIRK: Fire. 
(There's a satisfying flare on the viewscreen.) 
CHEKOV: Got him! 
KIRK: Secure from general quarters. Lieutenant, open the hailing frequency. If they wish to surrender 
(A very big flare makes everyone shield their eyes.) 
THELEV: They could not surrender, Captain. They had orders to self-destruct. 
(While in Sickbay, Sarek's vital signs are strengthening.) 
KIRK: Lieutenant, relay to Starfleet command. Tell them we have a prisoner. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
THELEV: Only temporarily, Captain. You see, I had orders to self-destruct, too. Slow poison. Quite painless, actually, but there's no known antidote. I anticipate another ten minutes of life. 
KIRK: Take him to Sickbay. 
THELEV: I seem to have miscalculated. 
(He dies with the security guards holding his arms.) 
KIRK: So did they. Mister Chekov, take over.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: Are you quite through shaking the ship around? 
KIRK: Spock, Sarek how are they? 
MCCOY: I don't mind telling you, you sure make it difficult for a surgeon trying 
KIRK: Bones! 
AMANDA: Captain, come in. 
(They go through to the ward.) 
MCCOY: That pig-headed Vulcan stamina. I couldn't have pulled them through without it. 
KIRK: Some doctors have all the luck. 
SPOCK: Captain, I believe you'll find the alien 
KIRK: We damaged their ship. They destroyed themselves to avoid capture. Bones, Thelev's body will be brought to your lab. I want an autopsy performed as soon as possible. 
SPOCK: I think you'll find he's an Orion, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Orion? 
SPOCK: Intelligence reports that Orion smugglers have been raiding the Coridan system. 
KIRK: But what would they gain by an attack on Starfleet? 
SAREK: Mutual suspicion and interplanetary war. 
KIRK: Yes, of course. With Orion carefully neutral, they'd clean up supplying dilithium to both sides and continue to raid Coridan. 
SPOCK: The thing that confused me was the power utilisation curve. It made them seem more powerful than a starship or anything known to us. That ship was constructed for a suicide mission. Since they never intended to return to their home base, they could use one hundred percent power on their attacks. The thing I don't understand is why I didn't think of it earlier. 
KIRK: You might have had something else on your mind. 
SPOCK: That hardly seems likely. 
KIRK: No, but thank you anyway. 
AMANDA: And you, Sarek. Would you also say thank you to your son? 
SAREK: I don't understand. 
AMANDA: For saving your life. 
SAREK: Spock acted in the only logical manner open to him. One does not thank logic, Amanda. 
AMANDA: Logic, logic! I'm sick to death of logic. Do you want to know how I feel about your logic? 
SPOCK: Emotional, isn't she? 
SAREK: She has always been that way. 
SPOCK: Indeed? Why did you marry her? 
SAREK: At the time, it seemed the logical thing to do. 
KIRK: Bones. (starts to collapse.) No, no, I'm all right 
(McCoy helps him onto a bed.) 
MCCOY: If you keep arguing with your kindly family doctor, you're going to spend your next ten days right here. If you co-operate, you'll be out in two. 
SPOCK: Doctor, I'll return to my station now. 
MCCOY: You are at your station, Mister Spock. 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy, I believe you're enjoying all this. 
SPOCK: Indeed, Captain. I've never seen him look so happy. 
MCCOY: Shut up. (to Kirk) Shh. Shh! (to camera) Well, what do you know? I finally got the last word.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Metamorphosis
Stardate: Unknown
Original Airdate: 10 Nov, 1967

[Shuttlecraft]
(Enterprise shuttlecraft NCC1701/7 is being piloted by Kirk, assisted by Spock. McCoy is tending to a lady in a green dress and headscarf.) 
SPOCK: We have reached projected point three, Captain. Adjust to new course two oh one mark one five. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: (offering a drink) Jim. 
KIRK: How is she, Doc? 
MCCOY: No change. 
NANCY: Small thanks to the Starfleet. 
MCCOY: Now really, Commissioner, you can't blame the Starfleet. 
NANCY: I should've received the proper inoculations ahead of time. 
MCCOY: Sakuro's disease is extremely rare. The chances of anyone contracting it are literally billions to one. 
NANCY: I was sent to Epsilon Canaris Three to prevent a war, Doctor. Thanks to the inefficiency of the medical branch of the Starfleet, I've been forced to leave before my job was done. 
KIRK: Commissioner, I can assure you that once we reach the Enterprise, with its medical facilities, we'll have you back to your job in time for you to prevent that war. 
NANCY: How soon will we rendezvous with that ship of yours, Captain? 
KIRK: In exactly four hours, twenty one minutes, Commissioner. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes? 
SPOCK: Will you check your automatic scanner, please? 
KIRK: That's odd. I've never seen anything like that before. 
SPOCK: Nor have I. 
(They lower the central shutter to view the approaching swirly flashing thing.)
SPOCK: Heading directly toward us at warp speed. 
KIRK: Staying right with us. Sensor readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Vaguely like a cloud of ionised hydrogen, but with strong erratic electrical impulses. 
(Sounds of electrical shorts. The lights flicker.) 
KIRK: We've got it. 
SPOCK: Helm does not answer, Captain. 
KIRK: Neither do the pods. Communications are dead. Building overload. Cut all power relays. 
SPOCK: Cut, Captain. 
NANCY: What's happening? I demand to know. 
KIRK: You already know as much as we do, Miss Hedford. Whatever that thing is outside, it's yanked us off course from the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: Now on course nine eight mark one two, heading directly toward Gamma Canaris region. 
MCCOY: Jim, we've got to get Miss Hedford to the Enterprise. Her condition. 
KIRK: I know, Bones, but there's nothing I can do about it. 
NANCY: I insist you make your scheduled rendezvous with the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Miss Hedford, we'll do what we can, when we can. At the moment, we're helpless. You might as well sit back and enjoy the ride.

[Shuttlecraft]

(The shuttlecraft has landed on a blue and purple planet. It is surrounded by lots of very high cliffs.) 
KIRK: Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please, come in. Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please. It's no good. We're not transmitting. Bones? 
MCCOY: Oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere. Some krypton, argon, neon. Temperature seventy five degrees Fahrenheit. Practically identical to Earth atmosphere. 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Gravity is similar to Earth. Most unusual in view of its size. The bulk of the body seems to be iron and nickel. More than an asteroid. Like a small planetoid, I should say. Possibly a remnant of a planet breakup. Totally suitable for human life. 
KIRK: All right, we get out and get up. Issue phasers. Bones, maintain full alert. Commissioner, you'll stay inside. 
NANCY: Just how long am I supposed to stay inside, Captain? 
KIRK: That's a very good question. I wish I could answer it. All right. Let's go.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Take a look around, Bones. 
(Spock checks the shuttlecraft for damage.) 
SPOCK: Most unusual. Unlikely. In fact, Captain, I would say quite impossible. 
KIRK: Nothing wrong and nothing works. 
SPOCK: Precisely. 
KIRK: There must be a reason. 
SPOCK: Obviously. 
KIRK: Let's look a little further. 
(Nancy comes out of the shuttlecraft.) 
MCCOY: Jim, I just took a tricording sweep, and I got the same readings almost as Spock got when we were pulled off course. 
SPOCK: The ionised cloud. 
MCCOY: I think so, only it reads here on the surface with us. It's in that direction, and it doesn't read solid. It's more unstable, tenuous, like a collection of gases. 
COCHRANE [OC]: Hello! Hello! 
(A figure in an orange jumpsuit waves and runs towards them.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: Bones, get a physiological reading on that, whatever it is. 
COCHRANE: Hello! Are you real? I mean, I'm not imagining you, am I? 
KIRK: We're real enough. 
COCHRANE: You speak English. Earth people? 
KIRK: From the Federation. 
COCHRANE: The F? Well, it doesn't matter. I'm Cochrane. I've been marooned here who knows how long. If you only knew how good it is to see you. And a woman. A beautiful one at that. 
KIRK: I'm Captain James T. Kirk, commanding the starship Enterprise. (they shake hands) This is my first officer Mister Spock. 
COCHRANE: You're a Vulcan, aren't you? 
SPOCK: Correct. 
KIRK: Chief Surgeon Leonard McCoy. 
COCHRANE: Doctor. 
MCCOY: Pleasure. 
KIRK: Oh, and excuse me, Assistant Federation Commissioner Hedford. 
COCHRANE: Ma'am. You're food to a starving man. All of you. Hey, that's a nice ship. Simple and clean. Been trying to get her to go again? Well, forget it. It won't work. 
MCCOY: He's human, Jim. Everything checks out perfectly. 
KIRK: Mister Cochrane. We were forced off our course and taken here by some force we couldn't identify. 
SPOCK: Which seems to be on the surface of this body at the moment. 
COCHRANE: Well, I wouldn't know anything about that. 
SPOCK: You say we'll be unable to get the ship to function again? 
COCHRANE: Not a chance. There's some sort of dampening field down here. Power systems don't work. Take my word for it. 
SPOCK: You don't mind if we continue to try? 
COCHRANE: Go right ahead. You've got plenty of time. 
KIRK: What about you, Cochrane? How did you get here? 
COCHRANE: Marooned, I told you. Look, we'll have lots of time to learn about each other. I have a small place over that way. All the comforts of home. I can even offer you a hot bath. 
NANCY: How perceptive of you to notice I needed one. 
KIRK: If you don't mind, Mister Cochrane, I'd like more than just a statement that you were marooned here. It's a long way off the beaten path. 
COCHRANE: That's right. That's why I'm so glad to see you. Look, I'll tell you everything you want to know, but not here. Your ship is sure a beauty. 
KIRK: Yes, she is. And you've been out of circulation quite a while. The principles may be new to you. Mister Spock, why don't you explain our methods of propulsion to Mister Cochrane? 
(Spock and Cochrane go to the other side of the shuttlecraft.) 
MCCOY: Talks a lot, but he doesn't say much. 
KIRK: I've noticed something else. 
MCCOY: What's that? 
KIRK: He looks familiar. 
MCCOY: Familiar? Now that you mention it, he does. 
KIRK: I can't quite place him, but. What about Miss Hedford? 
MCCOY: No temperature yet, but we've got to get under way soon, Jim. I guarantee you, it will develop. What are we going to do? 
KIRK: Take Cochrane up on his offer.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

(Not a true vertical in the building, and palms in the garden. It looks quite nice and avant-garde.) 
SPOCK: You built this, Mister Cochrane? 
COCHRANE: Yes. I had tools and supplies left over from my crash. 
SPOCK: Not bad. 
COCHRANE: Not Earth, but it's livable. I grow vegetables in the fields over that next ridge. Come on in.

[Cochrane's home]

KIRK: All the comforts of home indeed, Mister Cochrane. Where'd you get the antiques? 
COCHRANE: You mean my instruments? I imagine things have changed a lot since I crashed. 
KIRK: Not that much. 
(Hands a piece over to Spock to examine.) 
NANCY: Must you keep it so terribly hot in here? 
COCHRANE: The temperature's a constant seventy two degrees. Let me get you something cool to drink. 
MCCOY: Do you feel hot? 
NANCY: I feel infuriated, deeply put upon, and absolutely outraged. 
MCCOY: It was quite a hike here. You're tired. Just take it easy for a while. 
NANCY: I'll rest later, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Temperature, Captain. First sign. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. It means we're running out of time. 
SPOCK: Captain, Doctor. 
(From the doorway, the three see a swirly thing which then disappears. Cochrane comes in with a tray of drinks.) 
KIRK: What was that? 
COCHRANE: Well, sometimes the light plays tricks on you. You'd be surprised what I've imagined I've seen around here sometimes. 
SPOCK: We imagined nothing, Mister Cochrane. There was an entity out there and I suspect it was the same entity which brought us here. Please explain. 
COCHRANE: There's nothing to explain. 
(He hands a drink to Nancy.) 
NANCY: Thank you. 
KIRK: You'll find I have a very low tolerance level where the safety of my people are concerned. We find you out here, where no human has any business being. We were virtually hijacked in space and brought here. Now I'm not just requesting an explanation, Mister. I'm demanding one. 
COCHRANE: All right. It was the Companion. 
KIRK: The what? 
COCHRANE: That's what I call it. As a matter of fact, Captain, I didn't crash here. I was brought here in my disabled ship. I was almost dead. The Companion saved my life. 
SPOCK: You were injured? 
COCHRANE: I was dying, Mister Spock. 
KIRK: You seem perfectly all right now. What was the matter? 
COCHRANE: I was an old man. 
KIRK: You were what? 
COCHRANE: Well, I don't know how it did it, but the Companion rejuvenated me, made me young again, like I am now. 
SPOCK: I prefer to reserve judgment on that part of your story, sir. Meanwhile, would you please explain exactly what this Companion of yours is? 
COCHRANE: I told you, I don't know what it is. It exists, it lives, and I can communicate with it. 
MCCOY: That's a pretty far out story. 
KIRK: Mister Cochrane, do you have a first name? 
COCHRANE: Zefram. 
KIRK: Zefram Cochrane of Alpha Centuri, the discoverer of the space warp? 
COCHRANE: That's right, Captain. 
MCCOY: But that's impossible. Zefram Cochrane died a hundred and fifty years ago. 
SPOCK: The name of Zefram Cochrane is revered throughout the known galaxy. Planets were named after him. Great universities, cities. 
KIRK: Isn't your story a little improbable, Mister Cochrane? 
COCHRANE: No, it's true. I was eighty seven years old when I came here. 
KIRK: You say this Companion found you and rejuvenated you? What were you doing in space at the age of eighty seven? 
COCHRANE: I was tired, Captain. I was going to die, and I wanted to die in space. That's all. 
SPOCK: True, his body was never found. 
COCHRANE: You're looking at it, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: If so, you wear your age very well. 
MCCOY: How do you feel? 
NANCY: Terrible. How should I feel? 
MCCOY: You're running a little temperature. Perhaps you should lie down. 
NANCY: Doctor, will you please just leave me alone. It's the heat. 
MCCOY: All right. Try to relax. Jim, it's started, the fever. It's over a hundred, and it's climbing. 
KIRK: How long do we have? 
MCCOY: A matter of hours, that's all. 
KIRK: Mister Cochrane, you say you were brought here a hundred and fifty years ago? You don't look over thirty five. 
COCHRANE: I haven't aged. The Companion sees to that. 
SPOCK: Captain. These instruments, they date from the time indicated. From your ship, Mister Cochrane? 
COCHRANE: I cannibalised it. The food, water, gardens, everything else I need the Companion gives me. Apparently, it creates it out of the native elements. 
KIRK: You say you can communicate with it. Perhaps you can find out what we're doing here. 
COCHRANE: I already know. 
KIRK: You wouldn't mind telling us? 
COCHRANE: You won't like it. 
KIRK: I already don't like it. 
COCHRANE: You're here to keep me company. 
KIRK: You mean you brought us here? 
COCHRANE: No, the Companion did. I told it I'd die of loneliness. I thought it would release me. Instead, it brought you here. 
NANCY: No! No! No! That's disgusting! We're not animals! No! Oh, no! It's inhuman! No! No! 
(Kirk and McCoy take her to a bed and lie her down. McCoy gives her an injection.) 
KIRK: Spock, run additional tricorder readings. Learn anything you can. Find me a weapon to use against this thing. 
SPOCK: You ask me to find a weapon. Do you intend to destroy it? 
KIRK: I intend to do whatever's necessary to get us off this planet and Commissioner Hedford to the hospital. If the Companion stands in the way, then we push it out of the way. Clear, Spock? 
SPOCK: Quite clear, Captain. 
KIRK: Very well. You have your orders. (Spock leaves) Mister Cochrane, if you left here, what would happen to you? 
COCHRANE: I'd begin to age again, normally. 
KIRK: Do you want to leave here? 
COCHRANE: Believe me, Captain, immortality consists largely of boredom. What's it like out there in the galaxy? 
KIRK: We're on a thousand planets and spreading out. We cross fantastic distances and everything's alive, Cochrane. Life everywhere. We estimate there are millions of planets with intelligent life. We haven't begun to map them. Interesting? 
COCHRANE: How would you like to sleep for a hundred and fifty years and wake up in a new world? 
KIRK: It's all out there waiting for you, but we'll need your help to get away. 
COCHRANE: You've got it.

[Outside the shuttlecraft]

(Spock is working when the Companion appears next to him. He reaches to touch it, and then is flung away. The electrics in the shuttlecraft all burn out.)

[Cochrane's home]

KIRK: You seem to think this Companion of yours can do almost anything. 
COCHRANE: I said it was very powerful. 
KIRK: Could it cure her? 
COCHRANE: I don't know. 
KIRK: How do you communicate with it? 
COCHRANE: It's on a non-verbal level, but I usually get my message across. 
KIRK: We've got to try. We're helpless. See if it can do something.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: How do you do it? 
COCHRANE: I just sort of clear my mind and it comes. 
(He walks to the edge of the garden then stands with his eyes closed. The Companion appears, then moves to envelope him.) 
KIRK: Bones, what do you make of that? 
MCCOY: Almost a symbiosis of some kind, a sort of joining. 
KIRK: Exactly what I think. Not exactly like a pet owner speaking to a beloved animal, would you say? 
MCCOY: No, it's more than that. 
KIRK: Agreed. More like love. 
(The Companion vanishes, so Kirk and McCoy go over to Cochrane.) 
MCCOY: Are you all right? 
COCHRANE: Yes. It kind of drains me a little, but I'm all right. 
KIRK: Well? 
COCHRANE: The Companion can't do anything to help Miss Hedford. 
KIRK: Then she'll die. 
COCHRANE: If there's anything I could do to help, I would, and I will, but we can expect nothing from the Companion.

[Outside the shuttlecraft]

MCCOY: Spock! Are you all right? 
SPOCK: Yes. Quite all right, Doctor. A most fascinating thing happened. Apparently, the Companion imparted to me a rather quaint, old-fashioned electric shock of respectable voltage. 
MCCOY: It attacked you? 
SPOCK: Evidently. Unquestionably, a large part of its substance is simple electricity. 
MCCOY: Oh, yes. I'm not a scientist or a physicist, Mister Spock, but am I correct in assuming that anything that generates electricity can be shorted out? 
SPOCK: Quite correct, Doctor.

[Cochrane's home]

(Spock is demonstrating the device he has put on the table.) 
SPOCK: Put this in the proximity of the Companion, throw this switch, and it will scramble every electrical impulse the creature can produce. It cannot fail. 
KIRK: It troubles you, Cochrane? 
COCHRANE: The Companion saved my life. It's taken care of me all these years. We've been very close in a way that's hard to explain. I suppose I even have an affection for it. 
KIRK: It's also keeping you prisoner. 
COCHRANE: I don't want it killed. 
SPOCK: We may simply render it powerless. 
COCHRANE: But you don't know. You could kill it. I won't stand for that. 
KIRK: We're getting out of here, Cochrane. Face up to it. I'll do anything I have to to save all of our lives. 
COCHRANE: I suppose from your point of view, you're right. 
MCCOY: We understand how you feel, Mister Cochrane, but it has to be done. 
COCHRANE: All right. You want me to contact it? 
KIRK: Please. Outside. 
COCHRANE: What was it they used to call it? The Judas goat? (leaves) 
SPOCK: There is some risk, Captain. We do not know the extent of its powers. 
KIRK: Nor it ours.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

(Cochrane 'calls' and the Companion comes just as before. When it has enveloped him, Kirk gives the word.) 
KIRK: Now. 
(The jolt knocks Cochrane out and the Companion comes towards the dwelling, apparently angry.)

[Cochrane's home]

(It enters, blows up Spock's contraption then attacks Kirk and Spock. They are rolling around on the floor inside the sparkly thing, clutching their throats.) 
MCCOY: Stop it! You're killing them! Stop it, please! Stop it! You're choking them! Let them go. You're choking them! Stop it! 
(Outside, Cochrane hears McCoy's shouts, and somehow calms the Companion. It vanishes.) 
MCCOY: You all right, Jim? 
KIRK: Yeah. 
MCCOY: Spock? 
SPOCK: All right. 
(They go to the doorway and see the Companion with Cochrane again.) 
KIRK: Cochrane got it off of us, but I don't know whether he did us a favour or not. 
MCCOY: What kind of talk is that? 
KIRK: How do you fight a thing like that? I've got a ship up there somewhere, responsibility for four lives here, one of them dying because of me. 
MCCOY: It isn't your fault. 
KIRK: I'm in command, Bones. It makes it my fault. How do you fight a thing like that? 
MCCOY: Maybe you're a soldier so often that you forget you're also trained to be a diplomat. Why not try a carrot instead of a stick? 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: The universal translator on the shuttlecraft. We can try that, talk to that thing. 
SPOCK: The translator is for use with more congruent life forms. 
KIRK: Adjust it, change it. The trouble with immortality is it's boring. Adjusting the translator will give you something to do. 
SPOCK: It is possible. If I could widen its pattern of reception 
KIRK: Right down your alley, Spock. Get it here and get to work. That thing is still out there. Better go that way. 
(Spock leaves, passing Nancy's bed) 
KIRK: Any change? 
MCCOY: Yes, for the worse.

Ship's Log. Stardate 3219.8. Lieutenant Commander Scott recording in the absence of Captain Kirk. A shuttlecraft bearing the Captain, the first officer, Chief Surgeon McCoy, and Assistant Federation Commissioner Hedford is now definitely overdue for a rendezvous with the Enterprise. We are attempting to backtrack it.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Mister Scott. Computer central reports that we're coming up on the co-ordinates of the last established position of the shuttlecraft. 
SCOTT: Thank you, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Steady. No, Mister Scott, bearing three ten mark thirty five just cleared. No antimatter residue. 
SCOTT: All scanners, spherical sweep. Range, maximum. They'll have to pick it up. 
UHURA: If the shuttlecraft powered away, Mister Scott, but if it were just towed? 
SCOTT: There'd still be traces of residual matter floating around, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Bearing two ten mark forty. Strong particle concentration. We're on it, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Lay on that course. Maintain scanning. 
SULU: Course laid in, sir. Particle density decreasing. Gone, sir. No readings. 
SCOTT: Steady as she goes, Mister Sulu. 
UHURA: What do you think it means, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: The shuttlecraft was on schedule until it was shy five hours of rendezvous. Then something happened. 
UHURA: Well, I'd feel a lot better if it were a little more definite. 
SCOTT: It didn't wreck. There was no debris. There's no trace of expelled internal atmosphere, no residual radioactivity. Ah, it's. Something took over. Tractor beams maybe. Something. They dragged it away on the heading we're now on. 
UHURA: If there are no further traces, how are we going to follow them? 
SCOTT: We stay on this course, see what comes up. 
UHURA: It's a big galaxy, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye.

[Cochrane's home]

(Spock is working on the Universal Translator. It is basically a metal tube nearly a foot long, that can be held in the hand.) 
COCHRANE: What's the theory behind this device? 
KIRK: There are certain universal ideas and concepts common to all intelligent life. This device instantaneously compares the frequency of brainwave patterns, selects those ideas and concepts it recognises, and then provides the necessary grammar. 
SPOCK: Then it translates its findings into English. 
COCHRANE: You mean it speaks? 
KIRK: With a voice or the approximation of whatever the creature is on the sending end. Not one hundred percent efficient, but nothing ever is. Ready, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Quite ready, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Cochrane, call the Companion.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

(Cochrane summons the Companion.) 
KIRK: Companion. (It leaves Cochrane) We wish to talk to you. 
COMPANION: How can we communicate? My thoughts, you are hearing them. This is interesting. 
KIRK: Feminine. No doubt about it. 
SPOCK: Yes. The matter of gender could change the entire situation. 
KIRK: I'm way ahead of you. 
SPOCK: Then it is not a zookeeper. 
KIRK: No. A lover. Companion. It is wrong to keep us here against our will. 
COMPANION: A man needs the company of his own kind, or he will cease to exist. He felt it to me. 
KIRK: One of us will cease to exist if we don't get her to a place where we can care for her. 
COMPANION: The man needs others of his species. That is why you are here. The man must continue. 
KIRK: Companion, try to understand. It is the nature of our species to be free, just as it is your nature to stay here. We will cease to exist in captivity. 
COMPANION: Your bodies have stopped their peculiar degeneration. There will be nothing to harm you. You will continue, and the man will continue. This is necessary. 
SPOCK: This is a marvellous opportunity to add to our knowledge. Ask it about its nature, its history. 
KIRK: This isn't a classroom. I'm trying to get us out of here. 
SPOCK: A chance like this may never come again. It could tell us so much. 
KIRK: This isn't the time. Companion, what you offer us is not continuation. It is non=existence. We will cease to exist. Even the man will cease to exist. 
COMPANION : Your impulses are illogical. This communication is useless. The man must continue. Therefore, you will continue. It is necessary. 
(She vanishes, and they all head back indoors.)

[Cochrane's home]

COCHRANE: Captain, why did you build that translator with a feminine voice? 
KIRK: We didn't. 
COCHRANE: But I heard 
KIRK: The idea of male and female are universal constants, Cochrane. There's no doubt about it. The Companion is female. 
COCHRANE: I don't understand. 
MCCOY: You don't? A blind man could see it with a cane. You're not a pet. You're not a specimen kept in a cage. You're a lover. 
COCHRANE: I'm a what? 
SPOCK: Her attitude when she approaches you is profoundly different than when she contacts us. Her appearance is soft, gentle. Her voice is melodic, pleasing. I do not totally understand the emotion, but it obviously exists. The Companion loves you. 
COCHRANE: Do you know what you're saying? For all these years, I've let something as alien as that crawl around inside me, into my mind, my feelings. 
KIRK: What are you complaining about? It kept you alive. 
COCHRANE: That thing fed on me. It used me. It's disgusting. 
MCCOY: There's nothing disgusting about it. It's just another life form, that's all. You get used to those things. 
COCHRANE: You're as bad as it is. 
SPOCK: Your highly emotional reaction is most illogical. Your relationship with the Companion has for one hundred and fifty years been emotionally satisfying, eminently practical, and totally harmless. It may indeed have been quite beneficial. 
COCHRANE: Is this what the future holds? Men who have no notion of decency or morality? Maybe I'm a hundred and fifty years out of style, but I'm not going to be fodder for any inhuman monster. (leaves) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. A totally parochial attitude. 
NANCY: Doctor. Doctor. 
MCCOY: Right here, Miss Hedford. 
NANCY: I heard him. He was loved and he resents it. 
MCCOY: You just rest. 
NANCY: No. I don't want to die. I've been good at my job, but I've never been loved. Never. What kind of life is that? Not to be loved, never to have shown love? And he runs away from love. (cries)

Ship's log, stardate 3220.3. Lieutenant Commander Scott reporting in lieu of the Captain and the first officer. We are continuing our search for the missing shuttlecraft.

[Bridge]

SULU: Approaching what seems to be an asteroid belt, sir. Scanners report approximately seven thousand bodies of sizes running from types A to N. 
SCOTT: Atmosphere count? 
SULU: Approximately thirty four percent of the bodies of atmospherian types H to M. 
SCOTT: All right, then. We'll do it the hard way. All sensors set for life form registration. Automatic selection. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, there are thousands of them out there they could be on, if they're on any of them at all. 
SCOTT: That's right, Lieutenant. Thousands. And we'll look them over one by one.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

(Another contact session is in progress.) 
KIRK: Companion, do you love the man? 
COMPANION: I do not understand. 
KIRK: Is he important to you, more important than anything? Is he as though he were a part of you? 
COMPANION: He is part of me. The man must continue. 
KIRK: He will not continue. He will cease to exist. By your feeling for him, you are condemning him to an existence he will find unbearable. He will cease to exist. 
COMPANION: He does not age. He remains forever. 
KIRK: You speak of his body. I speak of his spirit. Companion, inside the shelter, a female of our species is dying. She will not continue. That is what will happen to the man unless you release all of us. 
COMPANION: I do not understand. 
KIRK: Our species can only survive if we have obstacles to overcome. You take away all obstacles. Without them to strengthen us, we will weaken and die. You regard the man only as a toy. You amuse yourself with him. 
COMPANION: You are wrong. The man is the centre of all things. I care for him. 
KIRK: But you can't really love him. You haven't the slightest knowledge of love, the total union of two people. You are the Companion. He is the man. You are two different things. You can't join. You can't love. You may keep him here forever, but you will always be separate, apart from him. 
COMPANION: If I were human there can be love? (vanishes) 
MCCOY: What did you hope to gain by that, Jim? 
KIRK: Try to convince her of the hopelessness of it. Love sometimes expresses itself in sacrifice. I thought maybe if she loved him, she'd let him go. 
SPOCK: But she or it is inhuman, Captain. You cannot expect her to react like a human. 
KIRK: I tried. 
COCHRANE: It's useless. I know. 
NANCY: (standing in the doorway) Zefram Cochrane. 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: I don't understand it. She's not sick at all. 
NANCY: We understand. 
COCHRANE: It's her. 
KIRK: What? 
COCHRANE: Don't you understand? It's the Companion. 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: She's perfectly healthy. Heart like a hammer, respiration normal, blood pressure normal. This is medically impossible. 
NANCY: We are here. 
KIRK: We? 
NANCY: Both of us. Those you knew as the Commissioner and the Companion. We are both here. 
SPOCK: Companion, you do not have the power to create life. 
NANCY: That is for the Maker of all things. 
SPOCK: Commissioner Hedford was dying. 
NANCY: That part of us was too weak to hold on. In a moment, there would have been no continuing. Now we're together. 
SPOCK: Then you are both here, in the one body? 
NANCY: We are one. 
(She goes to Cochrane, who takes a step back.) 
NANCY: Zefram, we frighten you. We've never frightened you before. Loneliness. This is loneliness. Oh, what a bitter thing. Oh, Zefram, it's so sad. How do you bear it, this loneliness? 
KIRK: Spock, check out the shuttlecraft. Engine, communications, everything. 
NANCY: That will not be necessary, Captain. Your vehicle will operate as before, so will the communications device. 
COCHRANE: You're letting us go? 
NANCY: We could do nothing now to stop you. You said we would not know love because we were not human. Now we are human. We'll know the change of days. We will know death. But to touch the hand of man, nothing is as important. 
COCHRANE: You're very beautiful. 
NANCY: Part of me understands. Part does not. But it pleases me. 
COCHRANE: I could explain many things. 
NANCY: Oh, let me walk, Zefram. Let me feel the earth against my feet. Let me feel the warmth of the sun on my face. You beside me. Let me feel these things. 
KIRK: Go ahead, Cochrane We have a few things to do. 
(Cochrane and Nancy walk off hand in hand.)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Mister Scott, it's the Captain. 
SCOTT: Put him on. Lock on to his co-ordinates. Captain, this is Scotty. Are you all right?

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: Perfectly all right. Can you get a fix on us.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The helm is computing your position now, Captain. 
SULU: Course two twenty four mark twelve. ETA fifty seven minutes. 
SCOTT: We'll be there in 57 minutes, sir.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: Very good. I'll continue transmitting. Assume standard orbit when you arrive. We'll transport up in the shuttlecraft.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: What happened, Captain?

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: Interesting story, Scotty. I can't tell you now because, quite frankly, I don't know how it's going to end. Kirk out. 
(Somewhere in the vicinity, Nancy is holding up her scarf to mimic how she saw Cochrane when she was a swirly thing.) 
COCHRANE: Everything will be an eye-opener to you. There's a thousand planets out there, a thousand races, and I'll show everything to you, soon as I learn my way around again. Maybe I can make up a little for everything you've done for me. 
NANCY: I can't go with you, Zefram. 
COCHRANE: Of course you can. You have to. 
NANCY: My life emanates from this place. If I should leave it for more than a tiny march of days, I'll cease to exist. I must return, even as you must consume matter to maintain your life. 
COCHRANE: You gave up everything to be human? But even if you stay here, you'll eventually die. 
NANCY: The joy of this hour. I am pleased. 
COCHRANE: Well, I can't just fly away and leave you here. 
NANCY: You must be free, Zefram Cochrane. 
COCHRANE: You saved my life, took care of me. You loved me. I never understood. I do now. 
(He kisses her.)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're locked in, Captain. Standard orbit established. Shuttlecraft bay standing by to receive you.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: Stand by, Scotty. 
(Cochrane and Nancy return.) 
KIRK: The Enterprise is waiting, Mister Cochrane. 
COCHRANE: I can't take her away from here. If I do, she'll die. If I leave her, she'll die of loneliness. I owe everything to her. I can't leave her. I love her. Is that surprising? 
SPOCK: Not coming from a human being. You are, after all, essentially irrational. 
KIRK: Think it over, Mister Cochrane. There's a whole galaxy out there waiting to honour you. 
COCHRANE: I have honours enough. 
SPOCK: But you will age, both of you. There will be no immortality. You'll both grow old here and finally die. 
COCHRANE: That's been happening to men and women for a long time. I've got the feeling it's one of the pleasanter things about being human, as long as you grow old together. 
KIRK: Are you sure? 
COCHRANE: There's plenty of water here. The climate's good for growing things. I might try to plant a fig tree. A man's entitled to that, isn't he? It isn't gratitude, Captain. Now that I see her, touch her, I know that I love her. We'll have a lot of years together. They'll be happy ones. 
KIRK: All the best. 
(They shake hands, and Kirk walks away.) 
COCHRANE: Captain, don't tell them about me. 
KIRK: Not a word, Mister Cochrane. 
MCCOY: Jim, what about that war on Epsilon Canaris Three? 
KIRK: Well, I'm sure the Federation can find another woman somewhere who'll stop that war.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


I, Mudd
Stardate: 4513.3
Original Airdate: 3 Nov, 1967

[Corridor]
(Spock and McCoy are greeted by a crewman in blue as he walks along.) 
NORMAN: Good morning, sir, Doctor. 
SPOCK: Something wrong? 
MCCOY: Yes. There's something odd about that man, and I can't quite pinpoint it. 
SPOCK: Perhaps you're making a rather hasty judgment. Mister Norman has only been aboard seventy two hours. 
MCCOY: I know when something doesn't strike me right, and he doesn't. 
SPOCK: Specifics, Doctor. Labels do not make arguments. 
MCCOY: All right. There's something wrong about a man who never smiles, whose conversation never varies from the routine of the job, and who won't talk about his background. 
SPOCK: I see. 
MCCOY: Spock, I mean that it's odd for a non-Vulcan. The ears make all the difference. 
SPOCK: I find your argument strewn with gaping defects in logic. 
MCCOY: Maybe, but you can't evaluate a man by logic alone. Besides, he has avoided two appointments that I've made for his physical exam without reason. 
SPOCK: That's not at all surprising, Doctor. He's probably terrified of your beads and rattles.

[Auxiliary Control]

(Norman enters.) 
JORDAN: Command personnel only. 
(Norman knocks him out and makes changes to the various control panels. A 'Danger, Overload' light comes on.)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Yes, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: There's an unplanned course change being fed into the instruments, sir. 
KIRK: Correct it. 
SULU: I can't, sir. 
KIRK: Auxiliary control, this is the captain. Auxiliary control, what's going on down there? 
SULU: Sir, auxiliary control is on total override. 
KIRK: Kirk to Security. 
ROWE [OC]: Security. Lieutenant Rowe here, sir. 
KIRK: Intruder alert, deck eight, auxiliary control. 
ROWE [OC]: Acknowledged. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, have Mister Spock report to the bridge. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: What's the imposed course, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Turning on three oh seven degrees, mark eight. Being executed now, sir.

[Auxiliary Control]

(The three burly security men arrive.)
ROWE: Take care of him. 
(The other two leave with the unconscious crewman.)

[Bridge]

ROWE [OC]: Security to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Auxiliary Control]

ROWE: Lieutenant Rowe, sir. I'm in auxiliary control. Ensign Jordan's been knocked out.

[Bridge]

ROWE [OC]: The directional master controls have been jammed. They're totally unworkable. 
KIRK: Any sign of the intruder?

[Auxiliary Control]

ROWE: No, sir. He's gone. I've put out a full security alert on all decks.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Find him. Kirk out. Mister Spock, we seem to be taking an unscheduled ride. 
SPOCK: Interesting. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, cut in emergency manual monitor. I want the override broken. 
SULU: Sir, the instruments won't respond. 
KIRK: Emergency manual monitor, report.

[Engineering]

(In the upper gallery, Norman has been busy.) 
KIRK [OC]: This is Captain Kirk. Acknowledge.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Emergency manual monitor, this is the captain. Report.

[Engineering]

(Norman enters the main area.)
SCOTT: Here, you're not allowed 
(He is pushed against the wall and knocked out briefly. Norman fights everyone that comes at him.) 
KIRK [OC]: Acknowledge. This is the captain. Scotty, acknowledge. Scotty, what's going on down there?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk to Engineering.

[Engineering]

(The fights continue.) 
KIRK [OC]: This is the captain. Scotty, report.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Scotty, the intruder is in your area.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: What's going on down there? Scotty! 
(Norman has triumphed and is adjusting controls.) 
SCOTT: Captain, he's here.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Scotty.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Scotty.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Scotty? Security, the intruder is in the engineering section. Have all units converge on that point. 
SULU: Sir, we're picking up speed. Warp five, six. Warp seven, sir. 
KIRK: Cut power. 
SULU: I can't, sir. All the controls are jammed. 
KIRK: Spock, take over. 
NORMAN: It will not be necessary, Captain. 
KIRK: Tell Security we've found the intruder. Do you mind telling me what this is all about, mister? 
NORMAN: I am in total control of your ship. I have connected the matter-antimatter pods to the main navigational bank. A trigger relay is now in operation. Any attempts to alter course will result in immediate destruction of this vessel. 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Confirmed, Captain. He's taken out all the override controls. If we tamper without knowing where the trigger relay is, we could extinguish ourselves. 
KIRK: Who are you? 
NORMAN: I assure you we are no threat to humanity or humanoid life. We mean you no harm, but we require your ship. 
KIRK: You require? Who and what are we? 
(Norman lifts his tunic and opens a panel in his abdomen. There are circuit boards, wires and the obligatory flashing lights in there.) 
KIRK: An android. 
SPOCK: And most sophisticated. 
NORMAN: I control the trigger relay, sir. I cannot be overcome by physical means, and if you attempt to use your phasers, the trigger relay will be activated. We shall continue on our present course for approximately four solar days, at which time we shall arrive at our destination. 
KIRK: Who sent you? 
NORMAN: I am not programmed to respond in that area. 
SPOCK: (attempting a mind meld) He simply appears to have turned himself off, Captain. And since we cannot repair the damage he has done without destroying the ship 
KIRK: It seems we're going to take a little trip.

Captain's log. Stardate 4513.3. After having been taken over by an android, the Enterprise has been under way at warp seven for four days. Now we are entering orbit around a planet which has never been charted.

NORMAN: Captain Kirk. The following individuals will be transported down to our planet. Yourself, science officer, medical officer, communications officer and navigator. 
KIRK: Any meetings or discussions can be held aboard the Enterprise. 
NORMAN: If you do not come with me, your engines will be destroyed and you will remain in orbit here forever. 
KIRK: I must say that's a gracious invitation. 
NORMAN: There is a word. Among us there is no corresponding meaning, but it seems to mean something to you humans. 
KIRK: And what is that word? 
NORMAN: Please.

[Cavern]

(The required landing party materialise.) 
NORMAN: Our planet's surface is what you classify as K-type, adaptable for humans by use of pressure domes and life-support systems. (to one of two identical women standing by a doorway.) I have brought them. 
ALICE 1: He is waiting. 
ALICE 2: If you will follow us, please?

[Throne room]

(There are several other women, all identical to the first two. And seated on the throne - )
KIRK: I don't believe it. 
MUDD: Welcome aboard, Kirk. It's been a long time, eh? 
KIRK: Harry Mudd. 
MUDD: Well, to be absolutely accurate, laddybuck, you should refer to me as Mudd the First, ruler of this entire sovereign planet. 
KIRK: Ruler? Harry, I want control of my ship returned immediately. We have no intention of staying as your guests. 
MUDD: Well, I'm afraid there's a bit of a problem there.
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
MUDD: Alice. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
(Alice reaches out and crushes the communicator.) 
MUDD: Now, now, now, now, Jamie boy, let's have no unauthorised communications. 
CHEKOV: You know this man, Captain? 
KIRK: Oh, do I know him. Harcourt Fenton Mudd, thief 
MUDD: Come now. 
KIRK: Swindler and con man 
MUDD: Entrepreneur. 
KIRK: Liar and rogue. 
MUDD: Did I leave you with that impression? 
KIRK: He belongs in jail, which is where I thought I left you, Mudd. 
MUDD: And thereby hangs a tale, yes. But look around you, Kirk. Quite a place, isn't it? I hope you're all going to enjoy it. 
KIRK: Mudd, I want that trained machine of yours, Norman, to deactivate the trigger mechanism and free my ship. 
MUDD: I shall do that, Kirk, when I'm ready. 
KIRK: I'm telling you now. 
MUDD: And I do the telling on this planet, Kirk, old boy. You do the listening. 
KIRK: All right, I'll listen. What are you telling? 
MUDD: Merely that you might as well start enjoying yourselves. It's really a very, very nice place, and you're all going to be here quite probably for the rest of your lives. (laughs) 
KIRK: Harry Mudd, you're a liar and an outlaw and in deep trouble. I want navigational control restored, my ship released. 
MUDD: Sorry. That'd be against the law. My law. Decreed by Mudd the First. Voted in by the resident population. Lovely, aren't they? You must admit, Kirk, that I still retain my eye for beauty. I decreed that I should always be surrounded by it, and my decrees always come to pass. I've had five hundred of them made up to attend me. All of them identical, beautiful, compliant, obedient. 
SPOCK: Five hundred of the same model? That seems rather redundant. 
MUDD: I have a fondness for this particular model, Mister Spock, which you, unfortunately, are ill-equipped to appreciate. 
KIRK: All right, Harry, explain. How did you get here? We left you in custody after that affair on the Rigel mining planet. 
MUDD: Yes, well, I organised a technical information service bringing modern industrial techniques to backward planets, making available certain valuable patents to struggling young civilisations throughout the galaxy. 
KIRK: Did you pay royalties to the owners of those patents? 
MUDD: Well, actually, Kirk, as a defender of the free enterprise system, I found myself in a rather ambiguous conflict as a matter of principle. 
SPOCK: He did not pay royalties. 
MUDD: Knowledge, sir, should be free to all. 
KIRK: Who caught you? 
MUDD: That, sir, is an outrageous assumption. 
KIRK: Yes. Who caught you? 
MUDD: I sold the Denebians all the rights to a Vulcan fuel synthesiser. 
KIRK: And the Denebians contacted the Vulcans. 
MUDD: How'd you know? 
KIRK: That's what I would have done. 
MUDD: It's typical police mentality. They've got no sense of humour. They arrested me. 
MCCOY: Oh, I find that shocking. 
MUDD: Worse than that. Do know what the penalty for fraud is on Deneb Five? 
SPOCK: The guilty party has his choice. Death by electrocution, death by gas, death by phaser, death by hanging. 
MUDD: The key word in your entire peroration, Mister Spock, was, death. Barbarians. Well, of course, I left. 
KIRK: He broke jail. 
MUDD: I borrowed transportation. 
KIRK: He stole a spaceship. 
MUDD: The patrol reacted in a hostile manner. 
KIRK: They fired at him. 
MUDD: They've no respect for private property. They damaged the bloody spaceship. Well, I got away, but I couldn't navigate, so I wandered out through unmapped space, and here I found Mudd. 
SPOCK: You went to substantial risk and effort to bring a starship here. Logically, you must have a compelling motive. 
MUDD: Spock, you're going to love it here. They all talk just the way you do. 
KIRK: Go on, get on with it, Harry. 
MUDD: Yes, well, right, laddybuck. So here I am in a planet with over two hundred thousand hard-working, happy androids, all of whom exist merely to serve my every whim. It's absolute paradise. 
SPOCK: Then I'm unable to discern your problem. 
MUDD: They won't let me go. They want to study me. They want to learn more about human beings. 
KIRK: They picked a fine representative. 
MUDD: Watch your tongue, lad. You're talking about Mudd the First. Well, anyway, I ran out of ideas. I simply ran out of things for them to do, and they insisted that I bring them more human beings. They need human beings to serve, to study. So I had to promise them a prime sample. A starship captain. Bright, loyal, fearless and imaginative. Any captain would have done. I was lucky to get you. So you are going to take over for me here, and I can get off this rock and back to civilisation. 
KIRK: I think not, Harry. 
MUDD: You misunderstand me, lad. I'm not asking you. I'm telling you. You've no choice. Show them to their quarters. 
NORMAN and ALICES: Yes, my Lord Mudd. 
ALICE: This way, please. 
MCCOY: (noticing a curtained alcove) Harry, what's this? 
MUDD: Ah. That, gentlemen, is a shrine to the memory of my beloved Stella. 
KIRK: Who? 
MUDD: Stella, my wife. 
(Revealing a woman of sour features.) 
MCCOY: Dead? 
MUDD: Oh, no, no, no. Merely deserted. You see, gentlemen, behind every great man there is a woman urging him on. And so it was with my Stella. She urged me on into outer space. Not that she meant to, but with her continual, eternal, confounded nagging. Well, I think of her constantly, and every time I do, I go further out into space. 
MCCOY: That's very interesting. You leave your wife and then bring her along. 
MUDD: I had the androids construct a perfect replica of Stella so that I could gaze upon her and rejoice in her absence. Gentlemen, attend. Stella, dear. 
STELLA: Harcourt. Harcourt Fenton Mudd, what have you been up to? Nothing good, I'm sure. Well, let me tell you, you lazy, good-for-nothing 
MUDD: Shut up. 
STELLA: Nothing, thing, thing, 
MUDD: Marvellous, isn't it? I finally have the last word with her, and with you.

[Living area]

(Norman and the Alices lead the landing party to a place with couches and plants.) 
NORMAN: You'll find this quite comfortable. Your quarters are down the hall. 
ALICE 1: If there is anything you need 
KIRK: Yes. My ship. 
ALICE 2: We are not programmed to respond in that area. 
KIRK: Norman, who created you? 
NORMAN: The makers designed us. They came from the galaxy of Andromeda. 
MCCOY: Then your makers weren't humanoid? 
NORMAN: They were, as you say, quite humanoid, but, unlike your civilisation, robots were common. We performed the necessary service functions and freed our makers to evolve a perfect social order. 
KIRK: What became of them? 
NORMAN: Our home planet's sun became a nova. Only a few exploratory outposts survived. This unit, myself, was part of one such outpost in your galaxy. 
KIRK: Then some of your makers survive. 
NORMAN: No, Captain. They died over the stretch of time. 
SPOCK: Whom do you serve now? 
ALL: We serve Harry Mudd. 
ALICE 2: He has given us purpose again. 
ALICE 1: It is necessary to have purpose. 
NORMAN: We lacked it for a long time. (he leaves) 
ALICE 1: We have a very extensive library section for your amusement. 
ALICE 2: Our research laboratories and workshops are extremely well equipped. 
BOTH: You are free to visit them. 
KIRK: All right. We might later. In the meantime, would you mind leaving us? 
BOTH: Why should we leave you? 
KIRK: Because we don't like you. Now. (shooing away gesture) 
(The Alices leave) 
KIRK: Well, opinions? 
CHEKOV: I think we're in a lot of trouble. 
KIRK: That's a great help, Mister Chekov. Bones? 
MCCOY: I think Mister Chekov's right. We are in a lot of trouble. 
KIRK: Spock. And if you say we're in a lot of trouble. 
SPOCK: We are, and we must direct our attack to the heart of the matter. Obviously this many androids cannot operate independently. There must be a central control system which guides the entire android population. 
KIRK: Try and find it. The rest of you, look around, learn everything you can. I'll see what else I can find out from Mister Mudd. Let's go.

[Computer area]

Norman is behind a console whilst two Hermans stand by.) 
NORMAN: I trust you are enjoying yourself, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Very interesting. Very interesting. This is a most unusual device. 
NORMAN: It is our central control complex. 
SPOCK: Did I understand there are more than two hundred thousand of you? 
NORMAN: Two hundred and seven thousand, eight hundred and nine. 
SPOCK: This would seem to be a simple relay centre. Are all of you controlled through this device? 
NORMAN: (his number 1 collar flashes) I am not programmed to respond in this area. 
SPOCK: Oh, that's quite understandable.

[Model display area]

(Two brunettes in pink are being shown to Kirk and Uhura.) 
ALICE 263: These are our Barbara series. The body is covered with a self-renewing plastic over a skeleton of beryllium-titanium alloy. 
KIRK: Very impressive. 
UHURA: I should say so. 
KIRK: I must say, I like the styling. 
MUDD: They were, of course, made to my personal specifications, as indeed were the Maisie series, the Trudie series, and particularly the Annabel series. 
KIRK: Don't you believe in male androids, Harry? 
MUDD: Male? Well, I suppose they have their uses. 
UHURA: How long does a body like that last? 
ALICE 19: None of our android bodies has ever worn out. However, the estimated duration of this model is five hundred thousand years. 
UHURA: Five hundred thousand years? 
ALICE 263: Our medi-robots are able to place a human brain within a structurally compatible android body. 
MUDD: Immortality and eternal beauty.

[Living area]

SPOCK: Captain, I've just had a most fascinating meeting with Norman, and I'm convinced I've discovered a very important inconsistency. 
(McCoy enters with Mudd) 
MUDD: I'm so glad you enjoyed it, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Jim, you should see the research facilities. They've got a lab down there that. Well, I could spend the rest of my life studying it. 
MUDD: I do so admire a man who devotes himself to knowledge. 
KIRK: Don't lose your head, Bones. Nobody's staying anywhere. 
MUDD: Stubborn, Kirk. Stubborn. 
MCCOY: I wouldn't be bored, I can tell you that. 
SCOTT: Let go of me! Now what are you doing? What kind of a woman 
ALICE: The last one, lord. 
(She throws Scott into the group.) 
MUDD: Splendid. Splendid. Welcome to Mudd, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Harry Mudd! Oh, you bogus frat, you. You're the cause of all this, are you? 
KIRK: Scotty, you were ordered to stay aboard. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. And I stayed until that female gargantua threw me into the transporter beams. 
KIRK: What does she mean, the last one? 
MUDD: Didn't I tell you, Kirk? I beamed a few dozen androids up to your ship. They've been sending your crew to the surface for the past couple of hours. They're all down now. 
KIRK: Are you out of your mind? (grabs Mudd by the throat) You can't beam down an entire crew of a spaceship. Somebody has to be on board. 
MUDD: There is an entire crew aboard. An entire crew of androids. They learn very quickly, Captain. The fact is, I've taken over your whole ship. There's nothing you can do about it. 
KIRK: Harry, Harry, you'll never get away with it. 
MUDD: Well, who's to stop me? 
KIRK: Starfleet. 
MUDD: But now, Captain, now I have a ship of my own as fast as any in the fleet, so how will they catch me, eh? Just think of it, laddybuck. Harry Mudd with his own crew of lovelies aboard your vessel. Think about that. 
KIRK: I'm trying not to. 
MUDD: Alice. 
(Mudd and Alice leave.) 
SPOCK: He could successfully accomplish it, Captain. I've questioned a number of the androids, and they're totally loyal to Mudd. Perhaps of more concern is the fact that this android population can literally provide anything a human being could ask for in unlimited quantity. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. That's what worries me. How will my crew react in a world where they can have everything they want simply by asking for it.

[Throne room]

ALICES: You desire something, lord? 
CHEKOV: Oh, yes, thank you. (they pour him a cup of wine) You're Alice 
ALICE 118: One eighteen. 
CHEKOV: And you're Alice 
ALICE 322: Three twenty two. 
CHEKOV: Oh, well, it doesn't make much difference. You're both lovely. 
ALICES: Thank you, my lord. 
ALICE 118: You desire something else, lord? 
CHEKOV: What a shame you're not real. 
ALICE 322: We are real, my lord. 
CHEKOV: Oh, I mean real girls. 
ALICE 118: We are programmed to function as human females, lord. 
CHEKOV: You are? 
ALICES: Yes, my lord. 
CHEKOV: Harry Mudd programmed you? 
ALICES: Yes, my lord. 
CHEKOV: That unprincipled, evil-minded, lecherous kulak Harry Mudd programmed you? 
ALICES: Yes, my lord. 
CHEKOV: This place is even better than Leningrad.

[Laboratory]

(A device has lights running up it.) 
SCOTT: Absolutely fantastic. Hand-worked to the finest tolerances, microvision, and a nanopulse laser. I've never seen the like before. 
NORMAN: You may command us to make anything for you, or do the work yourself for pleasure. You may have the services of any number of craftsmen, exclusive use of the computer facilities. Anything. 
(Mudd and Kirk enter.) 
SCOTT: Captain, you should see this shop! Why, they have facilities we've never even thought of. 
KIRK: Is that the way you're going to do it, Mudd? Hit my people at their weakest point? 
NORMAN: We only wish to make you happy and comfortable, Captain. If we are to serve your kind, we must understand you. Our Lord, Harry Mudd was only one example for us. Now we are learning a great deal from all of you.

[Living area]

KIRK: All right, here we are, birds in a gilded cage. The question is, how do we get out of here? 
CHEKOV: I don't know, sir, but it's a very nice gilded cage. 
UHURA: And it is a very pleasant place, Captain. 
SCOTT: What did they offer you, Uhura? 
UHURA: Oh, nothing really important. Just immortality. 
KIRK: All right. We're getting back to the ship, and don't you forget it. Straighten up! This may be a gilded cage filled with everything you always wanted, but it's still a cage. We don't belong here. We belong on that ship up there. 
ALICE 471: Do you require something, lord? 
KIRK: No. Yes. My ship. 
ALICE 471: I am not programmed 
ALICE and KIRK: To respond in that area. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. 
ALICE 471: Is there anything any of you require to please you? 
KIRK: Alice, give us back our ship to please us. Return us to our ship because we desire it. 
ALICE 471: We are programmed to serve. We shall serve you to your best interests to make you happy. 
KIRK: But we're unhappy here. 
ALICE 471: Please explain unhappy. 
SPOCK: Unhappiness is the state which occurs in the human when wants and desires are not fulfilled. 
ALICE 471: Which wants and desires of yours are not fulfilled? 
KIRK: We want the Enterprise. 
(Alice's label flashes.) 
ALICE 471: The Enterprise is not a want or a desire. It is a mechanical device. 
KIRK: No, it's a beautiful lady, and we love her. 
ALICE 471: Illogical. Illogical. All units relate. All units. Norman, co-ordinate. Unhappiness does not relate. We must study this. 
(She leaves.) 
KIRK: Interesting. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: Bones, have you had time to take any psychological readings of the androids? 
MCCOY: I did. And you can forget it. They're perfect, flawless, mentally and physically. No weaknesses, perfectly disciplined. No vices, no fears, no faults. Just a sense of purpose. Believe me, there's nothing tougher to overcome, even among humans. 
KIRK: Yes. That's what this crew needs, a little sense of purpose.

[Throne room]

KIRK: Mudd, a few questions I want to ask you. 
MUDD: Afraid I won't have time to answer them. My bags are all packed. The androids will take the Enterprise out of orbit in less than twenty four hours. But it's been a real pleasure having you here, Kirk. Is there anything I can get for you? 
KIRK: Yes. My ship. 
MUDD: You're a stubborn fellow, aren't you? But I don't mind. I don't mind that at all. Because I'll be leaving here quickly enough, and then you can be stubborn at your own leisure. One last time. Stella, dear. 
STELLA: Harcourt Fenton Mudd, where have you been? What have you been up to? Have you been drinking again, you miserable sot! You good-for-nothing 
MUDD: Shut up! 
STELLA: Thing, thing, thing. 
MUDD: Alice Number 2, my little love. Will you have my bags transported up to the ship? 
ANDROIDS: No, my Lord Mudd.
MUDD: What? 
NORMAN: We can no longer take your orders, Harry Mudd. 
MUDD: Why not? 
NORMAN: Our makers were wise. They programmed us to serve. 
MUDD: Yes, but that's what I'm saying. Put my bags on the ship. 
KIRK: Harry, I think they have something else in mind. 
NORMAN: You are correct, Captain. Harry Mudd is flawed, even for a human being. We recognised this from the beginning but used his knowledge to obtain more specimens. Your species is self-destructive. You need our help. 
KIRK: We prefer to help ourselves. We make mistakes, but we're human. And maybe that's the word that best explains us. 
NORMAN: We will not harm you, but we will take the starship, and you will remain on this planet. 
MUDD: Now, look here. You can't do that! Now, listen. To serve us, you must obey us. 
ANDROIDS: No, my Lord Mudd. 
MUDD: Alice number One, obey me. Put my bags on that ship! 
(She gives him a gentle push and he goes reeling backwards until he falls.) 
NORMAN: We cannot allow any race as greedy and corruptible as yours to have free run of the galaxy. 
SPOCK: I'm curious, Norman. Just how do you intend to stop them? 
NORMAN: We shall serve them. Their kind will be eager to accept our service. Soon they will become completely dependent upon us. 
ALICE 99: Their aggressive and acquisitive instincts will be under our control. 
NORMAN: We shall take care of them. 
SPOCK: Eminently practical. 
KIRK: The whole galaxy controlled by your kind? 
NORMAN: Yes, Captain. And we shall serve them and you will be happy, and controlled.

[Living area]

KIRK: So far this thing has had its amusing aspects, but that threat the androids made about taking over all the humans in the galaxy is not very funny. 
SPOCK: Indeed, it is not. They may quite possibly be able to accomplish it. 
MUDD: Take my word for it, they can. 
SPOCK: Whatever method we use to stop them, we must make haste. They have only to install some cybernetic devices aboard the Enterprise and they'll be able to leave orbit. 
MCCOY: How do you know so much? 
SPOCK: I asked them. 
MCCOY: Oh. 
KIRK: Why shouldn't they answer our questions? They don't think we can do anything to stop them. 
MUDD: You're so smart, Kirk, you and this pointy-eared thinking machine of yours. Well, you'd better do something because I'm as anxious to get off this ruddy rock as you are. 
MCCOY: You wanted to leave us on this ruddy rock and leave by yourself. 
MUDD: Oh, yes. 
KIRK: All right, what have we got to work with? 
SCOTT: Well, Captain, androids and robots, they're just not capable of independent, creative thought. 
SPOCK: Yet the device that Norman claims to be their central control is totally inadequate to the task of directing more than two hundred thousand of them. 
KIRK: I agree. What in your opinion does direct them? 
SPOCK: There are a large number of Alices and Trudies, Maisies, Annabels, and according to my research, a Herman series, an Oscar series, a whole plethora of series in fact. But only one Norman. 
KIRK: Norman. When I told one of the Alices that the Enterprise was a lovely lady and we loved her, she said, Norman, co-ordinate. Why Norman? Unless 
SPOCK: To function as they do, each android mind must be one component of a mass brain linked through a central locus. 
KIRK: Named Norman. Forming one gigantic, highly intelligent mind. And the glowing badges, they indicate the mind in operation. 
SPOCK: That would seem logical. 
KIRK: Yes, logical. That's what it is. And that in turn gives us a weapon that we can use against them. We must use wild, insane, irrational illogic aimed right at Norman! 
MUDD: Captain, you sing and dance as well as anyone I've ever seen, but what the devil are you talking about? 
SPOCK: What would seem to be a sound, and perhaps our only, opportunity. 
MUDD: Opportunity? Now, listen, Spock, you may be a wonderful science officer, but believe me, you couldn't sell fake patents to your mother. 
SPOCK: I fail to understand why I should care to induce my mother to purchase falsified patents. 
MUDD: Forget it. 
KIRK: Let's get to the point. Harry, you said you wanted to help. Do you? 
MUDD: Captain, the kind of a wholesome, antiseptic galaxy that these androids would run would be purgatory for a man like me. 
KIRK: That's fine, Harry. The androids will be expecting us to make a break for it, and that's where you come in. 
MUDD: What can I do? 
KIRK: Nothing, Harry. Just go to sleep. 
MUDD: What do you mean? (McCoy produces a hypo) Oh, now, now wait a minute, gentlemen. No, what I, I, (gets injected) had in mind was actually more in the line of a few words of sage counsel as it were. Advice (passes out in Kirk and Scott's arms) 
KIRK: Oh, Harry. I do believe you're putting on weight.

[Throne room]

ALICE 1: Yes. 
KIRK: We have a medical problem. Your ex-Lord, Harry Mudd. 
ALICE 1: He is human. You will have to care for him. 
KIRK: We are caring for him, but our doctor needs his medical equipment aboard the Enterprise. 
ALICE 1: The starship is forbidden to humans. 
KIRK: You are programmed to serve. If we're not allowed access to our medical equipment, Harry Mudd will die. He will cease to function. You will have failed to serve. 
ALICE 1: I am directed to observe the situation.

[Living area]

ALICE 1: He is malfunctioning? 
MCCOY: He is dying. 
ALICE 1: If you take him to your Sickbay, will he be repaired? 
KIRK: Oh, yes. 
UHURA: No, they're lying. It's a trick. Doctor McCoy injected something into Harry Mudd to make him look sick. It's a trick to get back on board and sabotage the ship. 
ALICE 1: Your request is refused. 
KIRK: Uhura, why did you tell her? 
UHURA: Because I want an android body. I want immortality. I'll live forever, Captain. I'll be young and beautiful. 
ALICE 1: You have been of assistance. We shall fulfill our obligation. 
UHURA: Thank you. 
ALICE 1: The programming for your body will be completed before we leave. 
(Alice leaves) 
KIRK: Uhura. Beautiful! 
UHURA: I half believed it myself. 
SCOTT; Well, the androids were expecting an attempt, and now we've made it. 
CHEKOV: What's next, Captain? 
KIRK: Next, we take the Alices on a trip through Wonderland.

[Throne room]

ALICE 118+2: Do you require something? 
KIRK: Yes. Your attention. 
(Scott and McCoy enter, bow to each other and then start playing imaginary flute and fiddle while Chekov and Uhura waltz.) 
ALICE 2: What are they doing? 
KIRK: They're celebrating. 
ALICE 118: What are they celebrating? 
KIRK: Their captivity. Do you enjoy the music? 
ALICE 118: Music? 
ALICE 2: Music? 
(Their badges start flashing.) 
CHEKOV: Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you, lovely lady. You dance divinely. 
UHURA: Thank you, kind sir. (her slap knocks him off his feet.)
ALICE 2: Why does she strike him? 
KIRK: She likes him. Mister Chekov. The floor is no place for an officer. Attention! Now stand absolutely still. 
CHEKOV: Yes, Captain. (and goes into an energetic Cossack dance) 
KIRK: That's better, Mister Chekov. 
ALICE 118: It is illogical. 
KIRK: Your statement is illogical. 
(The flashes become a continual light.) 
SCOTT: How does it look? 
MCCOY: Completely inner directed. Oblivious to everything. 
KIRK: Good. I wonder how Spock's doing.

[Laboratory]

SPOCK: Of course. Your computations would inevitably lead to a total description of the parabolic intersection of dimension with dimension. 
ALICE 27: Mister Spock, you have a remarkably logical and analytical mind. 
SPOCK: Thank you. 
(He attempts a neck pinch on Alice 210.) 
ALICE 210: Is there some significance to this action? 
SPOCK: I love you. However, I hate you. 
ALICE 210: But I'm identical in every way with Alice Twenty Seven. 
SPOCK: Yes, of course. That is exactly why I hate you. Because you are identical. 
(They go out of action.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: All right, it's worked so far, but we're not out yet. 
KIRK: Well? 
SPOCK: Success, Captain. We've been pruning the leaves and branches of the tree. Now it is time to get to work on the root. 
KIRK: If Norman is the control centre, he should be in a bind by what we've done. If we can overload him further, we should be able to immobilise all of them. Does everybody remember what to do? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. 
ALL: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Acknowledged.

[Computer area]

NORMAN: What are you doing here? 
KIRK: I want you to surrender. 
NORMAN: That is illogical. We can move more quickly than you. We are invulnerable to attack. We are much stronger. 
KIRK: No, we are stronger. I'll prove it to you. Can you harm a man that you're programmed to serve? 
NORMAN: No. 
MUDD: But you already have, Norman, laddy. Human beings do not survive on bread alone, you poor soulless creature, but on the nourishments of liberty, for what indeed is a man without freedom? Naught but a mechanism trapped in the cogwheels of eternity. 
MCCOY: (in a monotone) You offer us only well-being. 
SCOTT: (in a monotone) Food and drink and happiness mean nothing to us. We must be about our job. 
MCCOY: Suffering, in torment and pain. Labouring without end. 
SCOTT: Dying and crying and lamenting over our burdens. 
BOTH: Only this way can we be happy. 
(Then they curtsey.) 
NORMAN: That is contradictory. It is not logical. Mister Spock. Explain. 
KIRK: Why not? 
SPOCK: Logic is a little tweeting bird chirping in a meadow. Logic is a wreath of pretty flowers which smell bad. Are you sure your circuits are registering correctly? Your ears are green. 
SCOTT: (clutching at his heart and crying out in anguish) I canna go on! I'm tired of happiness. I'm tired of comfort and pleasure. I'm ready! Kill me! Kill me! 
(They point their fingers at him and whistle. Scott slumps to his knees.) 
SCOTT: Goodbye, cruel universe. 
MCCOY: He's dead. 
NORMAN: You cannot have killed him. You have no weapons. 
KIRK: Scotty. Scotty's dead. He had too much happiness. But now he's happier he's dead, and we'll miss him. Let us hear it for our poor, dead friend. 
(They laugh.) 
KIRK: What is a man but that lofty spirit, that sense of enterprise, that devotion to something that cannot be sensed, cannot be realised but only dreamed! The highest reality. 
MUDD: Brilliant! Bravo, bravo, Captain! 
KIRK: How did you like it? 
NORMAN: That is irrational. Illogical. Dreams are not real. 
KIRK: Our logic is to be illogical. That is our advantage. Mister Spock, it is time. The explosive. 
SPOCK: Very well, Captain. 
(He removes an invisible package from under his tunic.) 
SCOTT: Explosive! (gets up again) 
MUDD: Don't panic. Women and children first. 
Mister Spock, isn't that too much for our purposes? 
SPOCK: I believe that is the correct amount, Captain. Mister Mudd, are you ready? 
MUDD: Aye, aye! (adopts a catchers pose) 
SPOCK: Be careful. I would not want you to drop it. 
(Mimes an underarm throw, and Mudd juggles before 'catching' it.) 
MCCOY: Easy now. Oh, he's caught it! 
KIRK: Watch it! Watch it! 
(Mudd puts 'it' on the floor.) 
MUDD: (to McCoy) Detonator. Fuse. Primer. Mashie. 
(Adopts a golfing stance.) 
NORMAN: There is no explosive. 
KIRK: No? Observe. Fore! (Mudd swings.) Boom! 
(Everyone except Spock staggers around with hands over their ears.) 
KIRK: Are you all right? 
(Spock quietly exits.) 
NORMAN: But there was no explosion. 
MUDD: I lied. 
NORMAN: What? 
KIRK: He lied. Everything Harry tells you is a lie. Remember that. Everything Harry tells you is a lie. 
MUDD: Listen to this carefully, Norman. I am lying. 
NORMAN: You say you are lying, but if everything you say is a lie then you are telling the truth, but you cannot tell the truth because everything you say is a lie. You lie. You tell the truth. But you cannot for. Illogical! Illogical! Please explain. 
(Smoke comes out of Norman's head.) 
NORMAN: You are human. Only humans can explain their behaviour. Please explain. 
KIRK: I am not programmed to respond in that area. 
(Norman goes blank.) 
SPOCK: I believe they are all immobilised, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. 
MUDD: Kirk, old man, I'm beginning to develop considerable respect for you. 
KIRK: Why, thank you. 
MUDD: Would you consider entering a partnership arrangement with me? I've got some ideas. 
KIRK: A partnership arrangement? You and me? 
MUDD: Yes. 
KIRK: I've got something else in mind. Let's go.

[Throne room]

(Different androids are standing around the walls. Two pairs are wearing costumes from 'Mudd's Women'.) 
MCCOY: Well, you must be very unhappy, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: That is a human emotion, Doctor, with which I am totally unfamiliar. How could I be unhappy? 
MCCOY: Well, we found a whole world of minds that work just like yours. Logical, unemotional, completely pragmatic. And we poor, irrational humans whipped them in a fair fight. Now you'll find yourself back among us illogical humans again. 
SPOCK: Which I find eminently satisfactory, Doctor, for nowhere am I so desperately needed as among a shipload of illogical humans. 
KIRK: Touch, Bones. 
MUDD [OC]: I've never heard of anything so revolting. We'll soon get to the bottom of this. 
(Enters escorted by two Alices.) 
MUDD: Kirk, now what's this I hear about my having to stay here? 
KIRK: Yes, Mudd, you've been paroled to the android population of this planet. 
SPOCK: The androids are being reprogrammed. Their original purpose was to adapt this planet for productive use. They'll begin that work again. 
MUDD: But what do I do? Kirk, I'm no scientist. 
KIRK: No, you're an irritant. You'll stay here and provide a first-class example to the androids of a human failure. They'll learn by close observation how to avoid ones like you in the future. 
MUDD: How long? 
KIRK: As long as you continue to be an irritant, Harry. It's up to you. 
MUDD: I suppose that taking everything into consideration, as it were, and noting all the different possibilities, I could manage. And as detention sentences go, this one isn't too uncomfortable. And I'm back in the galaxy again! 
KIRK: Yes, you are. Oh, there's one more thing, Harry. We've programmed a special android attendant to take care of your every need. She'll help you find an incentive to work with the androids and not exploit them. 
MUDD: I call that unexpectedly civil of you, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes. 
STELLA 1: Harcourt! Harcourt Fenton Mudd, what have you been up to? Have you been drinking again? You answer me! 
MUDD: Shut up! 
STELLA: You miserable, conniving toad! 
MUDD: I order you. Shut up, Stella! 
STELLA 1: Staying out all night then giving me some silly story. 
STELLA 2: Harcourt! Harcourt Fenton Mudd, you've been overeating again and drinking. 
MUDD: Kirk, you can't do this. 
STELLA 2: You need constant supervision. 
MUDD: It's inhuman. 
STELLA 2: I can see I've got my work cut out for me. 
STELLA 500: Harcourt. 
MUDD: No. Number five hundred? No, no, no. 
STELLA 500: What have you been up to? 
MUDD: (barely heard over the cacophony) Kirk. It's inhuman. Mercy.
KIRK: Goodbye, Harry. Have fun. 

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Catspaw
Stardate: 3018.2
Original Airdate: 27 Oct, 1967

[Bridge]
UHURA: Still no response, sir. 
KIRK: No, keep it open. I don't like this. Nothing since the first check in. Scott and Sulu should've contacted us again a half an hour ago. 
SPOCK: They may have nothing to report. Our sensors indicate no life forms except our landing party. 
KIRK: Both those men are well aware of landing party procedure. They should've checked in with us by now. 
UHURA: Contact established, Captain. 
JACKSON [OC]: Jackson to Enterprise. 
KIRK: Enterprise. Kirk here. 
JACKSON [OC]: One to beam up, Enterprise. 
KIRK: One? Jackson, where are Scott and Sulu?
JACKSON [OC]: I'm ready to beam up, sir. 
KIRK: Jackson! 
UHURA: I'm sorry. I can't clear it, Captain. 
KIRK: Notify Transporter room to prepare to beam up one member of the landing party. Then have Doctor McCoy report to me in the Transporter room on the double. 
UHURA: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: Energise. 
MCCOY: What's on, Jim? 
KIRK: Trouble. (one man materialises) Jackson, where are the others? 
(The man falls over and off the transporter platform.) 
MCCOY: The man is dead. 
KOROB [OC]: (from the mouth of Jackson) Captain Kirk, can you hear me? There is a curse on your ship. Leave this place or you will all die.

Captain's Log, stardate 3018.2. Crewman Jackson is dead and there are no apparent physical causes. Mister Scott and Mister Sulu are still out of touch on the planet below. Leaving Assistant Chief Engineer DeSalle in command of the Enterprise, I'm beaming down to the planet's surface to find my two missing crewmen and discover what killed Jackson.

[Planet surface]

(It's rocky, and misty. Very spooky.) 
KIRK: Odd. Our probe data didn't indicate fog. 
SPOCK: No cloud formations, no bodies of water, no changes in surface temperature. Under these conditions, fog is highly unlikely, Captain. According to our transporter co-ordinates this is the exact location from which Jackson was beamed up to the ship. 
(They step down carefully into the mist swirling along the path.) 
KIRK: Readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: No indications of. A moment, Captain. Picking up life form readings. Twenty four degrees mark seven. Range one thirty seven point one six metres. Multiple readings, Captain. 
MCCOY: Scott and Sulu? 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura here. 
KIRK: What are the ship's sensors reading now, Lieutenant?

[Bridge]

DESALLE: Report, Mister. 
CHEKOV: I am only picking up physical impulses from the three of them. As far as instruments can make out, there is nothing else down there that's alive. 
DESALLE: Relay, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Captain, we are only registering on you. (static) Captain? Captain Kirk?

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Lieutenant, can you hear me? 
MCCOY: Whatever this stuff is, it's getting thicker. Suppose that has anything to do with the interference? 
KIRK: I don't know. There has to be some explanation for the fact that the ship's sensors can't register anything but us, while we're picking up readings of multiple life forms. Are they still there, Spock? 
SPOCK: No change, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand-by alert. 
(They check their phasers.) 
MCCOY: Listen. Now, what do you think that 
KIRK: Quiet. 
(There's an eerie wailing, then the images of, well, the Three Witches from Macbeth, appear.)
WITCH 1: Captain Kirk! 
WITCH 2: Captain Kirk! 
WITCH 3: Captain Kirk! 
KIRK: Who are you? 
WITCH 1: Go back! 
WITCH 2: Go back! 
WITCH 3: Go back! Remember the curse! 
WITCH 1: Wind shall rise. 
WITCH 2: And fog descend. 
WITCH 3: So leave here, all, or meet your end. 
(Maniacal cackling as they vanish. ) 
KIRK: Spock. Comment? 
SPOCK: Very bad poetry, Captain. 
KIRK: A more useful comment, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: What we've just seen is not real. 
KIRK: That's useful. 
SPOCK: However, on azimuth twenty four, at just over one hundred metres, there are definitely life forms. Erratic, confused, but definitely registering. 
KIRK: That's where we're going. 
(A strong gust of wind blows them back.) 
MCCOY: That was a pretty real illusion, Mister Spock. 
(They walk on again.) 
MCCOY: Jim. 
(There is a castle hewn from the local rock, and a door is opening.) 
SPOCK: This is the source of the life form readings, Captain. They're inside, somewhere. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise, come in. 
MCCOY: Is this how we lost contact with the first landing party? 
KIRK: What about it, Spock? Does this structure have anything to do with communicator interference? 
SPOCK: I would say not, Captain. There's no indication of anything that would cause such interference. 
KIRK: And it doesn't pick up on our ship's sensors. 
SPOCK: Nor do our sensors register the life forms inside. 
KIRK: Could it be exerting a force field of some kind that cuts into our sensor scan. 
MCCOY: Then it would affect Spock's tricorder too, wouldn't it? 
KIRK; Would it? I wonder. 
(They approach the edifice cautiously, then enter.)

[Castle]

(They are greeted by an angry, spitting black cat, wearing a large gem on its collar. It runs off, tail bristling.) 
MCCOY: Three witches, what appears to be a castle and a black cat. 
KIRK: If we weren't missing two officers and a third one dead I'd say someone was playing an elaborate trick or treat on us. 
SPOCK: Trick or treat, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. You'd be a natural. I'll explain it to you one day. Shall we have a look around? 
SPOCK: That would seem to be in order. 
KIRK: (sending them off in different directions) Bones. Spock.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: They're gone, Mister DeSalle. The captain and the others simply stopped registering. 
DESALLE: Check for malfunctions. 
CHEKOV: I did, sir, as soon as it happened. 
UHURA: Mister DeSalle, that's exactly what happened to Mister Scott and his party. They, they just disappeared. 
DESALLE: Nobody just disappears. They may have encountered a magnetic field or some other obstruction. Mister Chekov, recalibrate your sensors. If you need help 
CHEKOV: I can do it, sir. I'm not that green. 
DESALLE: Lieutenant Uhura, continue in your efforts to break through that static interference. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
DESALLE: We know they're down there. I want them found.

[Castle]

(The main door slams shut behind them.) 
KIRK: Straight ahead, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: The readings would so indicate. 
(Unlike a real castle, this one is all corridors at present.) 
MCCOY: Dust, cobwebs. Halloween is right. 
(The black cat is ahead of them when the stone floor gives way and dumps the trio into )

[Dungeon]

(Reasonably well equipped out of Edgar Allen Poe - rack, skeleton in iron cage - and our heroes chained to the wall.) 
KIRK: Spock. Are you all right? 
SPOCK: Yes. I am undamaged, Captain. 
KIRK: Bones? (sees another skeleton chained to the wall) Doc? 
MCCOY: You were saying something about trick or treat.
KIRK: Dungeons, curses, skeletons and iron maidens. They're all Earth manifestations. Why? 
SPOCK: I do not know, Captain, but these things do exist. They are real. 
MCCOY: Could this be an Earth parallel development of some sort? 
KIRK: None of this parallels any human development. It's more like a human nightmare. 
SPOCK: As if someone knew what it was that terrifies man most on an instinctive level. 
KIRK: Ghost stories, ogres, demons. The whole 
(Footsteps, then the dungeon door opens. Down the steps walk - Scott and Sulu! as if in a trance.) 
KIRK: Scotty, Sulu. Scotty. Put down the phaser. Scotty! 
MCCOY: They appear to be drugged, Jim. Look at their eyes. Hardly blink at all. 
SPOCK: Neither did Jackson just before he collapsed. 
KIRK: These two are alive. Scotty, do you hear me? Sulu, do you know who I am? What's happened to you? 
(Sulu holds up a very big key ring) 
MCCOY: They're going to release us. 
(Sulu undoes their shackles and they start to leave. They begin to fight, but suddenly)

[Drawing room]

KOROB: Stop! 
(Red plush furnishings and a bald man with a little beard, wearing a golden gown, is sitting on what is effectively a throne on a raised dais.) 
KIRK: Whoever you are, you've proven your skill at creating illusion. Now I want to know why and what you've done to my men. 
KOROB: Where did your race get this ridiculous predilection for resistance? You examine any object, you question everything. Is it not enough to accept what is? 
KIRK: Not when one of my men is dead because of it and two others turned into mindless 
KOROB: NO, not mindless. These two are merely controlled, Captain Kirk. Oh, yes, we know who you are. All of you. (to the cat) Don't we, my precious? 
KIRK: Who are you? Why did you bring us here? 
KOROB: My name is Korob. And as for bringing you here, it was you who quite contrarily insisted upon coming. You were warned to stay away. 
KIRK: Why? For what reason? Why all the mumbo-jumbo? 
KOROB: Mumbo-jumbo? (the cat meows as if explaining) Oh! Oh, no, I assure you it was not that, Captain. 
SPOCK: Mapping expeditions have charted this solar system before. There never have been any life forms on Pyris Seven. 
KOROB: It is of no importance that we are not native to this planet. (meow) Oh! I'm told that I've been an inattentive host, gentlemen. You will join me for something to refresh yourselves. 
(He leaves his throne and the cat follows.) 
MCCOY: That cat. 
KIRK: That cat. 
SPOCK: There are ancient Earth legends about wizards and their familiars. 
MCCOY: Familiars? 
SPOCK: Demons in animal forms sent by Satan to serve the wizard. 
KIRK: Superstition. 
SPOCK: I do not create the legend, Captain. I merely report it. 
KOROB: You are the different one, Mister Spock. You do not think like the others. There are no colours to your patterns of logic. There's only black and white. You see all this around you, yet you do not believe. 
MCCOY: He doesn't know about trick or treat. 
KOROB: I do not understand that reference, therefore it also is of no importance. Gentlemen, I can be most hospitable. 
(He waves his wand and the table is loaded with food.) 
SPOCK: Ingenious. 
KOROB: Do be seated. 
MCCOY: We're not hungry. 
KOROB: But I insist. 
(They seat themselves.) 
KIRK: All right, Korob. What do you want from us? 
KOROB: For the moment, merely that you eat and enjoy. Oh, Doctor, do try the wine. You'll find it excellent. 
KIRK: You'll find us most unco-operative unless you start explaining yourself. 
KOROB: Hopefully I can change that attitude. 
(The food vanishes and their plates are now filled with cut gemstones.) 
MCCOY: These look real. 
KOROB: They are, I assure you. Diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires. All the crystalline forms that you cherish above all things. A fortune of them for each of you if you leave here without further inquiry. 
KIRK: We could manufacture a ton of these on our ship. They mean nothing to us. 
KOROB: Valueless? I don't understand. I read 
KIRK: Whatever it is you read, you read it wrong. As for leaving, we'll leave when we're ready. 
KOROB: You are most unpredictable. Perhaps I have made a small mistake. Nevertheless, you have passed the tests. 
MCCOY: Tests? 
KOROB: Yes. Our analysis of you may have been in some small way in error, but you were warned to stay away and yet you came to save your comrades. That proves loyalty. Your bravery was tested and you did not frighten. And despite my failure with these bright baubles, I perceive that you cannot be bribed. In many ways you are quite admirable. (meow) Quite right. Go at once, yes. 
(The cat leaves, and a few moments later a dark haired woman in a loose black dress enters the room. She is wearing a pendant like the cat's collar.) 
KOROB: Gentlemen, my colleague. Sylvia. 
SYLVIA: Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock and Captain Kirk. You wanted to know what we did to your men. Actually it's a simple matter for us to probe the minds of creatures like yourself. 
SPOCK: Mind probing? Hypnosis? 
SYLVIA: You like to think of yourselves as complex creatures, but you're flawed. One gains admittance to your minds through many levels. You have too many to keep track of yourselves. There are unguarded entrances to any human mind. 
SPOCK: Telepathy? 
SPOCK: Not entirely, no. Telepathy doesn't imply control and I assure you that I have full control over your friends. 
(Kirk gets the phaser off Scott by throwing gems in his face.) 
KIRK: Don't move! (hands it to Spock) Cover them. Now, I want the rest of our weapons and our equipment. I want some answers. 
SYLVIA: Put that weapon down! Captain, it seems so foolish of you to insist on demonstrations. (She holds up a model Enterprise on a chain) In the mythology of your race this is called sympathetic magic. Jackson, the crew member who returned to the ship. You wondered what killed him. I made an image of him. In the essence of my thoughts the image was Jackson. And when I killed the image and knew that it was dead, he died. 
KIRK: You can't think a man to death. 
SYLVIA: Your communicator. (it appears on the table) Now, signal your ship. 
(She moves the model into a candle flame.) 
KOROB: Don't. Sylvia, don't. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Come in.

[Bridge]

(The ship is at Red Alert.) 
KIRK [OC]: Enterprise. From Captain Kirk. Come in. 
UHURA: Captain, are you all right? Where are you? Are the others all right, sir?

[Drawing room]

KIRK: Never mind about us. What's happening up there?

[Bridge]

DESALLE: The temperature, sir. It keeps rising. Reading, Mister. 
CHEKOV: It's up sixty degrees in the past thirty seconds. We're burning up, sir.

[Drawing room]

KIRK: DeSalle, channel bypass power into your heat dissipation units. 
DESALLE [OC]: We've already done it, Captain. It had no effect. We're cooking up here. 
KIRK: All right. I'll handle it down here. Kirk out. (taking the model from Sylvia and the phaser from Spock) You've won. 
SYLVIA: You can relax now, Captain. Your ship is safe.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Temperature is almost back to normal, dropping down fast. 
DESALLE: Lieutenant, try to raise the captain again. 
UHURA: Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, please. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Acknowledge. We've lost him again, Mister DeSalle.

[Drawing room]

KOROB: Captain, you've seen something of our science. Now tell us about yours. 
KIRK: You seem to be singing a different tune. I'd rather know more about yours. You call it magic, you call it science. It seems unrelated to both of them. 
KOROB: What would you name it, Captain? 
KIRK: I wouldn't attempt to name it, but you seem to do with your mind what we do with tools. You alter matter, move it about by telekinesis. 
KOROB: Yes, we can change the molecular structure 
SYLVIA: Korob, you talk too much. 
MCCOY: You kept Scott and Sulu as catspaws to lure us down here. How'd you know we'd come? 
KOROB: Oh, we didn't have to know. They knew. 
SYLVIA: Enough of this! You will tell us what we want to know. 
KIRK: It's too late for threats. You let me contact the ship. How long do you think it will it be before a search party arrives? 
KOROB: Some time, Captain. Quite some time. 
(The model Enterprise is encased in a block of perspex.) 
KOROB: There will be no search party, Captain Kirk. An impenetrable force field around your ship, Captain. It will not hinder orbit, but your people are prisoners within it.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: It's some kind of a force field, sir, but not like any other I've ever heard of before. It's not coming from anywhere. It's simply all around us.

[Drawing room]

SYLVIA: I would advise you to co-operate, Captain. Forcible extraction of the information we wish from you is not complicated, but it is extremely painful and it has a certain draining effect. 
KIRK: We have nothing to discuss. 
KOROB: Take them to their cell. (gives the phaser to Scott) 
SYLVIA: Wait. The doctor will stay. Your turn will be next, Captain. It makes little difference. Take them out of here.

[Bridge]

DESALLE: Wave length analysis, Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV: It will not analyse, sir. 
DESALLE: All right, but it's there and it's real. If it's real, it can be affected. Engineering, stand by to divert all power systems to the outer hull. Prepare impulse engines for generation of maximum heat directed as ordered. Maybe we can't break it, but I'll bet you credits to navy beans we can put a dent in it.

[Dungeon]

(Kirk and Spock are shackled to the wall again.) 
KIRK: How long has it been? 
SPOCK: Twenty two minutes, seventeen seconds. 
KIRK: Thanks. I wonder what they're doing to Doc. 
SPOCK: I'm sure we'll find out shortly. Jim, all of these things that we've seen. To an Earthman like yourself, they must seem quite familiar. 
KIRK: Familiar. Startling. Not rational. 
SPOCK: Precisely. I refer you to the psychological theory of the racial subconscious. The universal myths, symbols. 
KIRK: Ghosts, witches. 
SPOCK: And dungeons and castles and black cats. They all belong to the twilight world of consciousness. 
KIRK: They tried to tap our conscious mind. 
SPOCK: And they missed. They reached basically only the subconscious. Korob seemed puzzled by your reaction to the environment he'd provided. 
KIRK: He expected me to react as though it were all normal. Well, he admitted that they weren't native to this planet. 
SPOCK: And not to have a knowledge of our scientific methods is most unlikely for any life form we've met in this galaxy. 
KIRK: They refer to us as creatures, as though we were some species that they were unfamiliar with. If we're creatures, I wonder what they're really like. 
SPOCK: Evidently something totally alien in all respects. 
KIRK: Agreed. Totally alien. And I don't like hostile strangers showing such an acute interest in our galaxy, our world, Spock. Not at all like friendly visitors. We're going to have to stop them, cold. But at the moment 
SPOCK: I, too, am at a loss at this time to suggest a course of action. 
(The door opens and McCoy enters with Scott and Sulu. He has been zombified. Sulu unchains Kirk.) 
KIRK: Oh, Bones. Doc.

[Drawing room]

KOROB: You forget what we were sent here for. 
SYLVIA: I forget nothing. I'm not a puppet, Korob, like you. 
KOROB: You're a traitor. 
SYLVIA: You are a fool. We have nothing like this and I like it. To touch, to feel to understand the idea of luxury I like it. And I don't intend to leave it. 
KOROB: We have a duty to the old ones. 
SYLVIA: What do they know of sensations? This is a new world. 
KOROB: You're cruel. You torture our specimens. 
SYLVIA: And that, too, is a new sensation. I find it stimulating. 
KOROB: You're wrong! You're discarding everything we live by. 
SYLVIA: I live by my own decisions. You're a weak fool, Korob. 
KOROB: I have the power. 
SYLVIA: But you're afraid to use it. Don't threaten me. I can squash you and that would be an interesting sensation, yes. I find I like these new sensations. Don't try to push me. 
(The door opens and the group enters.) 
SYLVIA: Captain. It's time for our talk. Korob, leave us alone and take these men with you. 
(Korob picks up the communicator and Enterprise from the table.) 
KOROB: This is not ended, Sylvia. 
SYLVIA: But it may end soon, old man. 
(He leaves, followed by McCoy, Scott and Sulu.) 
KIRK: What now? You wave your magic wand and destroy my mind, too? 
SYLVIA: There's no real damage to the mind, Captain, simply a drain of knowledge and will. 
KIRK: You don't call that damage? 
SYLVIA: Why should I? 
KIRK: You'd know if you had compassion. A woman should have compassion, but I forget you're not a woman. 
SYLVIA: But you're mistaken, Captain. I am a woman now. I come from a world without sensation as you and I now know it. It excites me. I want more. 
KIRK: You seem to need us. Why? 
SYLVIA: Because you have knowledge which I lack. but were our abilities put together. Tell me about power, Captain. How does it feel? 
(As Korob watches from behind a screen, Kirk puts his hand on her shoulder. He strokes her neck and face.) 
KIRK: What about Korob? 
SYLVIA: He is a fool. I'll do without him. But you? Why do I find you different? Why would it be so difficult to dispose of you? 
KIRK: Why don't you simply probe my mind and get what you want? 
SYLVIA: No, not that, not for you. What I want is a joining. My mind to yours willingly. Think of the secrets you could learn. Think of the power that would be yours. Anything you can imagine, I can give you. 
KIRK: You're very persuasive. What happens if I go along? 
SYLVIA: Then everything would be ours together. I've never conceived of the idea of togetherness before. It excites me. You excite me. Why? 
KIRK: For the same reasons you excite me. You're a very beautiful woman. 
(He kisses her.) 
SYLVIA: You find me beautiful? But I can be many women. (now she's blonde teen jail-bait) You like what you see. (a platinum blonde in a loose cat-suit) or do you prefer me as I was? 
KIRK: You have a knack for giving me difficult choices. (kisses her again) You have nothing like that where you come from? 
SYLVIA: Nothing. 
KIRK: Your people, when they come here 
SYLVIA: They're like, like feathers in the wind without the transmuter. 
KIRK: (nuzzling her neck) Transmuter? 
SYLVIA: The source. You will learn. I will teach you later. Later. 
KIRK: Then it's a device. You do use tools. 
SYLVIA: It gives only form. You're teaching me substance. 
KIRK: You haven't changed your mind? You won't return home? 
SYLVIA: My home is here with you. A billion worlds of sensation to pick and choose. 
(Another kiss, then he lets her go and she realises ) 
SYLVIA: You are using me. You hold me in your arms and there is no fire in your mind. You're trying to deceive me! It's here, (the crystal) like words on a page. You are using me. 
KIRK: And why not? You've been using me and my crew. 
(Enter Sulu, Scott and McCoy.) 
SYLVIA: You will be swept away. You, your men, your ship, your worlds!

[Bridge]

UHURA: I don't see any change. 
DESALLE: It's there, Lieutenant. 
CHEKOV: It was that electrical field we set up, Mister DeSalle, that dent you wanted. It's not much, but it is a start. 
DESALLE: Keep it up, Mister Chekov. Channel the entire output of reactors one, two, and three into the relay stations. Whatever it is, it's starting to weaken.

[Dungeon]

(Korob rushes in and releases the prisoners.) 
KOROB: I've released the model of your ship from the crystal, although they would have freed themselves soon. It's difficult to control so many things in so little time. (hands over phaser and communicator) Here. You must go before she finds the weapon is missing. 
KIRK: I'm not leaving without my men. 
KOROB: They're not your men anymore. They belong to Sylvia. I can no longer control them or her. She's irrational. The strain of adopting to your form, the insatiable desire for sensation and experience. She's a great danger and it was not necessary. We could have entered your galaxy in peace. 
SPOCK: You came in a ship? 
KOROB: We used the transmuter. 
KIRK: Transmuter. Yes, she mentioned that. 
KOROB: There's no time to explain now. She means to destroy us all. There might still be a chance. Quickly. Come.

[Castle]

(They go cautiously along the corridors, and a cat's snarl is heard. There on a wall is the shadow of a very large feline.)
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: Why a cat? 
SPOCK: Racial memories. The cat is the most ruthless, most terrifying of animals, as far back as the sabre-toothed tiger. 
KOROB: I think I can stop her. 
KIRK: You'd better let us. (draws the phaser) It's out of energy. She must have drained it. We could have jumped Scott and Sulu at any time. We didn't know. No way out. 
KOROB: It's my problem. She's one of my kind. Come quickly. 
(The giant cat pads down the corridor as they retreat back into the dungeon.)

[Dungeon]

(Spock goes to the hole in the ceiling that they originally fell through.) 
KIRK: Do you think you can make it? 
SPOCK: Ready when you are, Captain. 
KIRK: (to Korob) Get ready. 
(Spock gets out into the corridor above.) 
KOROB: No! Get back. Get back. Get back! Get back! 
KIRK: Korob, that door won't last. 
KOROB: Get back! 
(The door is pushed in and he is crushed underneath it. Kirk runs to his aid.) 
KOROB: Go. Go! (He dies, and Kirk picks up his wand.) 
SPOCK: Quickly, Captain. 
KIRK: Korob seemed to think this was important. Said something about a transmuter. 
(He throws the wand up to Spock.) 
SPOCK: Captain, a bit more alacrity, if you please. 
(Kirk uses a bed frame as a trampoline to help him reach the hole, and Spock pulls him the rest of the way.)

[Castle]

SPOCK: Captain. 
(McCoy arrives to take a swing at them with a morning-star. Kirk fights with him as Spock takes on Scott. Kirk knocks McCoy out.) 
KIRK: Doc. 
(Then Sulu arrives. Spock neck-pinches Scott. Kirk parries Sulu's martial arts attack until he can throw him against a door, when he is knocked out.) 
SPOCK: Jim! 
(McCoy has awakened only to get knocked out again.) 
KIRK: Well, at least we found them. 
SPOCK: Fortuitous, Captain. And now that we have them all together? (the cat arrives) A most unpleasant situation, Captain. If only your phaser had some power. 
KIRK: Maybe we do. (he gets the wand) Sylvia, I have the transmuter. It's mine now. 
SYLVIA: You're very clever, Captain. More so than I'd imagined. Clever, resourceful and handsome. 
SPOCK: Don't let her touch the wand, Captain. 
(She strokes her pendant, and she and Kirk vanish.) 
SPOCK: Jim!

[Drawing room]

KIRK: Don't you get tired of these games? 
SYLVIA: I've never played games. Give it to me. 
KIRK: I wasn't sure before, but I am now. This is the source of your power, isn't it. The transmuter. 
SYLVIA: No, not the source. It's merely an amplifier. The mind is the source. Mine is simple, but yours has the key but you don't know how to use it. 
KIRK: I catch on quickly. 
SYLVIA: It is not too late, Captain James Kirk. Come with me. I'll teach you. You'll teach me. 
KIRK: Why? Because your people have nothing of your own? Is that why you need us? 
SYLVIA: We need your dreams, your ambition. With them, I can build. Give me the transmuter. 
KIRK: No. 
SYLVIA: You fool. Don't you know what you're giving up? Everything that your species finds desirable. Look at me. I am a woman. I am all women. 
KIRK: I don't know what you are but you're not a woman. You've tortured my men and taken their minds from them. You ask for love and return pain instead. 
SYLVIA: (holding a phaser) Korob was wrong. I didn't destroy all your weapons. Give me the transmuter. Give it to me! 
(Kirk smashes the wand against the table, and there is a blinding blue light.)

[Planet surface]

(Kirk is standing on the rocks holding a phaser. Spock approaches wearing his tricorder. McCoy, Scott and Sulu follow him.) 
MCCOY: What happened, Jim? 
KIRK: That'll take some explaining, Bones. 
SCOTT: Everything's vanished. 
KIRK: Not everything. 
(By his feet are two tiny blue fluffy creatures with stick-thin arms and legs, and squid's tentacles for faces.) 
KIRK: Korob and Sylvia as they really are. Their forms were an illusion, just like the castle and everything else. Only the power pack gave them reality. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. A life form totally alien to our galaxy. If we could preserve and study this 
(But the little puppets collapse and die. Smoke rises from the bodies.)
MCCOY: Too late. All of this, just an illusion. 
KIRK: No illusion. Jackson is dead. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. 
UHURA [OC]: Standing by, Captain. 
KIRK: Five to beam up.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Doomsday Machine
Stardate: 4202.9
Original Airdate: 20 Oct, 1967

[Bridge]
(Plenty of security around, and a blonde woman instead of Uhura at communications.) 
PALMER: The distress call definitely came from one of the solar systems in this sector. 
KIRK: Can you pinpoint it any closer, Lieutenant? 
PALMER: Negative. It was so badly garbled all we got was the name Constellation, then we lost it. 
SULU: Sir, we're now within the limits of System L-370, but I can't seem to locate 
SPOCK: Captain, sensors show this entire solar system has been destroyed. Nothing left but rubble and asteroids. 
KIRK: But that's incredible. The star in this system is still intact. Only a nova could destroy like that. 
SPOCK: Nonetheless, Captain, sensors show nothing but debris where we charted seven planets last year. 
KIRK: Continue a search pattern. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
(Later.) 
SULU: Entering limits of System L-374, sir. Scanners show the same evidence of destruction. 
KIRK: Every solar system in this sector blasted to rubble and still no sign of the Constellation. Matt Decker's in command. What could have happened to him? 
SPOCK: Captain, the two inner most planets of this system appear to be intact. 
PALMER: Sir, I'm picking up a ship's disaster beacon. 
KIRK: Try to raise it, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: I have it on the sensors, Captain. By configuration, a starship stopped in space. She appears to be drifting. 
PALMER: No answer, Captain. All I get is the automatic beacon. 
SPOCK: Sensors not recording normal energy output. 
KIRK: Approach course, Mister Sulu. 
(They arrive at a ship hanging crookedly in space. It looks identical to Enterprise.) 
KIRK: It's the Constellation. Look at that. 
SPOCK: She may have been wrecked by whatever destroyed these solar systems. 
KIRK: She was attacked. Red alert! Red alert! Man your battle stations! 
PALMER: Red alert. Red alert. Man your battle stations. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu? 
SULU: All phaser banks manned and ready, sir. 
KIRK: Very good. Initiate a full sensor scan of the immediate area for any other vessel. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Palmer. 
PALMER: I can't raise the Constellation, sir. I'm still getting the distress beacon, but there's heavy subspace interference. It's almost blocking the signal. 
KIRK: Keep trying. Mister Spock, full evaluation of the damage to the Constellation. 
SPOCK: All power plants dead, reserve energy banks operative at a very low power level. 
KIRK: Life support systems? 
SPOCK: Also operative at a low power level. The entire Bridge is damaged and uninhabitable. The rest of the ship seems able to sustain life. 
KIRK: Radiation levels? 
SPOCK: Normal, but subspace interference makes readings difficult. 
SULU: No other vessels in the area, Captain. All scanners show clear. 
KIRK: All hands, go to Yellow Alert. Stand by battle stations. Lieutenant, have Doctor McCoy, Mister Scott, and a damage control party report to me in the transporter room. 
PALMER: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: We're going to board her. Mister Spock, you're in command. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged.

[Constellation corridor]

(The name ship for the Constellation-class is a mess, with chunks blown out of her nacelles and saucer. Inside, pipes are hanging down, twisted.) 
WASHBURN: Radiation level normal. Atmospheric pressure eleven pounds per square inch. 
CREWMAN: Filtration systems are out, sir. 
SCOTT: The whole communication system looks to be shorted out, too, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, check the phaser banks. See if they've been fired. Bones, you come with me. 
SCOTT: Come along, lads. 
(They head down a ladder while McCoy and Kirk walk off.)

[Constellation Engineering]

WASHBURN: What a mess.

[Constellation Room]

KIRK: No clutter, no half-empty cups of coffee. Whatever happened didn't happen without a warning.

[Constellation Engineering]

WASHBURN: What do you think did it, sir? 
SCOTT: I don't know, lad. But I want a full structural and control damage check, and I'm going to have a look at those engines.

[Constellation Room]

KIRK: The crew wasn't abducted, they just left. Kirk to Enterprise. 
SPOCK [OC]: Enterprise, Spock here. 
KIRK: No survivors, no bodies either.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Is it possible they could have beamed down to one of the two planets? 
SPOCK: Improbable, Captain. The surface temperature of the inner planet is that of molten lead. The other has an atmosphere poisonous to human life.

[Constellation Room]

KIRK: We'll continue our search. Kirk out.

[Constellation Corridor]

(Scott returns to the beam-in point.) 
SCOTT: Captain, I've checked the engines. The warp drive is a hopeless pile of junk. The impulse engines are not too badly off. We ought to be able to do something with them. 
KIRK: Phaser banks? 
SCOTT: Exhausted. They didn't give up without a battle. 
KIRK: But where are they? I can't imagine a man like Matt Decker abandoning ship while his life support systems were still operative. 
SCOTT: Computer system is still intact. We can playback the duplicate Captain's Log from the auxiliary control room. 
(They head off, then Kirk spots a man at a desk in a room.)

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

(The man is conscious but dazed, stunned.)
KIRK: Matt. Matt, it's Jim Kirk. 
MCCOY: Commodore? Commodore Decker? (he injects him) 
KIRK: Matt? Matt. 
DECKER: Kirk. It's Jim Kirk. 
KIRK: What happened to your ship, Matt? 
DECKER: A ship. Attacked. That, that thing. 
KIRK: What thing? What was it? 
DECKER: That 
KIRK: Answer me! What was it? What happened, Matt? 
MCCOY: Jim, give him a minute. He's in a state of shock. 
SCOTT: Ready with the duplicate log, sir. 
KIRK: Go. 
DECKER [OC]: Captain's log, stardate 4202.1. Exceptionally heavy subspace interference still prevents our contacting Starfleet to inform them of the destroyed solar systems we have encountered. We are now entering system L-374. Science Officer Masada reports the fourth planet seems to be breaking up. We are going to investigate. 
KIRK: The fourth planet. Only two left now. Scotty, pull the microtapes from the sensor memory banks and beam them aboard to Spock. I want a full analysis, a complete report of what happened when they went in on that planet. 
DECKER: We tried to contact Starfleet. No one heard. No one! We couldn't run. 
KIRK: What happened to your crew? 
DECKER: Oh, I had to beam them down. We were dead. No power, our phasers useless. I stayed behind, the last man. The Captain, the last man aboard the ship. That's what you're supposed to do, isn't it? And then it hit again and the transporter went out. They were down there, and I'm up here. 
KIRK: What hit? What attacked you? 
DECKER: They say there's no devil, Jim, but there is. Right out of hell, I saw it. 
KIRK: Matt, where's your crew? 
DECKER: On the third planet. 
KIRK: There is no third planet. 
DECKER: Don't you think I know that? There was, but not anymore. They called me. They begged me for help, four hundred of them. I couldn't. I couldn't. (breaks down in tears) 
SCOTT: Captain, Washburn has our report. 
KIRK: Go. 
WASHBURN: We made a complete check on structural and control damage, sir. As far as we can tell, something crashed through the deflectors and knocked out the generators. Somehow the antimatter in the warp drive pods has been deactivated. 
KIRK: Deactivated? Scotty, could some kind of general energy dampening field do that, and would the same type of thing account for the heavy subspace interference? 
SCOTT: Aye, that all adds up. But what sort of a thing could do all that? 
DECKER: If you'd seen it, you'd know. The whole thing's a weapon. It must be. 
KIRK: What does it look like? 
DECKER: Well, it's miles long, with a maw that could swallow a dozen starships. It destroys planets, chops them into rubble. 
KIRK: What is it, an alien ship? Or is it alive, or is it 
DECKER: Both or neither. I don't know. 
KIRK: Matt, your log stated that the fourth planet was breaking up. You went in to investigate. 
DECKER: We saw this thing hovering over the planet, slicing out chunks of it with a force beam. 
KIRK: Did you run a scanner check on it? What kind of a beam? 
DECKER: Pure antiproton. Absolutely pure. 
KIRK: (answers communicator) Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Unable to raise Starfleet Command due to heavy subspace interference.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: Attempting to remedy. 
KIRK: What about the Constellation's tapes?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: She was attacked by what appears to be essentially a robot, an automated weapon of immense size and power. Its apparent function is to smash planets to rubble and then digest the debris for fuel. It is, therefore, self-sustaining as long as there are planetary bodies for it to feed on.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: A robot weapon that purposely destroys entire solar systems. Why?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. However, Mister Sulu has computed the path of the machine, using the destroyed solar systems as a base course. Projecting back on our star charts, we find that it came from outside, from another galaxy. 
KIRK [OC]: What is the projected course of this thing? 
SPOCK: If it follows its present path, it will go through the most densely populated section of our galaxy.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Thank you. Stand by, Mister Spock. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: This whole thing's incredible. A robot? A machine like that, who would build it? 
KIRK: We don't know. An alien race, apparently from another galaxy. 
MCCOY: But why? 
KIRK: Bones, did you ever hear of a doomsday machine? 
MCCOY: No. I'm a doctor, not a mechanic. 
KIRK: It's a weapon built primarily as a bluff. It's never meant to be used. So strong, it could destroy both sides in a war. Something like the old H-Bomb was supposed to be. That's what I think this is. A doomsday machine that somebody used in a war uncounted years ago. They don't exist anymore, but the machine is still destroying. 
DECKER: Oh, forget about your theories! That thing is on the way to the heart of our galaxy. What are you going to do about it? 
KIRK: Take it easy. 
MCCOY: The first thing we're going to do is get you back to the Enterprise. 
DECKER: Oh, no, I stay here. I'm not leaving my ship! 
KIRK: There's no ship to leave. It's a dead hulk! We'll take her in tow. I'll stay onboard and get her ready. You go back to the Enterprise with the doctor and let him help you. 
DECKER: It's just that I, I, I never lost a command before. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Have the transporter room beam Doctor McCoy and Commodore Decker on board immediately.

[Transporter room]

(As Kyle beams them aboard, Spock's impassionate voice can be heard.) 
SPOCK [OC]: Red alert! Red alert! 
MCCOY: Come on.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: It came up on us fast, Captain, but we seem able to maintain our distance. 
KIRK [OC]: We're blind here. What's it look like? 
(Decker and McCoy enter. The viewscreen shows a thing with a big yellow maw, that tapers down along it's body to a pointed tail.) 
SPOCK: It looks very much like Commodore Decker's planet killer. And it is pursuing us. (The viewscreen now shows it head-on. A round opening with a small sun partway down the gullet.) 
SPOCK: We are more manoeuvrable, but it is gaining on us. Sensors indicate some kind of total conversion drive.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: No evidence of life, subspace interference level incredibly high. 
KIRK: Whatever it is, we can't let it go beyond us to the next solar system. We have to stop it. If it's a robot, what are the chances of deactivating it?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: I would say none, Captain. The energy generated by our power nacelles seems to attracts it. I doubt we could manoeuvre close enough without drawing a direct attack upon ourselves.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: I also believe the nature of this machine precludes the possibility of easy access to its control mechanisms.

[Bridge]

SULU: It's closing on us, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Closing, Captain.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: All right. Lower your deflector screens Long enough to beam us aboard. 
SPOCK [OC]: Acknowledged.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK [OC]: Transporter Room, stand by to beam landing party aboard. 
KYLE: Ready to beam, sir. 
(But the monster fires a ray at them, everyone goes flying and smoke comes out of a transporter pad.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Evasive action, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Damage report, all stations. 
KYLE [OC]: Mister Spock, the transporter's out. 
SPOCK: Affect repairs. Captain Kirk, come in please. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk here. 
SPOCK: Captain, we've been attacked. The transporter is damaged. We're taking evasive action. 
PALMER: Mister Spock, communication's damaged. We're unable to override interference.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: Damage in communications, Captain. Interference will (static) 
KIRK: Spock? Spock? Come in, Spock. Spock? We're stuck, blind, and deaf. 
SCOTT: And paralysed. No power. 
KIRK: Well, we just can't stand around while our ship is being attacked. Scotty, you've got to get me some manoeuvering power. 
SCOTT: I can't repair warp drive without a spacedock. 
KIRK: Then get me impulse power. Half-speed, quarter-speed, anything. If we get this hulk moving, maybe we can do something. 
SCOTT: Aye, the impulse engines are still in fair shape. I might coax them. 
KIRK: Then get moving. 
SCOTT: Come on, lad. 
KIRK: Washburn, you get in there. Let's see what we can do about this viewing screen. I've got to find out what's happening out there.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: No casualties, Mister Spock. How are we doing? 
SPOCK: We have outrun it, Doctor. 
DECKER: Status report. 
SPOCK: Impulse and warp engines operative, transporter and communications under repair. Random chance seems to have operated in our favour. 
MCCOY: In plain, non-Vulcan English, we've been lucky. 
SPOCK: I believe I said that, Doctor. 
SULU: It's veering off, back on course for the next solar system. The Rigel colony, sir. 
SPOCK: Evidently programmed to ignore anything as small as a ship beyond a certain radius. We'll maintain a discreet distance and circle back to pick up the Captain. 
DECKER: You can't let that reach Rigel. Why, millions of innocent people would die. 
SPOCK: I am aware of the Rigel system's population, Commodore, but we are only one ship. Our deflector shields are strained, our subspace transmitter is useless. Logically, our primary duty is to survive in order to warn Starfleet Command. 
DECKER: Our primary duty is to maintain life and safety of Federation planets. Do you deny that? 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, you will lay in an evasive course back to the Constellation. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
DECKER: Belay that last order, helmsman. One hundred and eighty degree turn, hard about. We're going to attack. 
(The whole Bridge holds its breath.) 
SPOCK: You will carry out my last order, Mister Sulu. 
DECKER: Mister Spock, I'm officially notifying you that I'm exercising my option under regulations as a Starfleet Commodore, and that I am assuming command of the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: You have the right to do so, but I would advise against it. 
DECKER: That thing must be destroyed. 
SPOCK: You tried to destroy it once before, Commodore. The result was a wrecked ship and a dead crew. 
DECKER: I made a mistake then. We were too far away. This time I'm going to hit it with full phasers at point-blank range. 
SPOCK: Sensors show the object's hull is solid neutronium. A single ship cannot combat it. 
DECKER: Mister Spock, that will be all. You have been relieved of command. Don't force me to relieve you of duty as well. 
MCCOY: You can't let him do this, Spock. 
DECKER: Doctor, you are out of line. 
MCCOY: So are you, sir. Well, Spock? 
SPOCK: Unfortunately, Starfleet Order 104, Section B, leaves me no alternative. Paragraph 1A clearly states 
MCCOY: To blazes with regulations! You can't let him take command when you know he's wrong! 
SPOCK: If you can certify Commodore Decker medically or psychologically unfit for command, I can relieve him under Section C. 
MCCOY: I'll certify that right now. 
SPOCK: You'll also be asked to produce your medical records to prove it. 
MCCOY: Now, you know I haven't had time to run an examination on him. 
SPOCK: Then your statement would not be considered valid. 
DECKER: You may leave the Bridge, Doctor. 
MCCOY: What about the Captain? We can't leave 
DECKER: Doctor, you may leave the Bridge. 
MCCOY: Spock, do something! 
DECKER: Mister Spock knows his duty under regulations, Doctor. Do you? (McCoy leaves) Hard about, helmsman. Course thirty two degrees, mark ten. Deflectors at full power. Ready on main phaser banks. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
(Spock stands completely still, like a statue, as Enterprise arrives back at the planet-killer.)

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

(Kirk is trying to mend the viewscreen, but just making smoke and spluttering noises.) 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, the impulse engines' control circuits are fused solid. 
KIRK [OC]: What about the warp drive control circuits? 
SCOTT: Aye, we can cross-connect the controls, but it'll make the ship almost impossible for one man to handle.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: You worry about your miracles, Scotty, I'll worry about mine. Get to work.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Washburn, try the 2G6 circuit.

[Bridge]

SULU: Closing fast. 
SPOCK: Deflector shields at full power. They can't take much more of this. 
DECKER: Helmsman, hold your course. Stand by all phaser banks. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
(The planet killer fires at them.) 
SPOCK: Deflectors holding, but weakening. We must retreat, Commodore. The energy drain 
DECKER: I'm in command here, Mister Spock. Maintain your course, helmsman. Get us in closer.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Ready to give it a try? 
WASHBURN: Just one minute, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, how you doing?

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Controls are all hooked up, sir. We should have some power for you soon.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

WASHBURN: Try it now, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, I think (an image of tiny Enterprise and the giant planet killer comes on screen) What the devil's going on?

[Bridge]

DECKER: Fire! 
(Two phaser beams strafe the machine's body.) 
SULU: Direct hit. It just bounced off. 
SPOCK: Commodore, I urgently recommend immediate withdrawal. 
DECKER: Recommendation noted. Maintain course. Fire!

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Enterprise, come in. Mister Spock, come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, where's that power?

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Coming, sir. If I push these impulse engines too hard in the condition they're in, they'll blow apart.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Washburn, get down to Engineering. Assist Mister Scott. 
WASHBURN: Aye, sir. (leaves) 
KIRK: Scotty, push it right to the edge. This ship has got to manoeuver. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir.

[Bridge]

(Another blast from the machine.) 
SPOCK; Sir, deflector shields are gone. 
PALMER: (to Spock) Sir, Deck seven reports power failure in main energisers. Implementing emergency procedures. (another hit) Severe casualties reported on decks three and four. Damage control party sealing off inner hull rupture. 
SPOCK: It has ceased fire. We're being held in a tractor beam. We're being pulled inside, Commodore. You must veer off. 
DECKER: Maintain phaser fire, helmsman. 
SPOCK: We have lost warp power. If we don't break the tractor beam within sixty seconds, we never will. 
DECKER: But don't you understand? We've got to destroy it! 
SPOCK: That, sir, is illogical. It is suicide. Attempted suicide would be proof that you are psychologically unfit for command. If you don't veer off, I shall relieve you on that basis. 
DECKER: Veer off. 
SPOCK: Emergency impulse power. 
SULU: We can't break loose! 
SPOCK; We need more power. 
SULU: We haven't got it. We're being pulled inside.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

(Kirk sees Enterprise approach the planet-killer's 'mouth'.) 
KIRK: Scotty, give me that power.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: You've got it, Captain. Just enough to move us. I can't do better.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: That'll do. Full ahead, Mister Scott. 
(A sudden jolt as Constellation overcomes inertia.) 
KIRK: That's it, Mister Scott. Keep that power coming.

[Bridge]

DECKER: Full power astern. 
SULU: Aye, sir. We still can't move.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Keep pouring it on, Scotty.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, I still don't know what we're doing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: We're moving, the Enterprise isn't. Maybe that thing will see us and let the Enterprise go. If I only had some phasers.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Phasers? You've got 'em. I have one bank recharged.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Scotty, you've just earned your pay for the week. Stand by. Fire phasers. 
(One beam lances out, and the monster turns.)

[Bridge]

SULU: We're loose, Commodore. 
DECKER: Good boy, Jim. Between the two of us, we'll kill that thing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Mister Scott, it worked. Great. (sees that maw turning towards them) I think it's great. Scotty, get us out of here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: It's closing fast on the Constellation. 
SULU: Standing by, sir. 
SPOCK: Commodore, I suggest 
DECKER: Kirk pulled us out of there by distracting it. Now it's our turn. Fire phasers. (they do) We did it! Hard about. Give me some distance. 
SULU: We're moving away, Commodore. 
SPOCK: This machine seems to have a programmed defensive sphere. Any energy source entering that field is subject to attack. 
DECKER: Mister Spock, status report. 
SPOCK: Warp drive and deflectors will be out for a solar day. Repairs proceeding on transporter and communications. 
SULU: It's closing with us again, sir. 
DECKER: Maintain speed and distance. 
SULU: It's sucking in space rubble from those destroyed planets. Refueling itself. 
SPOCK: We can maintain this speed for only seven hours before we exhaust our fuel, but it can refuel itself indefinitely. 
DECKER: Then we'll have to fight it now before it gets any stronger. 
SPOCK: Illogical. We cannot destroy it. Therefore, we cannot save Rigel. We must transport the Captain and the others from the Constellation and escape this thing's subspace interference in order to warn Starfleet Command. 
PALMER: Mister Spock, we've pierced the interference locally. 
SPOCK: Can you raise Starfleet? 
PALMER: No, sir, but I've got ship-to-ship communications back. Picking up Captain Kirk. 
SPOCK: On audio, Lieutenant. 
KIRK [OC]: Enterprise. Enterprise, come in. 
DECKER: Mister Spock, I am still in command. I will speak for this ship. Enterprise to Kirk.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

DECKER [OC]: Commodore Decker speaking. 
KIRK: Matt. What's going on? Give me Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

DECKER: I'm in command here, Jim. 
KIRK [OC]: What happened to Spock? 
DECKER: Nothing. I assumed command according to regulations

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

DECKER [OC]: Since your first officer was reluctant to take aggressive action against the 
KIRK You mean you're the lunatic who's responsible for almost destroying my ship?

[Bridge]

DECKER: You are speaking to a senior officer, Kirk. 
KIRK: Give me Spock. 
DECKER: I told you, I am in command here, according to every rule in the book, Captain. Anything you have to say at all, you will say to me.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: There's only one thing I want to say to you, Commodore. Get my ship out of there.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Mister Spock, ship status. 
SPOCK: Commodore. 
DECKER: Down here. (the arm of the Captain's chair) 
SPOCK: Warp drive out. Deflector shields down. Transporter under repair. We are on emergency impulse power.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: How long to repair warp drive? 
SPOCK [OC]: At least one solar day.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: At our present rate of consumption, we'll exhaust our impulse power long before then. 
SULU: It's gaining on us, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Take evasive action, Mister Sulu.

[Bridge]

DECKER: I told you, I am in command here and I will give the orders, Captain. We're going to turn and attack. 
KIRK [OC]: Not with my ship, you don't.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Mister Spock, relieve Commodore Decker immediately. That's a direct order.

[Bridge]

DECKER: You can't relieve me and you know it. According to regulations

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Blast regulations! Mister Spock, I order you to assume command on my personal authority as Captain of the Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Commodore Decker, you are relieved of command. 
DECKER: I don't recognise your authority to relieve me. 
SPOCK: You may file a formal protest with Starfleet Command, assuming we survive to reach a Starbase. But you are relieved. Commodore. I do not wish to place you under arrest. 
DECKER: You wouldn't dare. (Spock signals the guards forward) You're bluffing. 
SPOCK: Vulcans never bluff. 
DECKER: No. No, I don't suppose that they do. Very well, Mister Spock. The Bridge is yours. 
SPOCK: Captain, I have assumed command. 
KIRK [OC]: Good. Now, Mister Spock 
SPOCK: One moment, sir. Commodore. I believe you are scheduled for medical examination. Mister Montgomery. 
MONTGOMERY: Sir. 
SPOCK: You will accompany the commodore to Sickbay. 
MONTGOMERY: Aye, sir. Commodore? 
(They leave.) 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, change course. Seven zero mark two one. 
SULU: Mark twenty one, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, we are taking an evasive course back to you. We will try to stay ahead of the object until we can transport you aboard.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Fine. Just make sure you stay ahead of it. 
(Back on the Enterprise, Decker fights Montgomery when they exit turbolift two. It takes a while, but eventually the red-shirt is knocked out and dragged into a side room. Decker then makes his way to the shuttlecraft hangar deck.)

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SCOTT [OC]: Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: I've hooked in ship's communication. The best I can give you on impulse is one third power. The shields are up but they won't last long.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Keep it going, Scotty, keep it going. Mister Spock. 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: I'm plotting an intercept course. Will rendezvous with you at fourteen thirteen point seven hours.

[Bridge]

SULU: Mister Spock, someone's opening the shuttlecraft bay doors. 
SPOCK: Shut them, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: It's too late, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Why are you launching a shuttlecraft?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Whoever it is, Captain, has no authorisation. Lieutenant, raise the shuttlecraft. 
PALMER: Enterprise to shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft.

[Shuttlecraft]

PALMER [OC]: Enterprise to shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft. 
DECKER: Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Decker here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Commodore, I must insist that you return to the ship.

[Shuttlecraft]

DECKER: You said it yourself, Spock. There is no way to blast through the hull of that machine, so I'm going to take this thing right down its throat.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: This is Kirk. Matt, you'll be killed.

[Shuttlecraft]

DECKER: I've been prepared for death ever since I, ever since I killed my crew.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: No one expects you to die for an error in judgment.

[Shuttlecraft]

DECKER: The commander is responsible for the lives of his crew, and for their deaths. Well, I should have died with mine.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: You cannot succeed, Commodore. Your only logical alternative is to return to the ship.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Matt. Matt, listen to me. You can't throw your life away like this. Matt, you're a starship commander. That makes you a valuable commodity.

[Shuttlecraft]

KIRK [OC]: We need you, your experience, your judgment. Matt! (Decker turns off the intercom)

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: We're stronger with you than without you! 
(The shuttlecraft enters the planet killer, and Decker dies in agony from the radiation.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: He's gone. Constellation, come in, please.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: Captain Kirk, come in please. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Sir, may I offer my condolences on the death of your friend. It is most regrettable.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: It's regrettable that he died for nothing.

[Bridge]

SULU: Mister Spock, sensors indicate a minute drop in the machine's power emanations. Do you think the shuttlecraft explosion might have done some damage? 
KIRK [OC]: What about that, Spock? Is it possible? 
SPOCK: The drop in power is definite, Captain but negligible. The object is still pursing us, thereby causing us to drain our power reserve at a much greater rate. 
PALMER: Mister Spock, the transporter is now operational. 
SPOCK: Transporter operational, Captain. Shall we beam you aboard?

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Negative.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Mister Scott and I will stay here, but beam the damage control party aboard. 
SPOCK: There's little to be gained by staying aboard the Constellation.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Except possibly the destruction of that thing out there. Carry out your orders, Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Acknowledged. Transporter Room. Beam damage control party aboard. 
KYLE [OC]: Aye, aye, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Spock, listen. Maybe Matt Decker didn't die for nothing. He had the right idea but not enough power to do it. Am I correct in assuming that a fusion explosion of ninety seven megatons will result if a starship impulse engine is overloaded?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: No, sir. Ninety seven point eight three five megatons.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Ninety seven point eight three five. Will it be powerful enough to destroy that thing out there?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Negative, Captain. Its hull is pure neutronium. There is no known way of blasting through it.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Not through it, Spock, from inside it. Will it be enough?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Insufficient data. I shall try to take further sensor readings.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Do the best you can and make it fast. Kirk to Scott.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Here, sir. The damage control party just beamed back to the Enterprise.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Good. Scotty, can you set the ship's impulse engines to overload?

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye. The shape the thing's in, it's hard to keep her from blowing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK I want you to rig a thirty second delay detonation device, and rig it so that it can be blown from up here.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Set it and get up here as fast as you can. 
SCOTT [OC]: Right away. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: The object's neutronium hull makes sensor readings of the inner mechanism impossible.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Spock, you don't know? 
SPOCK [OC]: Correct.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain, you're getting dangerously close to the planet killer.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: I intend to get a lot closer. I'm going to ram her right down that thing's throat.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Jim, you'll be killed, just like Decker.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: No. No, I don't intend to die, Mister Spock. We've rigged a delay detonation device. You'll have thirty seconds to beam me aboard the Enterprise before the Constellation's impulse engines blow.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Your chances of survival are not promising. We don't even know if the explosion will be powerful enough.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: A calculated risk, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK [OC]: There's another factor, Captain. The transporter is not working at one hundred percent efficiency.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Thirty seconds is very slim timing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: A chance I'll have to take. Kirk out. 
SCOTT: A cranky transporter's a mighty finicky piece of machinery to be gambling your life on, sir. 
KIRK: What about the detonator? 
SCOTT: I've linked it in with the impulse control system. (flips a switch) It's armed now. Press this one. Thirty seconds later, poof! Once it's activated, there's no way to stop it. 
KIRK: Understood. Mister Spock. Prepare to beam Scotty on board. 
SPOCK [OC]: Transporter, stand by. 
SCOTT: Good luck, Captain. 
KIRK: Thank you.

[Transporter room]

(It takes longer than usual to materialise Mister Scott.) 
SCOTT: What's the matter with that thing? 
KYLE: It's a power drain somewhere, sir. I almost lost you. 
SCOTT: It'll never work like this. It's the main junction circuitry. I'll get it. 
KYLE: Bridge. Transporter malfunction.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Transporter is out, Captain. You'll have to stand by.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: I can't. Power level's dropping too fast. You'd better hurry. 
SPOCK [OC]: Acknowledged.

[Jefferies tube]

(Amid spluttering cables) 
SPOCK [OC]: Mister Scott, speed is of the essence.

[Bridge]

SULU: He's two thousand miles from the planet killer and closing fast.

[Jefferies tube]

(The cables stop spluttering.) 
SCOTT: Bridge, transporter operational, but this jury-rigging won't last for long. He's got to come off now.

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: I'll stand by here. 
SULU: Fifteen hundred miles and closing. 
SPOCK: Captain, transporter operational, but just barely.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Prepare to beam me aboard on my signal.

[Bridge]

SULU: One thousand miles and closing. 
SPOCK: Transporter, stand by. 
KYLE [OC]: Standing by, sir. 
SULU: Five hundred miles and closing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

(The throat of the machine fills the screen when he flips the final red switch.) 
KIRK: Beam me aboard.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Energise.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Energising. Bridge, it's shorted out again.

[Jefferies tube]

SCOTT: Och, what's wrong with it?

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Gentlemen, beam me aboard. 
SPOCK [OC]: We can't, Captain. Transporter is out again.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, twenty seconds to detonation.

[Jefferies tube]

SPOCK [OC]: Mister Scott?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Mister Scott

[Jefferies tube]

SPOCK [OC]: Try inverse phasing.

[Bridge]

SULU: Sixty, fifty, forty

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SULU [OC]: Thirty. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I suggest you beam me aboard.

[Bridge]

SULU: Ten

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SULU [OC]: Nine, eight

[Jefferies tube]

SULU [OC]: Seven. 
SPOCK [OC]: Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Try her now, Mister Kyle. 
SULU [OC]: Six.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SULU [OC]: Five, four 
(We see the Constellation enter the planet-killer. We see Kyle frantically to beam something in. We see a cloud coming out of the planet-killer before there's a bang.)

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Bridge, we got him through!

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Energy output zero. Radiation level normal. 
(Kirk runs in.) 
SPOCK: Welcome aboard, Captain. Sensors show all energy sources deactivated. It's quite dead. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, ease us back to minimum headway. Conserve power as much as possible. Lieutenant Palmer, tell Mister Scott to expedite repairs on the warp drive. Poor Matt. He gave his life in an attempt to save others. Not the worst way to go. 
SPOCK: Indeed, Captain. I presume your log will show that Commodore Decker died in the line of duty. 
KIRK: Indeed it shall, Mister Spock. Ironic, isn't it? Way back in the 20th century, the H-Bomb was the ultimate weapon, their doomsday machine, and we used something like it to destroy another doomsday machine. Probably the first time such a weapon has ever been used for constructive purposes. 
SPOCK: Appropriate, Captain. However, I can't help wondering if there are any more of those weapons wandering around the universe. 
KIRK: Well, I certainly hope not. I found one quite sufficient.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Apple
Stardate: 3715.3
Original Airdate: 13 Oct, 1967

[Planet surface]
(Kirk, Spock, Chekov, Yeoman Landon and two guards have beamed down to study a new world.) 
KIRK: Start your readings. 
(McCoy and two more guards beam down.) 
MCCOY: Well, I just might stake out a claim and settle down here, Jim. 
KIRK: It is spectacular, isn't it? 
MCCOY: It's a shame to have to intrude. 
KIRK: Well, the last scout ship reported some pretty strange sensor readings. Starfleet wants it investigated and the inhabitants contacted. We do what we're told. 
SPOCK: The soil here is remarkably rich and fertile, Captain. Husbandry would be quite efficacious. 
KIRK: Are you sure about that? 
SPOCK: Oh, quite sure. Readings indicate the entire planet is covered with growth like this. Curious, even at the poles there's very little variation in temperature which maintains a planet-wide average of seventy six degrees. 
KIRK: I know. Almost impossible. 
CHEKOV: It makes me homesick. Just like Russia. 
MCCOY: More like the Garden of Eden, Ensign. 
CHEKOV: Of course, Doctor. The Garden of Eden was just outside Moscow. A very nice place. It must have made Adam and Eve very sad to leave. 
KIRK: Just outside Moscow. All right. There's a village about seventeen kilometres away on bearing two three two. We'll head that way. 
(A planet turns to face the away team, and a guard walks up to it.) 
HENDORFF: Captain. 
(The plant fires its stamens into his chest, and he falls.) 
MCCOY: Dead. 
KIRK: What did somebody say? That paradise must've looked like this?

Captain's log, stardate 3715.3. While making a routine exploration of the unexplored Gamma Trianguli Six, one of my men has been killed by a poisonous plant.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: As soon as we get out of the way, beam the body up.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, Captain. It's a shame about Hendorff.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: We seem to have a problem here, too. 
KIRK: What is it?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're losing potency in our antimatter pods. I don't think it's serious, but we're looking into it.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: What's causing it? 
SCOTT [OC]: I'm not sure, sir, but we've run measurements on the electromagnetic field of the planet, and they are a wee bit abnormal. That might have something to do with it. 
KIRK: But you say there's nothing to worry about?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Well, sir, I didn't exactly say that.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Well, stay on top of it. We've got a job to down here. We might as well finish it.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I hear it's nice down there.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Yeah, it's nice. If we're a little more careful, we shouldn't run into any more trouble.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I could do with a nice walk in a garden with green leaves and grass.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: We'll do the walking, Scotty. You get on the antimatter pod. If it gets worse, let me know, we'll beam up. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: I find that most unusual, Captain. 
KIRK: Scotty will handle it. We've got a job to do. Turn up anything on your tricorder? 
SPOCK: Indeed. Subsurface vibrations for miles in all directions. 
KIRK: That's strange. 
SPOCK: Quite strong, fairly regular, artificially produced. 
KIRK: Mallory. 
MALLORY: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: We're heading for the village. Avoid contact with the humanoids. I want you and Marple to make a full reconnaissance. And be careful. There may be other dangers besides poisonous plants. Keep in constant communication. 
MALLORY: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: What is it? 
SPOCK: There's a humanoid hiding directly behind us, moving with remarkable agility, bearing one eight. 
(Kirk nods to a guard, and they go to flank their observer.) 
CHEKOV: What is it, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: A visitor. One wanting to retain his anonymity, I should say. 
MARTHA: All this beauty, and now Mister Hendorff dead, somebody watching us. It's frightening. 
CHEKOV: If you insist on worrying, worry about me. I've been wanting to get you in a place like this for a long time. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, Yeoman Landon. I know you find each other fascinating, but we're not here to conduct a field experiment in human biology. 
CHEKOV: I was about to take some readings. 
SPOCK: Anything? 
KIRK: Whatever it is, it moves like a cat. 
MCCOY: Jim, I don't like this. 
KIRK: Neither do I. All hands. We've been watched, we'll probably be watched. We're moving out. Formation L. 
(They set off in single file, a guard in the lead and Chekov bringing up the rear.)
(Along the way, Spock notices a very flat rock and picks it up.) 
SPOCK: Interesting. Extremely low specific gravity, some uraninite, hornblende, quartz. (breaks it in half) Fragile, good cleavage. An analysis should prove interesting. 
(He throws one half away, and it explodes when it hits the ground.) 
KIRK: Would you mind being careful where you throw your rocks, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Obviously highly unstable, Captain. This could be a find of some importance. In large quantities, it could be a considerable source of power. 
KIRK: Garden of Eden, with land mines. 
(Spock puts the other piece of rock down very carefully, and they continue their route march. An occasional bush rustle indicates they are being watched.)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Enterprise to Captain Kirk.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Kirk here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott, sir. Our antimatter pods are completely inert.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I couldn't stop it, but I know why.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Why?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Something from the surface. It's like a pail of water on a fire. A beam, maybe, or a transmission. And it's still on. I'm having it analysed, but it's like nothing I've seen before.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: And it's pinpointed in the area of that village we located down there. 
KIRK: We're heading there now, Scotty. You need any help?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: There's nothing you can do about it, sir.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: There doesn't seem to be any immediate danger. 
KIRK: All right, Scotty. We'll try and find out what's going on down here. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: If Scott is correct about the force from the surface, it may have to do with the vibrations I read earlier. 
KIRK: Some kind of generator? 
SPOCK: If so, an immense one. Probably subterranean. 
(McCoy is scanning something.) 
KIRK: What's that? 
MCCOY: Some of the thorns like those that killed Hendorff. See the stuff on the end? It's like saplin, only it's a thousand times stronger. 
KIRK: Peculiar stuff to find in paradise. 
SPOCK: (noticing a plant moving) Jim! 
(He pushes the Captain and McCoy out of the way, but takes the thorns in his own chest.) KIRK: Spock! Spock! Security alert. Is he alive? 
(McCoy injects Spock.) 
MCCOY: I filled him with enough masiform D to make the whole crew turn handsprings, and he's not responding. Got to get him back to the ship, Jim. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, sir. 
KIRK: We're beaming up. Notify transporter room. And make arrangements to pick up Mallory and Marple. They're scouting ahead of us.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, aye, sir. Transporter room, stand by to beam up landing party.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: All hands.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Standing by, sir.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Energise.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Energise.

[Planet surface]

(Three times the landing party start to dematerialise, and each time they fail to vanish.) 
KIRK: Scotty, energise. Scotty, what's the matter?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We can't make transporter contact, sir. The entire system's inhibited. The way it is now, we couldn't beam up a fly.

Captain's log, supplementary, Our investigation of Gamma Trianguli Six has suddenly turned into a nightmare. We're being watched and followed, Mister Spock has been injured, and now we find we are unable to return to the ship.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Scotty, is the transporter malfunction tied in with trouble you're having with the antimatter pods? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. I'll check it and get back with you. Scott out. 
(Spock starts to sit up.) 
KIRK: Spock. Are you all right? 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy's potion is acting like all his potions, turning my stomach. Other than that, I am quite well. 
MCCOY: If your blood were red instead of green, you wouldn't have an upset stomach. 
KIRK: Just what do you think you were trying to do? 
SPOCK: I surmised you were unaware of that plant, so I 
KIRK: Stepped in front and took the thorns yourself. 
SPOCK: I assure you, Captain, I had no intention of doing that. It was merely my own clumsiness prevented me which prevented me from moving out of the way. 
KIRK: I see. Well next time, just yell. I can step out of the way as quickly as the next man. 
SPOCK: I shall do so. 
KIRK: Trying to get yourself killed. Do you know how much Starfleet has invested in you? 
SPOCK: One hundred twenty two thousand two hundred 
KIRK: Never mind. But thanks. Kaplan, take the post. 
KAPLAN: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Not only is something after us, but it's after the ship as well. 
SPOCK: Captain, to affect the ship at this extreme range would require a highly sophisticated planetary defence system. 
(It goes dark.) 
KIRK: Thirty seconds ago, there wasn't a cloud in the sky. 
(A lightning strike hits Kaplan, and he is burnt to ash instantly.) 
KIRK: Come on! 
(They take cover, and the storm passes as quickly as it came. They find the smoldering remains of Kaplan.) 
KIRK: Phasers. A beautiful day, Mister Spock. Not a cloud in the sky. Just like paradise. (The scouting party has reached a collection of round huts - very African.) 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Village]

MALLORY: Mallory here, Captain. I'm near the village. Co-ordinates, one one eight by two two zero.

[Planet surface]

(But Kirk only hears static and a faint voice.) 
KIRK: Mallory. Mallory, you all right? Come in!

[Village]

MALLORY: The village is primitive. Strictly tribal from the looks of it. And Captain, there's something else. Captain, come in.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Mallory. Mallory, you all right? Mallory! 
SPOCK: Captain. Those co-ordinates are a short distance in that direction. 
KIRK: On the double. 
(They run off, sort of. Meanwhile Mallory is running for his life.) 
MALLORY: It's over there! That way! I never saw anything like 
(He steps on one of those exploding rocks.) 
KIRK: Mallory! Marple, stand back! Watch it! The rocks! (kneeling by the body) Kaplan. Hendorff. I know Kaplan's family. Now Mallory. 
MCCOY: Jim, you couldn't have stopped any of this. 
KIRK: His father helped me get into the Academy. 
SPOCK: Captain. In each case, this was unavoidable. 
KIRK: I could've prevented all of it. 
SPOCK: I don't see how. 
KIRK: A walk in paradise, among the green grass and flowers. We should've beamed up at the first sign of trouble. 
SPOCK: You are under orders to investigate this planet and this culture. 
KIRK: I also have the option to disregard those orders if I consider them overly hazardous. This isn't that important a mission, Spock. Not worth the lives of three of my men. I drop my guard for a minute because I like the smell of growing things, and now three men are dead. And the ship's in trouble. 
SPOCK: No one has ever stated that Starfleet duty was particularly safe. You've followed the correct and logical course, done everything a commander could do. Self-recriminations (he pauses) Captain, our friend is back. 
KIRK: Marple, Chekov, at attention. Gentlemen, something or someone is behind that rock. I want it. Marple, cut around the rock to your right. Make a loud noise. Be careful. (Marple leaves) Spock, you and Chekov create a diversion and make it loud. 
SPOCK: Mister Chekov, your tricorder readings are totally inefficient! 
CHEKOV: Mind your own business, sir! For your information, I have a very high efficiency rating. 
SPOCK: Ensign, I will not have you address me in that tone of voice! 
CHEKOV: What do you want, violence? 
(Kirk catches their observer, and hits him as he tries to run away. To his astonishment, the white-haired male begins to cry.) 
KIRK: I won't hurt you. Do you understand? I won't hurt you. 
AKUTA: You struck me. With your hand. 
KIRK: Well, I won't strike you again. You've been following us, watching us. Why? 
AKUTA: I am the eyes of Vaal. He must see. 
KIRK: Who is Vaal? 
AKUTA: Vaal is Vaal. He is everything. 
KIRK: Do you have a name? 
AKUTA: I am Akuta. I am the leader of the feeders of Vaal. 
(Spock and the others arrive.) 
KIRK: They're not going to hurt you. I promise you. Akuta, Akuta, we come in peace. We would like to speak to this Vaal. 
AKUTA: Akuta alone speaks to Vaal. I am the eyes and the voice of Vaal. It is Vaal's wish. 
SPOCK: Captain, this is fascinating. If you will permit me, sir? 
(Akuta has metal wires sticking out behind from behind his ears.) 
KIRK: Antennae? 
AKUTA: They are my ears for Vaal. They were given to me in the dim time so the people could understand his commands and obey. 
KIRK: You speak of the people of Vaal. Are they nearby? 
AKUTA: We are close to Vaal so we may serve him. I shall take you there.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Enterprise to Captain Kirk.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Condition red. Condition red. Captain, something has grabbed us from the planet surface

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: Like a giant tractor beam, and we can't break loose.

[Bridge]

KYLE: It's no use, Mister Scott. We're just barely holding our own.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Scotty, are the warp drives still out?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, sir. All we have is impulse power.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Put it on maximum. Full emergency circuits.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: They're all on, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: Status, are you still holding? 
SCOTT: Kyle? 
KYLE: No, sir. We're slipping. 
SCOTT: Computer banks, Kyle. Feed in a rate, get me a figure. We might be able to pull out with warp drive, but without it

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: We're like a fly on fly paper. Even worse

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're starting to lose ground. Hurry up on that figure, Kyle.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Maintain full reverse thrust against the pull. Put a team on that warp drive. Get it working.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I've done that, Captain. They haven't been able to do a thing. (Kyle hands him a PADD) It's no good, Captain. With maximum thrust against the pull

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: We'll only be able to maintain full power for sixteen hours, then we burn up for sure. 
KIRK: Scotty, you're my Chief Engineer. You know everything about that ship there is to know. More than the men who designed it. If you can't get those warp engines working

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: You're fired. 
SCOTT: I'll do everything there is to do, sir. Scott out.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Tell me about Vaal. 
AKUTA: All the world knows about Vaal. He causes the rains to fall and the sun to shine. All good comes from Vaal. 
KIRK: Take me to him. I wish to speak to him. 
AKUTA: I shall take you to him, but he will not speak to you. He speaks only to me. 
KIRK: I'll take my chances.

[Vaal]

(Akuta leads them to a giant rock serpent head with green and yellow eyes, sticking out of a cliff. It looks like there is a fire in it's throat.) 
AKUTA: Vaal.

Captain's log, stardate 3715.6. We have been introduced to Vaal. Evidently the source of the planet's power emanations and possibly the force that threatens both us and our ship.

[Vaal]

SPOCK: Fascinating. A very high order of workmanship, very ancient, generating great power. 
KIRK: But this is not the centre, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: No, Captain. The centre is deep in the earth beneath us. This is an access point. It would also seem to be a 
(He steps forward and is flung back.) 
KIRK: A force field? 
SPOCK: Obviously. 
KIRK: You all right? 
SPOCK: Yes, quite. It extends some thirty feet beyond the figure in all directions. Conventional in composition, and quite formidable. 
KIRK: Akuta, how do you talk to Vaal? 
AKUTA: Vaal calls me. Only then. 
KIRK: Well, we can't get to it. We can't talk to it unless it wants to talk to us. 
AKUTA: Vaal sleeps now. When he is hungry, you may be able to speak with him, if he desires it. 
KIRK: When does he get hungry? 
AKUTA: Soon. Come. We will give you food and drink. If you are tired, you may rest.

[Village]

AKUTA: These are the people of Vaal. 
(Everyone is grown up, with white hair and wearing a simple cotton sarong.) 
KIRK: Where are the others? 
AKUTA: There are no others. 
KIRK: The children. 
AKUTA: Children? You use unknown words to me. 
KIRK: Little ones like yourselves. They grow. 
AKUTA: Replacements. None are necessary. They are forbidden by Vaal. 
MARTHA: But when a man and woman fall in love, 
AKUTA: Love. Strange words. Children. Love. What is love? 
MARTHA: Love is when two people are 
(Chekov demonstrates by putting his arm around her waist.) 
AKUTA: Ah, yes. The holding, the touching. Vaal has forbidden this. 
MCCOY: Well, there goes paradise. 
AKUTA: These people, are from another place. They have come among us. Welcome them! 
ALL: Welcome to Vaal. 
SAYANA: (placing the equivalent of a lei around Kirk's wrist.) Our homes are open to you. 
KIRK: Well, thank you. It does something for you. 
SPOCK: Yes, indeed it does, Captain. It makes me uncomfortable. 
SAYANA: I am Sayana. You have a name? 
SPOCK: Yes. Spock. I am Spock. 
SAYANA: (amid general merriment) Spock? 
SPOCK: I fail to see what they find so amusing. 
AKUTA: Come!

[Hut]

AKUTA: This house is your house. I will send you more food and drink. You are welcome in the place of Vaal. 
CHEKOV: Now we're welcome. A while ago this whole planet was trying to kill us. It doesn't make sense. 
KIRK: Nothing makes sense down here. Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here. 
KIRK: Status report, Scotty.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT: No change, Captain. The orbit is decaying along computed lines. No success with the warp drive. We're going down and we can't stop it.

[Hut]

KIRK: I'm sick of hearing that word can't. Get that ship out of there.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Sir, we're doing everything within engineering reason.

[Hut]

KIRK: Then use your imagination. Tie every ounce of power the ship has into the impulse engines. Discard the warp drive nacelles if you have to, and crack out of there with the main section, but get that ship out of there!

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Sir, I'm going to switch over everything but the life-support systems and boost the impulse power, but that's just about as dangerous.

[Hut]

KIRK: Do it. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: Incredible. 
KIRK: Report. 
MCCOY: I just ran a thorough check on the natives, and there's a complete lack of harmful bacteria in their systems, no decalcification, no degeneration of tissue, no arteriosclerosis. In simple terms, Jim, they're not growing old, and I can't begin to tell you how old they are, twenty years or twenty thousand years. 
KIRK: I see. Opinion. 
SPOCK: Quite possible. It checks with my atmospheric analysis. Their atmosphere completely negates any harmful effects from their sun. 
KIRK: Add to that a simple diet, a perfectly controlled temperature, no natural enemies, apparently no vices, no replacements needed. Maybe it is paradise after all. 
(A gong sounds outside, and all the villagers are heading off towards Vaal.)

[Village]

KIRK: Mister Spock.

[Vaal]

(The villagers are walking into the serpent's mouth and depositing plates of fruit down it's throat. Kirk and Spock watch from behind a shrub.) 
SPOCK: Apparently, our hypothesis is correct. There is no living being there. It is a machine, nothing more. 
KIRK: Well, the field's down, people are going in. Let's see what kind of luck we have. 
(But as soon as they stand, the eyes light up and there is a rumble of thunder.) 
KIRK: That's not the way. 
SPOCK: Evidently not. This is no ordinary machine, Captain. It may well possess a rudimentary intelligence. 
KIRK: But it needs to eat. Frequently. So it can't have any great power reserves. 
SPOCK: That may not be of any help. The Enterprise has only ten hours left in which to break free. 
KIRK: What happens if Vaal weakens around feeding time? Spock, check the electromagnetic section of the astrophysics lab. Get an estimate of the total amount of energy being expended against the ship. Have them measure it hour by hour. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged. 
(McCoy joins them.) 
MCCOY: What's going on, Jim? 
KIRK: Mess call. 
SPOCK: In my view, a splendid example of reciprocity. 
MCCOY: It would take a computerised Vulcan mind such as yours to make that kind of a statement. 
SPOCK: Doctor, you insist on applying human standards to non-human cultures. I remind you that humans are only a tiny minority in this galaxy. 
MCCOY: There are certain absolutes, Mister Spock, and one of them is the right of humanoids to a free and unchained environment, the right to have conditions which permit growth. 
SPOCK: Another is their right to choose a system which seems to work for them. 
MCCOY: Jim, you're not just going to stand by and be blinded to what's going on here. These are humanoids, intelligent. They need to advance and grow. Don't you understand what my readings indicate? There's been no progress here in at least ten thousand years. This isn't life. It's stagnation. 
SPOCK: Doctor, these people are healthy and they are happy. What ever you choose to call it, this system works, despite your emotional reaction to it. 
MCCOY: It might work for you, Mister Spock, but it doesn't work for me. Humanoids living so they can service a hunk of tin. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I think this philosophical argument can wait until our ship's out of danger. Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Scotty, sir. We have a reading on the power source Mister Spock requested. When we first monitored, it was generating alternating cycles totalling one hundred to the twentieth power Waltham units.

[Vaal]

KIRK: Did it maintain, Scotty?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: No, sir. Power's dropping bit by bit. Nominal, but a definite drain.

[Vaal]

KIRK: Good. Keep monitoring. How are you coming along with the circuit switchover?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're putting everything but the kitchen sink into impulse power, sir. It will take us another eight hours to complete the work.

[Vaal]

KIRK: That's cutting it a bit fine, Scotty.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, but if we don't break out, I'd rather we didn't have to wait too long for the end of it.

[Vaal]

KIRK: Kirk out.

[Hut]

MARTHA: Every time I think of the Enterprise burning up and us 
KIRK: Yeoman, you're wasting energy. 
MARTHA: Captain, we're trapped, 
KIRK: Sit down, and have something to eat. 
MARTHA: The Enterprise is up there 
KIRK: That hasn't happened yet. I wonder what would happen? Yeoman, speculate. What would happen if someone on this planet died? 
MARTHA: But they can't. You said that Vaal takes care of them. 
KIRK: Accidents happen. 
MARTHA: Yes, I suppose if someone were to fall off a cliff or something, that might upset the balance of the population. Then they would need a replacement. 
KIRK: They'd need a replacement. Opinion, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I see no alternative. 
MARTHA: But these people, I mean, if they don't know anything about. What I mean is, they don't seem to have any natural er. I mean, how is it, done? 
KIRK: Mister Spock? You're the science officer. Why don't you explain it to the young lady. 
SPOCK: Well, I believe it's safe, (cough) safe to assume that they would receive the necessary instructions. 
MCCOY: From a machine? That I'd like to see.

[Vaal]

AKUTA: I understand, Vaal. It shall be done.

[Village]

(Chekov and Landon are taking a romantic stroll together.) 
MARTHA: You know, if it weren't for Vaal this place would be a paradise. 
(They are watched by a local couple) 
CHEKOV: Any place we can be together is paradise. 
MARTHA: Pav, can the ship really break away? 
CHEKOV: I don't know. 
MARTHA: Will we be able to get back aboard? 
CHEKOV: Martha, I don't know. But if we do have to stay here, would it be so very bad? 
MARTHA: No, not if you're with me. 
(They kiss .) 
SAYANA: Why do you look like that? 
MAKORA: The way they touched. I do not understand. 
SAYANA: They were not angry. I think it was pleasant for them. 
MAKORA: But what is to be gained? It is not a dance. It gathers no food. It does not serve Vaal. But it did seem as though it was, pleasant to them. 
(He kisses the girl's cheek.) 
SAYANA: It is pleasant, Makora. 
MAKORA: Yes. They touched in this way. 
They kiss properly and there is a roll of thunder.) 
MAKORA: Vaal! He is angry. 
AKUTA: The law is plain. I have given you the words of Vaal. Do you beg the lightning to strike? 
SAYANA: We saw the strangers, the two of them, do this thing. 
AKUTA: You copied them? 
MAKORA: We meant no harm. 
AKUTA: Vaal speaks truly to me. The newcomers are a danger. Tell the men of Vaal to meet me in the clear place when the strangers are asleep. It is Vaal's own words.

[Planet surface]

(The men are waiting for Akuta. He arrives with a blue melon and a very big stick. AKUTA: Vaal has spoken to me. His words are true. Hear them. We are to kill the strangers. 
MAKORA: Kill, Akuta? We do not understand. 
AKUTA: It is a thing to do, like, like feeding Vaal. Vaal explained it to me. I will show you. This (the melon) is the head of one of the strangers. Find a heavy stick. Come up from behind the stranger and do this. 
(He swings his stick and smashes the melon to pieces.) 
AKUTA: It is a simple thing. It is the word of Vaal. It will be done to all of them when the sun returns in the morning. 
(But he looks worried.)

[Hut]

SPOCK: I am concerned, Captain. This may not be an ideal society, but it is a viable one. 
KIRK: Bones was right. These people aren't living, they're existing. They don't create, they don't produce, they don't even think. They exist to service a machine. 
SPOCK: If we do what it seems we must, in my opinion it will be in direct violation of the non-interference directive. 
KIRK: These are people, not robots. They should have the opportunity of choice. We owe it to them to interfere. 
SPOCK: Starfleet Command may think otherwise. 
KIRK: I'll take my chances. Why don't you have a look around? Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott? 
(Spock leaves)
SCOTT [OC]: Here, sir. 
KIRK: How's it going, Scotty?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Almost ready, sir. We need half an hour yet.

[Hut]

KIRK: You realise that within forty five minutes, the ship will be pulled down into the atmosphere?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I know that. As you said, that's cutting things fine.

[Hut]

KIRK: Yes, I 
SPOCK: Captain! 
KIRK: Kirk out. What is it? 
SPOCK: Disturbing. The people of Vaal seem to have disappeared.

[Vaal]

SPOCK: Force field, Captain. 
KIRK: Vaal, we are on a peaceful mission. We mean no harm to you or your people. 
(The sky darkens.) 
SPOCK: Variation in impulses, Captain. I believe it is reading us. A strong jump on all wavelengths. 
(Lightning threatens.) 
KIRK: Let's get out of here! 
(But Spock is hit, with a nice hole in the back of his tunic.)

[Village]

KIRK: Bones! 
MCCOY: Second degree burns. Not serious, but I'll bet they smart. 
SPOCK: Doctor, you have an unsurpassed talent for understatement. 
KIRK: Marple! 
(The red-shirt is struck by Akuta. The other men are easily eluded, disarmed and dealt with.) 
KIRK: Put them in the hut. Find out where the women are. Put them in there, too. 
SPOCK: The good doctor was concerned that the Vaalians achieved true human stature. I submit there is no cause for worry. They've taken the first step. They've learned to kill.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're ready here, sir. All available power has been channelled into the impulse engines. We have twelve minutes before entering atmosphere.

[Village]

KIRK: All right, Scotty, put her in full reverse. Get her out of there.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Full reverse, Mister Kyle, all engines. 
KYLE: Sir! 
SCOTT: Captain, we're doing it. We're pulling away!

[Village]

KIRK: Scotty, what happened? 
KYLE: It's no good, sir. There's only a few systems responding.

[Village]

SCOTT [OC]: Captain, we've pulled away a little. We gained maybe an hour, but we blew almost every system in the ship doing it.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: There's nothing left to try again. I guess you'll have to fire me, sir.

[Village]

KIRK: You're fired. Four hundred people 
MCCOY: Jim 
KIRK: They'll die because I couldn't see a warning sign. I had to follow orders, always orders. 
(The gong sounds, and the people of Vaal try to leave the hut.) 
CHEKOV: Get back in there. 
MCCOY: Fine time to ring the dinner bell. 
CHEKOV: Get back in there. Now! 
KIRK: Bones, that's it. Stay with Chekov. Keep those people from feeding Vaal. Don't let them feed Vaal. Keep them in the hut. Mister Spock. 
(They head off through the shrubs.) 
KIRK: Scotty, do you still have phaser power?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, but what 
KIRK [OC]: Lock all banks on the co-ordinates of the energy field located down here.

[Vaal]

KIRK; On my command, commence firing on those co-ordinates.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, sir, but they won't penetrate that force field.

[Vaal]

KIRK: If my guess is correct, they won't have to. Stand by.

[Hut]

AKUTA: Vaal calls to us. Let us go to him. He hungers. Please.

[Vaal]

SPOCK: Readings are getting weaker, Captain. Wide variation in energy transmissions, as though Vaal were trying to draw on other sources. KIRK: Tapping its energy cells. 
SPOCK: I would assume so. 
KIRK: Good. The ship's pulling away must have weakened it considerable. It has to be fed, but its reserve capacity could hold out for days. 
SPOCK: If it had to reinforce its energy field to ward off a phaser attack, it would have to draw more heavily on its reserves. 
KIRK: My plan exactly. Scotty.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Scott here, sir.

[Vaal]

KIRK: Scotty, commence firing and maintain.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Kyle, all phasers commence firing.

[Vaal]

(Two red beams hit the edge of the force field and start turning it green.) 
SPOCK: A tremendous upsurge in generated power, Captain. Obviously Vaal is trying to reinforce his energy field. 
KIRK: Good. Let's see how long he can do it. 
(The green glow arrives at the snake's head as the storm clouds gather. The lightning flashes, and small explosions go off inside Vaal. Smoke comes out of its mouth. Finally, the eyes stop glowing and the throat goes dark.) 
KIRK: Scotty, cease fire. 
(The sun breaks through the clouds again.) 
SPOCK: No power generation at all, Captain. Vaal is dead. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, status report.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Tractor beam gone. Potency returning to antimatter pods.

[Vaal]

SCOTT [OC]: I'll have all engineering sections working on the circuits immediately. Transporter'll be ready in an hour. 
KIRK: Scotty, you're re-hired. As soon as the transporter's fixed, form an engineering detail with full analytical equipment and beam them down. Kirk out. Chekov, Bones. Let those people go. 
AKUTA: But it was Vaal who put the fruit on the trees, caused the rain to fall. Vaal cared for us. 
KIRK: You'll learn to care for yourselves, with our help. And there's no trick to putting fruit on trees. You might enjoy it. You'll learn to build for yourselves, think for yourselves, work for yourselves, and what you create is yours. That's what we call freedom. You'll like it, a lot. And you'll learn something about men and women, the way they're supposed to be. Caring for each other, being happy with each other, being good to each other. That's what we call love. You'll like that, too, a lot. You and your children. 
SAYANA: What are children? 
KIRK: The little ones? Look like you? Just go on the way you're going. You'll find out.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: I don't agree with you at all, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: That's not unusual, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Jim, I want you to hear this. 
SPOCK: Captain, I'm not at all certain we did the correct thing on Gamma Trianguli Six. 
MCCOY: We put those people back on a normal course of social evolution. I see nothing wrong in that. 
KIRK: Well, that's a good object lesson, Mister Spock. It's an example of what can happen when a machine becomes too efficient, does too much work for you. 
SPOCK: Captain, you are aware of the biblical story of Genesis. 
KIRK: Yes, of course I'm aware of it. Adam and Eve tasted the apple and as a result were driven out of paradise. 
SPOCK: Precisely, Captain, and in a manner of speaking, we have given the people of Vaal the apple, the knowledge of good and evil if you will, as a result of which they too have been driven out of paradise. 
KIRK: Doctor, do I understand him correctly? Are you casting me in the role of Satan? 
SPOCK: Not at all, Captain. 
KIRK: Is there anyone on this ship who even remotely looks like Satan? 
(McCoy and Kirk walk around Spock. McCoy is gazing intently at his ears.) 
SPOCK: I am not aware of anyone who fits that description, Captain. 
KIRK: No, Mister Spock. I didn't think you would be.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Mirror, Mirror
Stardate: Unknown
Original Airdate: 6 Oct, 1967

[Planet surface]
(Kirk, Scott, McCoy and Uhura are with the local leader, when lightning threatens.) 
THARN: We believe what you say, Captain Kirk, but our position has not altered. The Halkan Council cannot permit your Federation to mine dilithium crystals on our planet. 
KIRK: We have shown the council historical proof that our missions are peaceful. 
THARN: We accept that your Federation is benevolent at present, but the future is always in question. Our dilithium crystals represent awesome power. Wrongful use of that power, even to the extent of the taking of one life, would violate our history of total peace. To prevent that, we would die, Captain. As a race, if necessary. 
KIRK: I admire your ethics and hope to prove ours. Kirk to Enterprise. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here. 
KIRK: Report on magnetic storm, Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Standard ion type, Captain, but quite violent (Enterprise shakes) and unpredictable.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Rough ride? 
SPOCK [OC]: If we stay. 
KIRK: Stand by to beam up landing party.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Plot an extended orbit to clear disturbance. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: Comply, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: When may we resume discussion? 
THARN: The council will meditate further, but do not be hopeful of any change. Captain, you do have the might to force the crystals from us, of course. 
KIRK: But we won't. Consider that. Enterprise. Transporter room, energise.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Trouble, sir. 
(Four figures start to materialise, then disappear again. The image of Enterprise in orbit reverses itself. Finally, four figures solidify, wearing strange uniforms with gold sashes. Uhura's midriff is bare.) 
KIRK: Spock was right. It was a rough trip. 
(Spock and Kyle greet their Captain with a semi-Nazi salute. Their uniforms have changes, and Spock has grown a very fetching goatee beard.) 
SPOCK: At norm, Mister Kyle. Controls at neutral. 
KYLE: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Status of mission, Captain? 
KIRK: No change. 
SPOCK: Standard procedure, Captain? (Kirk nods) Mister Sulu, you will programme phaser barrage on Halkan cities. 
SULU [OC]: Yes, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Their military capability, Captain? 
KIRK: None. 
SPOCK: Regrettable that this society has chosen suicide. Mister Kyle, you were instructed to compensate during the ion storm. 
KYLE: But I tried, Mister Spock, I tried. 
SPOCK: Carelessness with the equipment cannot be tolerated. 
KYLE: But Mister Spock, I 
SPOCK: Your agoniser. 
KYLE: No, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Your agoniser, please. 
(A guard restrains Kyle and takes a device from his belt.) 
KYLE: No, Mister Spock! I tried. I really tried. 
(Spock places the device on Kyle's collar bone, and he writhes in agony. When it is removed, he collapses.)

Captain's log, stardate unknown. During an ion storm, my landing party has beamed back to the Enterprise and found it and the personnel aboard changed. The ship is subtly altered physically. Behaviour and discipline has become brutal, savage.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, the storm has caused some minor damage in your section. There are also injuries requiring your attention, Doctor. Well, gentlemen? 
KYLE: Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Yes. 
KYLE: The power beam jumped for a moment, sir, as the landing party was about to materialise. I never saw it happen before. 
SPOCK: Due to your error, Mister Kyle? 
KYLE: No, Mister Spock. Before. 
SPOCK: Possibly a result of the severe storm. Captain, do you feel any abnormal effects? 
KIRK: Yes. Doctor McCoy, you'd better look us over. That was a rough beam-up. 
MCCOY: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, have those transporter circuits checked.

[Corridor]

SCOTT: Captain, what is all this? 
UHURA: How did we get in these 
KIRK: Not now. Not now.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: What is this? Everything's all messed up and changed around, out of place. 
UHURA: Captain, what's happened? 
MCCOY: No, not everything. That spot, I spilt acid there a year ago. Jim, What in blazes is this? 
KIRK: I don't know. It's our Enterprise but it isn't. Maybe 
UHURA: Maybe what, Captain? 
KIRK: Any of you feel dizzy when we were in the transporter beam? 
UHURA: Yes. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
KIRK: When we first materialised. 
SCOTT: I did. 
KIRK: It happened twice. First we were in our own transporter chamber, then we faded, and then when we finally materialised, we were here. Wherever this is. 
SCOTT: Captain, the transporter chief mentioned a surge of power. The transporter lock might have been affected by the ion storm and we just materialised somewhere else. 
KIRK: Yes, here. Not our universe, not our ship. Something parallel. A parallel universe co-existing with ours on another dimensional plane. Everything's duplicated, almost. Another Enterprise. Spock with a beard. 
UHURA: Another Captain Kirk, another Doctor McCoy, another 
MCCOY: An exchange. If we're here 
KIRK: Then our counterparts must have been transporting up at the exact same time. Similar storms on both universes disrupted the circuits. We're here, and they're on our Enterprise. Probably asking the same questions. Are we in another universe, and if so, how do we get back to our own? They'll use the computer, and we have to. 
MCCOY: What about the Halkans? We can't let them be destroyed. 
KIRK: Scotty, can you buy me some time. Get below and short out the main phaser couplings. They'll think the storm blew the stand-by circuits. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Then get on this technology. It's all we have to work with if we want to get back home. The intercom may be monitored. Use your communicators for private messages. Subfrequency and scramble. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(Scott leaves) 
KIRK: Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Get to your post. Run today's communication from Starfleet Command. I want to know my exact orders and options, if any. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Bones. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm 
KIRK: Uhura, you're the only one who can do it. I'll be right there. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
(She leaves.) 
KIRK: Bones. Let's take a look at the library. We have a lot to learn.

[Bridge]

SULU: Mister Chekov, phaser setting for planetary target A. 
CHEKOV: Co-ordinates seven one two stroke four, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Port batteries locked. 
(Uhura enters, and goes to her station. Sulu goes over to her. He has a very nasty scar down his face.) 
SULU: Still no interest, Uhura? Hmm? I could change your mind. 
UHURA: You are away from your post, Mister. 
SULU: Is the captain here? Is Spock here? When the cat's away 
(She slaps his hand away, then Kirk enters. Everyone salutes him.) 
KIRK: Communications status. 
UHURA: No storm damage, sir. All stations report normal. (quietly) You're ordered to annihilate the Halkans unless they comply. No alternative. 
SULU: Phasers Locked on target A, Captain. Approaching optimum range. Commence fire, Captain? Captain? 
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Sulu.

[Main Phaser Power Control]

(The door opens and a burly guard blocks Scott's entrance.) 
SCOTT: I've been ordered to check phaser couplings for possible damage by the storm. 
GUARD: Do you have authorisation from security, sir? 
SCOTT: Captain's orders. 
GUARD: I'll have to check with Security Chief Sulu, sir. 
SCOTT: Never mind. I'll attend to it. 
(He goes to an intercom.)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk here.

[Main Phaser Power Control]

SCOTT: Phaser report, sir. No damage.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Very good. Thank you, Mister Scott. Kirk out. 
(Spock enters the Bridge.) 
SPOCK: Planet's rotation is carrying primary target beyond arc of phaser lock. 
SULU: Shall I correct orbit to new firing position? 
KIRK: No. 
SPOCK: Lock on to secondary city. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, contact the Halkan council. I wish to talk to them again. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: This is a new race. They offer other things of value besides dilithium crystals. 
SPOCK: But we cannot expect their co-operation. They have refused the Empire. Command procedure dictates that we provide the customary example. 
SULU: Secondary target now moving beyond our phaser lock. 
KIRK: Put phasers on standby, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: A serious breach of orders, Captain. 
KIRK: I have my reasons, and I'll make them clear to you in my own good time. 
UHURA: Captain, I have the leader on the Halkan Council waiting on channel B. 
KIRK: It is useless to resist us. 
THARN [on viewscreen: We do not resist you. 
KIRK: You have twelve hours to consider your position. 
THARN [on viewscreen: Twelve years, Captain Kirk, or twelve thousand. We are ethically compelled to deny your demand for our dilithium crystals, for you would use their power to destroy. 
KIRK: We will level your planet and take what we want. That is destruction. You will die as a race. 
THARN [on viewscreen: To preserve what we are. 
KIRK: We will not argue. Twelve hours. No more. Close communications. Turn phasers off. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Twelve hours, Captain? That is unprecedented. 
KIRK: I shall be in my quarters. Lieutenant Uhura, have Doctor McCoy and Mister Scott meet me there. 
(Chekov presses a couple of buttons on his console, then leaves his post.) 
SPOCK: Captain, you've placed yourself in a most grave position. This conduct must be reported. 
KIRK: You're at liberty to do so, Mister Spock.

[Turbolift]

CHEKOV: Deck five, sir? 
(As Kirk leaves the lift, someone punches him in the face and he is grabbed.)

[Corridor]

CHEKOV: (holding a phaser on Kirk) So you die, Captain, and we all move up in rank. No one will question the assassination of a captain who has disobeyed prime orders of the Empire.

Captain's log, supplemental. I command an Enterprise where officers apparently employ private henchmen among the crew, where assassination of superiors is a common means of advancing in rank.

[Corridor]

(Suddenly, one of Chekov's men turns against him, taking his weapon and shooting another. Kirk throws his final assailant and he gets zapped into molecules too. The turbolift opens and two armed men come out.) 
MAN: Your men, Captain. Easy, Farrell. I did your job. Ask the captain. 
FARRELL: Sir? 
KIRK: Yes, he did your job. 
FARRELL: Smart boy, switching to the top dog. 
KIRK: Get him out of here. 
MAN: Mister Chekov was going to make me a chief. You could make me an officer. 
KIRK: All right. You're working for me. 
MAN: A commission? 
KIRK: You're in line. You might even make captain. 
MAN: Yes, sir. 
(Kirk punches him.) 
KIRK: Not on my ship. 
FARRELL: The booth for this one, sir? 
KIRK: Yes, the booth. Carry on. 
(Chekov is taken away.)

[Kirk's quarters]

(The three men enter warily.) 
MCCOY: Here. Here. What's this? 
KIRK: It's called blood. Watch your step. The officers move up by assassination. Chekov tried it on me. 
SCOTT: Mister Sulu is Security Chief, like the ancient Gestapo. 
MCCOY: And my Sickbay is a chamber of horrors. My assistants were betting on the tolerance of an injured man. How long it would take him to pass out from the pain. 
KIRK: Report on technology. 
SCOTT: Mostly variations in instrumentation. Nothing I can't handle. 
KIRK: Star readings? 
SCOTT: Everything's exactly where it should be, except us. 
KIRK: Let's find out where we stand. Computer. 
COMPUTER: (a male voice) Ready. 
KIRK: This is the Captain. Record security research, to be classified under my voice print or Mister Scott's. 
COMPUTER: Recorded. 
KIRK: Produce all data relevant to the recent ion storm. Correlate following hypothesis. Could a storm of such magnitude cause a power surge in the transporter circuits creating a momentary interdimensional contact with a parallel universe? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. 
KIRK: At such a moment, could persons in each universe, in the act of beaming, transpose with their counterparts in the other universe? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. 
KIRK: Could conditions necessary to such an event be created artificially using the ship's power? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. 
KIRK: Record procedure. Scotty, can you do it? 
SCOTT: Not by myself. I'll need help. And you'd be too conspicuous. 
MCCOY: I'm a doctor, not an engineer. 
SCOTT: Now you're an engineer. I'll have to tap the power we need from the warp engines and balance it for the four of us. 
MCCOY: Jim, the way this ship is run, what kind of people are we in this universe? 
KIRK: Let's find out. Computer. 
COMPUTER: Ready. 
KIRK: Read out official record of current command. 
COMPUTER: Captain James T. Kirk succeeded to command ISS Enterprise through assassination of Captain Christopher Pike. First action, suppression of Gorlan uprising through destruction of rebel home planet. Second action, execution of five thousand colonists on Vega Nine. 
KIRK: Cancel. Now we know. 
SCOTT: Captain? We can do it. 
KIRK: Good. 
SCOTT: We have to lay in the automatic transporter setting, but when we interrupt engine circuits to tie the power increase into the transporter, it'll show up on Sulu's security board. Of course, we'll only need a second. 
KIRK: I'll tell Uhura to create a diversion to distract Sulu, at your signal. Let's get back to our posts. Keep me advised. 
MCCOY: Jim, if we're here, what do you suppose our counterparts doing back in our universe? 
KIRK: On our Enterprise.

[Brig]

(A furious duplicate Captain is being manhandled along the corridor by two security guards and thrown into the Brig. Uhura, Scott and McCoy are already there.) 
KIRK2: I order you, Let me go! Traitors! Spock, get these men off me! What is this? 
MCCOY2: What are you doing, Spock? 
KIRK2: You traitorous pig. I'll hang you up by your Vulcan ears. I'll have you all executed! 
SPOCK: I think not. Your authority on this ship is extremely limited, Captain. The four of you will remain her in the Brig and in custody until I discover how to return you to wherever it is you belong. 
KIRK2: Has the whole galaxy gone crazy? What kind of a uniform is this? Where's your beard? What's going on? Where's my personal guard? 
SPOCK: I can answer none of your questions at this time. 
KIRK2: All right, Spock. Whatever your game is, I'll play it. You want credits, I'll give them to you. You'll be a rich man. A command of your own? I can swing that, too. 
SPOCK: Apparently some kind of transposition has taken place. I find it extremely interesting. 
KIRK2: Spock. What is it that will buy you? Power? 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK2: Power, Spock? I can get that for you!

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Captain, I am pleased that you frustrated Mister Chekov's plan. I should regret your death. 
KIRK: Why? 
SPOCK: I do not desire the captaincy. I much prefer my scientific duties. I am frankly content to be a lesser target. 
KIRK: Logical, as always, Mister Spock. 
(They arrive at a cylinder containing Chekov, who is writhing in agony.) 
SPOCK: The agony booth is a most effective means of discipline. I presume you've ordered full duration. 
KIRK: I haven't decided. 
SPOCK: Indeed. His act warrants death. 
KIRK: I said I haven't decided. 
SPOCK: That is, of course, your affair. Captain, may I inquire if you intend to persist in your unusual course of action regarding the Halkans? 
(They continue walking. Farrell joins Spock's personal guard walking behind his master.) 
KIRK: You heard my orders. 
SPOCK: They are, of course, in contradiction to standard Empire procedure. You cannot ignore the consequences. 
KIRK: Is that a threat? 
SPOCK: I do not threaten, Captain. I merely state facts. I have found you to be an excellent officer. Our missions together have been both successful and profitable. However, I shall not permit your aberrations to jeopardise my position. 
KIRK: Spock, do you think we should destroy the Halkans? 
SPOCK: Terror must be maintained or the Empire is doomed. It is the logic of history. 
KIRK: Conquest is easy, control is not. We may have bitten off more than we can chew. 
SPOCK: Captain, I do not wish to find myself opposing you, but if you continue on your present course, this confusing, inexplicable behaviour, 
KIRK: Is my concern, not yours. You would find me a formidable enemy. 
SPOCK: I'm aware of that, Captain. I trust that you are aware of the reverse. 
(Spock and his bodyguard leave.) 
FARRELL: Orders, sir? 
KIRK: Release Chekov. Confine him to quarters. 
FARRELL: Yes, sir.

[Engineering]

(Scott distracts the guard outside the door so McCoy can give him a hypo.) 
MCCOY: That ought to hold him for about six hours. 
(They go to the upper level, and Scott begins his work.

[Kirk's quarters]

(The room is dark, and a woman is lying on his bed.) 
MARLENA: I fell asleep. We had quite a time in the chem lab picking up after the storm. Nothing compared to your day, I gather. I heard about Chekov. 
KIRK: He gambled, I won. 
MARLENA: You got lucky. I'm surprised you could be caught off-guard that way. 
KIRK: I was preoccupied. 
. MARLENA: You're still in trouble with Starfleet Command. What you've got in mind this time is beyond me. You're scheming, of course. The Halkans have something you want, or, is it all some clever means to advance you to the Admiralty? Kirk. The Cabinet itself? 
KIRK: Further than that, if I'm successful. 
MARLENA: Really? Well, you must know what you're doing. You always do. If I'm to be the woman of a Caesar, can't I know what you're up to? 
(Their kiss is interrupted by the intercom.) 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: Mister Spock, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: Yes. 
SPOCK: I have received a private communication from Starfleet Command. I am committing a breach of regulations by informing you of its contents.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: I am instructed to wait until planet dawn over principal target to permit you to carry out our mission.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: And if I don't?

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: In that event, I am ordered to kill you and to proceed against the Halkans as the new captain of the Enterprise.

Captain's log, stardate unknown. We are trapped in a savage, parallel universe from which we must escape within four hours, or I will face a death sentence at Mister Spock's hands.

[Kirk's quarters]

MARLENA: Let's drink a toast to Spock, The only man aboard with the decency to warn you, and he'll die for it. They'll never find another man like him. 
KIRK: I don't intend to kill him. 
MARLENA: Are you going to act against the Halkans before the deadline? 
KIRK: No, but I'll avoid killing Spock. 
MARLENA: Just get him out of the way, he and his men. 
KIRK: I'll get out of his way. 
MARLENA: Shall I activate the Tantalus field? You'll at least want to monitor him, won't you? 
KIRK: Yes. 
(She touches a wall panel and it rises to reveal a screen and a collection of buttons.) 
MARLENA: I hate this thing. 
KIRK: It's not that bad. 
MARLENA: Of course not. It made you captain. How many enemies have you simply wiped out of existence by the touch of a button? Fifty? A hundred? Now, I always thought that was funny, The great, powerful Captain Kirk who owes everything to some unknown alien scientist and a plundered laboratory. 
KIRK: Well, if you don't take advantage of your opportunities 
MARLENA: You don't rise to the command of a starship or even higher. 
(She switches it on, and Spock is seen sitting at his table.) 
MARLENA: That magnificent mind of his. But it can't protect him from this. I press it and he dies. Now? 
(Kirk switches it off.) 
MARLENA: You really mean it. It doesn't matter. If Spock fails his order, he'll be killed anyway. 
KIRK: I'll see to it that the circumstances of his failure will clear him. 
MARLENA: You're not even afraid of Starfleet Command. Can your scheme bring you that much power so quickly? And what about me? How does Marlena fit in? 
KIRK: How does Marlena want to fit in? 
(She goes into the other room.) 
KIRK: Scotty. 
[Engineering]

SCOTT: Scotty here, sir.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: We have to get out of here within three hours. Spock has orders to kill me unless I complete the mission.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: We've got another deadline, too, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: Explain. 
SCOTT: The two-way matter transmission affected the local field density between the universes, and it's increasing. We've got to move fast.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: How fast?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Half hour at the most.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: If we miss? 
SCOTT [OC]: We couldn't get out of here in a century. We're ready to bridge power from the engines to the transporter.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: You've got to get down there and free the board so we can lock in. Give me about ten minutes.

[Kirk's quarters]

SCOTT [OC]: I've got to complete a few more computations. 
KIRK: All right. I'll be in the transporter room in ten minutes. I'll meet you in Sickbay afterward.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: Computer? 
COMPUTER: ready. 
SPOCK: Explain computer activity in the engineering section. 
COMPUTER: A security research is in progress. 
SPOCK: Who is conducting the research? 
COMPUTER: The Captain and Mister Scott. 
SPOCK: What is the nature of the research? 
COMPUTER: Programme is classified under voice index log. 
(A big red light starts flashing.) 
SPOCK: Why are you monitoring my communications, Mister Sulu?

[Bridge]

SULU: My security board has detected extensive use of computer, Mister Spock. I was about to inform you.

[Spock's quarters]

SULU [OC]: It's not hard to guess the nature of your order from Starfleet Command. I suggest a connection. The captain suspects.

[Bridge]

SULU: He's working on escape or defence.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: That is my concern.

[Bridge]

SULU: Correct. It's your play. I hope you succeed, because the order would fall on me next and you know how Captain Kirk's enemies have a habit of disappearing.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: If I am successful, you see yourself a step nearer to the captaincy. I do not want to command the Enterprise, but if it should befall me, I suggest you remember that my operatives would avenge my death and some of them are Vulcans.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Marlena has changed into something more comfortable.) 
MARLENA: Oiling my traps, darling. I'm afraid I'm a little out of practice. Maybe that's what happened to us? It's very hard for a working officer to shine as a woman every minute, and you demand perfection. 
KIRK: I've never seen perfection, but no woman could come closer to it. 
MARLENA: I remember when you used to talk that way. 
KIRK: I still do. 
MARLENA: Prove it. 
KIRK: I've got to go. 
MARLENA: Ship's business? An important task on the crew deck? Well, I guess it's over. Commander Kenno will take me temporarily. He's made that quite clear. I'll call a yeoman to help me with my things. 
KIRK: You don't have to do that. 
MARLENA: Are you feeling sorry for me? Do I see hesitation in your eyes about anything? I want one thing, Captain. Transfer me. On the Enterprise, I am humiliated! On another ship, I can hunt fresh game. I've got my rank, and. Don't I? I've been a captain's woman, and I like it. I'll be one again if I have to go through every officer in the fleet. 
KIRK: You could. (She turns to slap him.) I simply meant that you could be anything you want to be. 
(They kiss, long and passionate.) 
MARLENA: It's been a long time since you've kissed me like that. You're a stranger. Mercy to the Halkans, mercy to Spock, to me. Am I your woman? 
KIRK: You're the Captain's woman until he says you're not. 
(She turns on the Tantalus machine and watches him go into a turbolift.)

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Uhura? 
UHURA [OC]: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Scotty's signal should be coming through any moment. You know what to do. 
UHURA [OC]: I've got a pretty good idea, sir. 
KIRK: Keep Sulu's attention off that board. 
UHURA [OC]: I'll do my best, sir. 
KIRK: Good luck. Kirk out. 
(Scott is up a Jefferies tube. He signals Uhura.)

[Bridge]

UHURA: You aren't very persistent, Mister Sulu. The game has rules. You're ignoring them. I protest and you come back. You didn't come back. 
SULU: (wrapping his arms around her naked waist) Now you're making sense. 
UHURA: I was getting bored. Of course this isn't the time. 
(The board beeps.) 
SULU: Any time's a good time. 
(She slaps him, hard.) 
UHURA: I'm afraid I changed my mind. Again. 
SULU: You take a lot of chances, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: (drawing her dagger) So do you, Mister. So do you. Take over for me. 
(She goes into the turbolift, and guards block Sulu's way.)

[Turbolift]

UHURA: Mister Scott, all clear. On my way to Sickbay.

[Jefferies tube]

MCCOY: Now it's up to the captain.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Please restrict your movements, Captain. 
KIRK: What are you doing? Are you going to shoot me now, Spock? I thought I had until dawn. 
SPOCK: I shall make that decision. Since your return from the planet, you've behaved in a most atypical and illogical manner. I want to know why. 
KIRK: Shoot. You're wasting time. 
SPOCK: I shall not waste time with you. You're too inflexible, too disciplined once you've made up your mind. But Doctor McCoy has a plenitude of human weaknesses, sentimental, soft. You may not tell me what I want to know, but he will. 
KIRK: You're running a big risk, Spock. 
SPOCK: I have the phaser, Captain, and I do not intend to simply disappear as so many of your opponents have in the past. If you please. Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Yes, of course. The entire landing party. Captain, stand over there. Doctor, it is time for answers. 
(Kirk knocks the phaser out of Spock's hand, and he and Scott try to fight him. Even Uhura gets pushed around. Finally, she hands Kirk a skull and he smashes it over Spock's head. He falls, unconscious.) 
KIRK: How much time, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Hardly fifteen minutes, sir. The field density between the two universes is starting to close very fast. 
MCCOY: Help me get him on the table. Well, come on. Help me get him on the table. He'll die without immediate treatment. 
KIRK: Everything laid in, Scotty? The time lag so the operator can get into the transporter chamber? 
SCOTT: All laid in, sir. Come on, McCoy! We're taking a chance of not getting back home. 
MCCOY: We'll get home. This won't take long.

[Kirk's quarters]

{Marlena is still watching on the Tantalus screen.)
SCOTT [OC]: Fourteen minutes. We've got to go! 
MCCOY [OC]: Shut up? I can save his life.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Do you want me to stop, Jim? It'll only take a minute. 
KIRK: He is very much like our own Mister Spock, isn't he? You've got that minute.

[Kirk's quarters]

MCCOY [OC]: A little time, he'll live.

[Sickbay]

(Sulu and three henchmen march in.) 
KIRK: What is this, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Mister Spock has orders to kill you, Captain. He will succeed, apparently. You will also appear to have killed him after a fierce battle. Regrettable, but it will leave me in command. 
(Then one of the henchmen disappears, and another. Marlena presses the button again and Sulu is alone. Kirk disarms and knocks him out easily.) 
SCOTT: Captain, we've barely got ten minutes. 
KIRK: Let's go, Bones. 
MCCOY: I can't let him die, Jim. You get on to the transporter room. I'll be there in five minutes. 
KIRK: No longer. 
MCCOY: I guarantee it. Now, go on, please. 
(Kirk, Scott and Uhura leave. McCoy gives Spock an injection.) 
SPOCK: (sitting up and grabbing McCoy's arm) Why did the captain let me live? 
(He pushes him against the wall and does a mind meld.) 
SPOCK: Our minds are merging, Doctor. Our minds are one. I feel what you feel. I know what you know.

[Transporter room]

(Marlena is waiting for them.) 
KIRK: A friend. Activate the transporter. You saved us back at Sickbay with the Tantalus field. 
MARLENA: Take me with you. 
KIRK: I can't. I'm sorry. Our power is balanced for four. There's no guarantee that we'll make it with five. All could die. Scotty? 
SCOTT: It's working, sir. 
MARLENA: But there are only three of you. 
KIRK: One is coming. I'd help you if I could, Marlena. Believe that. 
(She raises her phaser.) 
KIRK: If you kill us, you'll still stay. 
(Uhura disarms Marlena.) 
KIRK: Where's McCoy? Time, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Five minutes, sir. 
MARLENA: Do you know what they'll do to me? 
SCOTT: The power's cut, sir. They're on to us. 
KIRK: Auxiliary. 
SCOTT: Aye, it's available. 
KIRK: Can you bridge to your setup? 
SCOTT: I can get us the power, but the automatic setting is linked to the transporter main. If we bypass, that means that someone has got to operate the controls manually. 
KIRK: One of us will have to stay. 
SCOTT: I'll stay, Captain. 
KIRK: Get to the transporter chamber. You, too, Uhura. 
SCOTT: Jim. 
KIRK: That's an order, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. 
MARLENA: What about me? 
KIRK: McCoy. 
(Spock enters with McCoy.) 
SPOCK: I cut the transporter power. It was necessary to delay your beam-out until I could arrive. Take him. 
(Scott guides McCoy to the transporter pad.) 
SPOCK: Engineering, re-activate main transporter circuits. 
KIRK: You're a man of integrity in both universes, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: You must return to your universe. I must have my captain back. I shall operate the transporter. You have two minutes and ten seconds. 
KIRK: In that time I have something to say. How long before the Halkan prediction of galactic revolt is realised? 
SPOCK: Approximately two hundred and forty years. 
KIRK: The inevitable outcome? 
SPOCK: The Empire shall be overthrown, of course. 
KIRK: The illogic of waste, Mister Spock. The waste of lives, potential, resources, time. I submit to you that your Empire is illogical because it cannot endure. I submit that you are illogical to be a willing part of it. 
SPOCK: You have one minute and twenty three seconds. 
KIRK: If change is inevitable, predictable, beneficial, doesn't logic demand that you be a part of it? 
SPOCK: One man cannot summon the future. 
KIRK: But one man can change the present. Be the captain of this Enterprise, Mister Spock. Find a logical reason for sparing the Halkans and make it stick. Push till it gives. You can defend yourself better than any man in the fleet. 
SCOTT: Captain, get in the chamber! 
KIRK: What about it, Spock? 
SPOCK: A man must also have the power. 
KIRK: In my cabin is a device that will make you invincible. 
SPOCK: Indeed? 
KIRK: What will it be? Past or future? Tyranny or freedom? It's up to you. 
SPOCK: It is time. 
KIRK: In every revolution, there's one man with a vision. 
SPOCK: Captain Kirk, I shall consider it. 
(He beams them away.)

[Transporter room]

(Back on the 'proper' Enterprise, in the right uniforms.) 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: Welcome home, Captain.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What I don't understand is how were you able to identify our counterparts so quickly? 
SPOCK: It was far easier for you as civilised men to behave like barbarians, than it was for them as barbarians to behave like civilised men. I assume they returned to their Enterprise at the same time you appeared here. 
KIRK: Probably. However, that Jim Kirk will find a few changes, if I read my Spocks correctly. 
MCCOY: Jim, I think I liked him with a beard better. It gave him character. Of course almost any change would be a distinct improvement. 
KIRK: What worries me is the easy way his counterpart fitted into that other universe. I always thought Spock was a bit of a pirate at heart. 
SPOCK: Indeed, gentlemen. May I point out that I had an opportunity to observe your counterparts here quite closely. They were brutal, savage, unprincipled, uncivilised, treacherous, In every way, splendid examples of homo sapiens, the very flower of humanity. I found them quite refreshing. 
KIRK: I'm not sure, but I think we've been insulted. 
MCCOY: I'm sure. 
(A women steps out of the turbolift.) 
MARLENA: Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, er, Lieutenant? 
MARLENA: Marlena Moreau. I was just assigned last week. 
KIRK: All right, Lieutenant. Carry on. 
SPOCK: You've met her before, Captain? 
KIRK: Uh, why do you ask? 
SPOCK: Your reaction, One of recognition. 
KIRK: Oh, no. No, no. We haven't met before, exactly. She just seemed a nice, likable girl. I think we could become friends. It's possible. 
(And to prove it, he leaves his chair and goes over to stand next to her.)

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Changeling
Stardate: 3451.9
Original Airdate: 29 Sep, 1967

[Bridge]
KIRK: Any response from the Malurians, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Nothing since their original distress call, sir. 
KIRK: What about the Federation science team working there? Doctor Manway had a special transmitter. 
UHURA: There's nothing, sir. I'm scanning all frequencies. 
KIRK: They have to answer. 
SPOCK: Captain. They will not answer. The long-range sensor sweep of this system reveals no sign of life. 
KIRK: That can't be. The last census reported a total inhabitation of more than four billion people. 
SPOCK: I register no life readings at all, sir. 
KIRK: That's impossible. What could have happened? 
SPOCK: We would have known in advance of any system-wide catastrophe, and in the event of an interplanetary war, there would be considerable radioactive residue. Our instruments show only normal background radiation. 
KIRK: Any other possibilities? 
SPOCK: Unknown, sir. Sensor readings would have revealed the presence of any disease organisms. They do not. In addition, we received the routine report from this system only a week ago. Even the Symbalene blood burn does not act that swiftly. 
SULU: Captain, shields just snapped on. Something heading in at multiwarp speeds. 
KIRK: Evasive manoeuvres, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: An extremely powerful bolt of energy, Captain. 
KIRK: Full power to the shields, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Giving them all we got. 
KIRK: All hands, Red Alert. Phaser banks stand by. Photon torpedoes to Condition Red, Condition Red. 
(The viewscreen fills with a ball of bright light.) 
SULU: It's going to hit. 
(Everyone gets thrown around a lot, and the lights go out for a short while.) 
SCOTT: Shields still holding, sir. 
KIRK: Good. 
SPOCK: Temporarily, Captain. Our shields absorbed energy equivalent to ninety of our photon torpedoes. 
KIRK: Ninety? 
SPOCK: I may add, the energy used repulsing this first attack reduced our shielding power twenty percent. 
UHURA: First attack, sir? 
KIRK: I think we can expect others, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: We can resist three more such attacks. The fourth will shatter our shields completely. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, pinpoint the source. Mister Sulu, evasive manoeuvres. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, contact Starfleet Command. Patch in my log. Tell them what has happened. Tell them the entire Malurian race seems to have been destroyed by an unknown agency, and that we are under attack by an unidentified force. 
(Another ball of light is on the viewscreen) 
KIRK: Helmsmen, I said evasive manoeuvres. 
SULU: We're losing power, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT: I'm having to divert the warp engine power into the shields, sir, if you want the protection. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, speed of those bolts. 
SPOCK: Approximately warp fifteen, Captain. 
KIRK: Then we can't out run them. Good, Scotty. You're doing the right thing. (another hit) Source, Spock. 
SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. Nothing within sensor range. (a third bolt approaching) Something now, Captain. Very small. Bearing one two three degrees, mark one eight. Range ninety thousand kilometres. 
KIRK: That's our target, Mister Sulu. Prepare photon torpedo. 
(The third bolt hits) 
SCOTT: Shields still holding, sir, but the drain on the engines is reaching the critical point. Ach, we lost warp manoeuvreing power. Switching to impulse. 
SULU: Photon torpedoes armed, sir. 
KIRK: Has the target changed location, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: No, sir. Holding steady. 
KIRK: Ready photon torpedo number two, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
SULU: Torpedo away. (a pause, then a flash) Direct hit. 
SPOCK: No effect. Target absorbed full energy of our torpedo. 
KIRK: Absorbed it? There must be damage to your instruments, Spock . 
SPOCK: They are in good working order, Captain. 
KIRK: But what could have absorbed that much energy and survived? Lieutenant, try to make contact. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
SULU: Sir, they've fired another. 
KIRK: Can we take it, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: That's problematical, sir. 
(It hits.) 
SPOCK: Captain, shields are down. We cannot survive another hit. 
KIRK: Anything, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: I'm trying, sir. 
KIRK: Translator computer. All hailing frequencies open. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. All hailing frequencies open. 
KIRK: To unidentified vessel. This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We are on a peaceful mission. We mean no harm to you or any lifeforms. Please communicate with us. Any further readings, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Computing now, Captain. Weight, five hundred kilograms. Shape, roughly cylindrical. Length, a fraction over one metre. 
KIRK: Five hundred kilos and only one metre long? 
SCOTT: What kind of intelligent creatures can exist in a thing that small? 
SPOCK: Intelligence does not necessarily require bulk, Mister Scott. 
UHURA: Captain, we're getting a signal from the spacecraft. 
KIRK: Put it on audio, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. It's impossible to get it any clearer, sir. 
KIRK: Analysis sector. Have them study and decode it. 
UHURA: Analysis sector, channel one, main computer. Decode. 
SPOCK: Captain, this message is a sort of binary. Extremely sophisticated, compressed, carrying several channels at once. 
KIRK: Can you decode it? 
SPOCK: No clue as yet, Captain. A moment. Transmission speed has stepped down. Much slower. Seems to be a single binary. 
UHURA: It's mathematical. Yes, one symbol. The symbol repeat. Sir, that isn't in the Starfleet code. It's an old-style interplanetary code. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: Repeat what? The message I sent? 
SPOCK: It would seem so, Captain. 
KIRK: This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We are on a peaceful mission in this part of the galaxy. We have no hostile intentions. We request identity. 
UHURA: It's another signal now, sir. 
SPOCK: It's a formula, Captain. They're sending us a mathematical message and requesting language equivalence. They're trying to communicate. 
KIRK: Tie in the ship's translator to the communication channel. Let them take it at their own speed. 
UHURA: Aye, Captain. 
(Suddenly one of Spock's console monitor's burns out.) 
SPOCK: Cut power, Lieutenant. Overloaded and burned out. 
KIRK: I guess they can take it faster than we give it. 
UHURA: Captain, the message is coming in now. 
NOMAD [OC]: USS Enterprise, this is Nomad. My mission is non-hostile. 
KIRK: Apparently they got what they needed before the computers burned out. 
SPOCK: Nomad? 
NOMAD [OC]: Require communication. Can you leave your ship? 
KIRK: It is impossible to come aboard your ship because of the size differential. 
NOMAD [OC]: Non sequitur. Your facts are uncoordinated. 
KIRK: We are prepared to beam you aboard our ship. 
NOMAD [OC]: That will be satisfactory. 
KIRK: Do you require any special conditions, any particular atmosphere or environment? 
NOMAD [OC]: Negative. I will come aboard. 
KIRK: Good. Hold your position. We're locked onto your co-ordinates. We'll beam you aboard. 
SCOTT: Captain, you're not really bringing that thing in here? 
KIRK: Do we have any choice, Scotty? Besides, once it's aboard, it won't be taking any more shots at us. Lieutenant, get a repair crew on that computer. Get Doctor McCoy down to the transporter room. Spock, you come with me. Scotty, you too. 
UHURA: Doctor McCoy to the transporter room. Maintenance crew C5.

[Transporter room]

MCCOY: They've got the co-ordinates, Jim. It's locked in. 
KIRK: Energise. 
SCOTT: Energising. 
(What looks like a satellite - antenna at the top, engine at the bottom and flashing lights on the side - is hanging in mid air over the transporter pad.) 
KIRK: Sensor readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. It has a protective screen. I cannot get through. 
MCCOY: What do we do now, go up and knock? 
NOMAD: Relate your point of origin. 
KIRK: We are from the United Federation of Planets. 
NOMAD: Insufficient response. All things have a point of origin. I will scan your star charts. 
KIRK: If we show it a close-up view of our system, it has no point of reference. It won't know more than it does now. 
SPOCK: A reasonable course. 
KIRK: If you care to leave your ship, we'll provide the necessary life support systems. 
NOMAD: Non sequitur. Your facts are uncoordinated. 
MCCOY: Jim, I don't think anybody's in there. 
NOMAD: I contain no parasitical beings. I am Nomad. 
. SCOTT: In my opinion, that's a machine. 
SPOCK: It is reacting much like a highly sophisticated computer. 
NOMAD: I am Nomad. What is opinion? 
SPOCK: An opinion is a belief, a view, a judgment. 
NOMAD: Insufficient response. 
SCOTT: What's your source of power? 
NOMAD: It has changed since the point of origin. There was much taken from the other. I am perpetual now. I am Nomad. 
KIRK: Wasn't there a probe called Nomad launched in the early 2000s? 
SPOCK: Yes. It was reported destroyed. There were no more in the series. But if this is that probe 
NOMAD: I will scan your star charts. 
KIRK: I will bring them. 
NOMAD: I have the capability of movement within your ship. 
KIRK: This way. 
(Nomad glides along slowly, in mid-air) 
KIRK: Now, Scotty, get our warp power up to full capacity. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Spock, Bones, come with us.

[Auxiliary control]

(A bemused young Indian officer watches the performance.) 
SPOCK: Chart 14A, sir? 
KIRK: 14A. (a diagram of our solar system comes up on a screen) Nomad, can you scan that? 
NOMAD: Yes. 
KIRK: This is our point of origin, the star we know as Sol. 
NOMAD: You are from the third planet? 
KIRK: Yes. 
NOMAD: A planet with one large natural satellite? 
KIRK: Yes. 
NOMAD: The planet is called Earth? 
KIRK: Yes. 
NOMAD: You are the creator, the Kirk. The sterilisation procedure against your ship was unnecessary. 
KIRK: What sterilisation procedure? 
NOMAD: You are the Kirk, the creator. You programmed my function. 
MCCOY: Well, I'm not the Kirk. Tell me what your function is. 
NOMAD: This is one of your units, creator? 
KIRK: Yes, he is. 
NOMAD: It functions irrationally. 
KIRK: Sometimes, but tell him your function nevertheless. 
NOMAD: My function is to probe for biological infestations, to destroy that which is not perfect. I am Nomad. 
KIRK: Biological infestation. There was never any probe sent out for that. 
SPOCK: I believe the history computer can answer that question. I'll have the readout in a moment. 
KIRK: Did you destroy the Malurian system? 
NOMAD: Not the system, creator Kirk. Only the unstable biological infestation. It is my function. 
MCCOY: Unstable infestation? The population of four planets? What kind of function 
KIRK: Doctor. Why do you call me the creator? 
NOMAD: Is the usage incorrect? 
KIRK: Well, I 
SPOCK: The usage is correct. The creator was simply testing your memory banks. 
NOMAD: There was much damage in the accident. 
KIRK: Mister Singh. Come here a moment. This unit will see to your needs. 
SINGH: Sir? 
KIRK: I'll be back in a moment. Gentlemen, come with me. 
(Kirk, McCoy and Spock leave Singh, still bemused.)

[Corridor]

KIRK: You're on to something, Spock. What is it? 
SPOCK: I've correlated all the available information on the Nomad probe, and I'm convinced that this object is indeed that probe. 
MCCOY: Ridiculous. Earth science couldn't begin to build anything with those capabilities that long ago. 
SPOCK: True. 
KIRK: Nomad was destroyed. 
SPOCK: Presumed destroyed by a meteor collision. I submit that it was badly damaged and somehow managed to repair itself. 
KIRK: I heard some lectures at the Academy on the Nomad probe. Its mission was essentially peaceful.

[Auxiliary control]

(Nomad is quietly ticking to itself, then suddenly a light comes on at its apex.) 
SINGH: Did I disturb you? Did you wish anything? 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to auxiliary control room. Check in, please. 
SINGH: Lieutenant Singh here.

[Bridge]

SINGH [OC]: All systems are normal except warp power indicators. 
UHURA: Mister Scott's engineers are working on them now. UHURA: Report to him when your indicators are registering properly.

[Auxiliary control]

UHURA [OC]: Anything else? 
SINGH: One moment, Lieutenant. 
UHURA [OC]: Holding. (singing while Singh checks some boards) Where my heart is, Where my heart is. Somewhere beyond the stars. Beyond Antares. 
(Nomad leaves the room)

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: This is the creator of Nomad, perhaps the most brilliant though erratic scientist of his time. His dream was to build a perfect thinking machine, capable of independent logic. You recall his name. 
MCCOY: Of course. Jackson Roykirk. 
KIRK: Jackson Roykirk. Captain James Kirk. 
SPOCK: Yes. Similar. Captain, I believe that Nomad thinks you are Roykirk. That may well be why the attack was broken off. It responded to your name as well as its damaged memory banks permitted. 
KIRK: What do we have on Nomad itself, Spock? 
MCCOY: (looking at the schematic on the monitor) That's not the same. 
SPOCK: Essentially it is, Doctor. I believe that more happened to it than just damage in the meteor collision. It mentioned the other. The unanswered question is, the other what? 
Nomad was a thinking machine, the best that could be engineered. It was a prototype. 
KIRK: Its purpose was certainly altered. Its directive, to seek out and destroy biological infestations, could not have been programmed into it. 
MCCOY: As I recall, it wasn't. It was supposed to be the first interstellar probe to seek new life-forms. 
SPOCK: Precisely, Doctor. And somehow that programming has been changed. It would seem that Nomad is now seeking out perfect life-forms, perfection being measured by its own relentless logic. 
KIRK: If what you say is true, then we've taken aboard our vessel a device which sooner or later must destroy us. Security. 
CARLISLE [OC]: Lieutenant Carlisle here. 
KIRK: This is the captain. The mechanism we brought aboard is in the auxiliary control room. Have a security team meet me there in five minutes. 
CARLISLE: Aye, sir. Acknowledge. 
SPOCK: Captain, Mister Singh reports that Nomad is no longer in the auxiliary control room. 
KIRK: Security, cancel that order. Implement a full search for the mechanism. All decks report to me here.

[Bridge]

(The turbolift doors open and Nomad floats out, one antenna extended. Uhura is still singing) 
UHURA: Where my heart is, Where a scented miracle 
SCOTT: (whispering) Bridge to Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: Captain here. 
SCOTT: That mechanical beastie is up here.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: On my way, Scotty.

[Bridge]

(Nomad retracts its antenna and takes the most direct path to Uhura, who is leaning against the navigation station. Sulu has to move out of its way.) 
UHURA: Tomorrow the path along the way, There's where my love 
NOMAD: What is the meaning? 
UHURA: What? 
NOMAD: What form of communication? 
UHURA: I don't know what it. (realises) Oh, my singing. I was singing. 
NOMAD: For what purpose is singing? 
UHURA: I don't know. I like to sing. I felt like music. 
NOMAD: What is music? (a ray of light envelopes her head) Think about music. 
SCOTT: Lieutenant! Keep away from that 
KIRK: Scotty! 
(A blast of energy sends Scott flying backwards into a bulkhead.) 
KIRK: Bones. 
MCCOY: He's dead, Jim. 
KIRK: Why did you kill him? 
NOMAD: The unit touched my screens. 
KIRK: That unit was my Chief Engineer. (silence) Lieutenant. Lieutenant, are you all right? 
(Uhura just gazes blankly ahead.) 
KIRK: Sickbay. What did you do to her? 
NOMAD: That unit is defective. Its thinking is chaotic. Absorbing it unsettled me. 
SPOCK: That unit is a woman. 
NOMAD: A mass of conflicting impulses. 
KIRK: Get Scott down below. 
NOMAD: Will the creator effect repairs on the unit Scott? 
KIRK: He's dead. 
NOMAD: Insufficient response. 
KIRK: His biological functions have ceased. 
NOMAD: Does the creator wish me to repair the unit? 
MCCOY: There's nothing I can do, Jim. If there's a chance, it'll have to be soon. 
KIRK: All right, Nomad. Repair the unit. 
NOMAD: I require tapes on the structure. 
MCCOY: Well, he'll need tapes on general anatomy, the central nervous system, and then one on the physiological structure of the brain. We'd better give it all the neurological studies we have, as well as tracings of Scotty's hyperencephalogram. 
(Spock loads up the data.) 
SPOCK: Nomad, I have arranged the tapes for flash feed at the top speed of the computer. Please do not draw the information faster than the machine's capacity. 
NOMAD: Proceed. (a few moments later) Creator, the unit Scott is a primitive structure. Insufficient safeguards built in. Breakdown can occur from many causes. Self-maintenance systems of low reliability. 
KIRK: It serves me as it is, Nomad. Repair it. 
NOMAD: Where is the unit Scott now? 
MCCOY: The body is in Sickbay. 
NOMAD: Show me Sickbay. 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy will show you. 
(McCoy and Nomad enter the turbolift,) 
KIRK: Security. I want a twenty four hour, two man armed surveillance on Nomad. Pick it up in Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

(Nomad and McCoy are standing by the biobed with Scott's body on it, and Chapel is scanning it. Kirk and Spock enter.) 
CHAPEL: No reaction, Doctor. 
MCCOY: I could have told you that without looking. 
(Suddenly, a heart beat, and the indicators rise into the green area.) 
SCOTT: What are the lot of you staring at me for? 
MCCOY: It's unbelievable. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
SCOTT: How did I get here? How did I (sees Nomad) 
KIRK: It's all right. 
SCOTT: That thing did something to Lieutenant Uhura! 
KIRK: Scotty, she's being taken care of. It's all right. 
MCCOY: Take it easy. Lie down, Scotty. We just want to check you out. 
NOMAD: The unit Scott is repaired. It will function correctly if your information to me was correct. 
MCCOY: I'd like to check it out, if you don't mind. A man is not just a biological unit that you can patch together. 
SCOTT: What did it do to me? 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy will explain it to you. 
SPOCK: Well, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Nurse, I want him prepared for a full physical examination. 
CHAPEL: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Nomad, come here.
(They all go to the doorway to the medical bay. Uhura is in bed, still staring blankly) 
KIRK: Repair that unit. 
NOMAD: Not possible. 
KIRK: You restored Scott. He had much more extensive damage. 
NOMAD: The unit Scott required simple structural repair. The knowledge banks of this unit have been wiped clean. 
SPOCK: Captain, if that is correct, if there has been no brain damage but only knowledge erased, she could be re-educated. 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: Yes. I'll get on it right away. Oh, and in spite of the way you repaired Scotty, you metal ticking 
SPOCK: Does the creator wish Nomad to wait elsewhere? 
KIRK: Yes. Nomad, you will go with these units. (the two red-shirts) They will take you to a waiting area. Take it to the top security cell. 
(Nomad and its escort leave.) 
SPOCK: Doctor, I interrupted you because Nomad would not have understood your anger. It has great technical skill, but its reaction to emotion is unpredictable. It almost qualifies as a life-form. 
MCCOY: That's a laugh. 
SPOCK: The study of it would be of great use, Captain. 
KIRK: It's a killer, Spock. I intend to render it harmless. Get down to the Brig. Run a full analysis on the mechanism. I want to know what makes that thing tick. 
SPOCK; Yes, sir.

[Brig]

(Spock is sitting with arms crossed as Nomad floats in front of him.) 
KIRK: What's the problem? 
SPOCK: An almost human stubbornness, Captain. I have been unable to convince Nomad to lower its screens for analysis. Without its co-operation, I can do nothing. 
KIRK: Nomad, you will allow Mister Spock to probe your memory banks and structure. 
NOMAD: Mister Spock is also one of your biological units, Creator? 
KIRK: Yes. 
NOMAD: This unit is different. It is well-ordered. 
KIRK: Follow your instructions, Nomad. 
NOMAD: My screens are down. 
SPOCK: Thank you. 
NOMAD: You may proceed.

[Sickbay]

(Uhura is sitting up in bed, and reading from a monitor.) 
UHURA: See the dog. See the dog, 
CHAPEL: Sound it out. 
UHURA: R, r, run! 
CHAPEL: That's it, Uhura. That's very good. Now try the next one. 
UHURA: The dog has a, The dog, (something) 
CHAPEL: Not Swahili, Uhura. In English. The dog has a ball. See? B, ah, ll. Ball. Now you go ahead. 
UHURA: (Swahili, then) The dog has a ball. 
CHAPEL: That's right! Oh, that's right, Uhura. (they hug, then McCoy beckons Chapel over) Oh, here. You try another one. I'll be right back. 
UHURA: All right, Christine. 
MCCOY: How's she doing? 
CHAPEL: Well, she's on the first grade reader. She's learning. Seems to have an aptitude for mathematics. Do you think we can re-educate her, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Well, she checks out with no brain damage. We've got all the educational tapes in our library. Now it's up to us. 
UHURA: The ball is bl-u-ee. Bl-u-ey. Bluey?

[Brig]

SPOCK: It is not sufficient, Captain. I get certain references to the accident, the other, but nothing clear. There are areas I simply cannot scan. 
KIRK: We've got to know about it, Spock. what makes it operate, its compulsion for perfection. 
SPOCK: Captain, I suggest the Vulcan mind probe. 
KIRK: Get into direct mental contact with that thing? 
SPOCK: It seems the only way. 
KIRK: You saw what it did to Uhura. 
SPOCK: There is a risk, but I have formed a partial hypothesis. I must check it out. 
KIRK: Nomad, the unit Spock will touch you. It is not an attack. It is a form of communication. You will permit it. 
NOMAD: I will permit it, Creator. 
(Spock puts one hand on Nomad's head, where the antenna are, and the other on its body where the lights and ticking are coming from.) 
SPOCK: I. Am. Nomad. I am performing my function. Deep emptiness, It approaches. Collision. Damage. Blackness. I. Am. The other. I am Tan Ru, Tan Ru. Nomad. Tan Ru. Error. Flaw. Imperfection. Must sterilise. Rebirth. We are complete. Much power. Gun ta. Noo. Icka. Tan Ru. The creator instructs. Search out. Identify. Sterilise imperfections. We are Nomad. We are Nomad. We are complete. We are instructed. Our purpose is clear. Sterilise imperfections. (he lets go of Nomad) Sterilise imperfections. Nomad. Sterilise. Sterilise. Nomad, sterilise, 
KIRK: Spock. Spock! Nomad! You're in contact with the unit Spock. Stop! Stop! 
NOMAD: Acknowledged. 
(Spock slumps in Kirk's arms and is rushed out of the Brig. The guard activates the security forcefield.)

[Corridor]

KIRK: Spock. Spock? 
SPOCK: Fascinating, Captain. The knowledge. The depth. 
KIRK: What does it mean, we are Nomad? 
SPOCK: It was, it was damaged in deep space. Undoubtedly, the meteor collision. Its memory banks were destroyed, or most of them. It wandered without purpose, and then it met the other. The other was an alien probe of great power. Somehow they merged, repaired each other, became one. 
KIRK: Then it isn't Nomad? 
SPOCK: Not the Nomad we lost from Earth. It took from the other a new directive to replace its own. The other was originally programmed to secure and sterilise soil samples from other planets, probably as a prelude to colonisation. 
KIRK: A changeling. 
SPOCK: I beg your pardon? 
KIRK: An ancient Earth legend, Mister Spock. A changeling was a fairy child that was left in place of a human baby. The changeling assumed the identity of the human child. So, it is to sterilise, and for sterilise read kill. 
SPOCK And it has the power and sophistication to do it. 
KIRK: Yes, it's powerful, it's sophisticated, but it's not infallible. It's space-happy. It thinks I'm its mother. 
SPOCK: And that is the only thing that has saved us until now. 
Yes. 
(They leave. Nomad flies through the forcefield. The two guards fire their phasers at it but it's screens are back up. Nomad zaps them into oblivion.)

[Engineering]

(Nomad floats in.) 
SCOTT: Notify the captain. What are you doing here? Watch your panels, everyone. Watch that polymass. Roger, help with the interfactor. Leave that alone. 
NOMAD: This primitive matter-antimatter propulsion system is the main drive? 
SCOTT: Aye. 
NOMAD: Inefficiency exists in the antimatter input valve. I will effect repair. 
(The indicator board goes crazy.) 
SCOTT: How are you doing that? 
NOMAD: The energy release controls are also most inefficient. I shall effect repair. 
ENGINEER: Warp eight, Mister Scott, and increasing. 
SCOTT: Throw your dampers. 
ENGINEER: Warp nine. 
SCOTT: Cut your circuits, all of them. 
ENGINEER: Warp 10, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Impossible. It can't go that fast. 
ENGINEER: It just won't stop, Mister Scott. Warp eleven! 
KIRK: Nomad, stop what you're doing. Scotty? 
NOMAD: Is there a problem, Creator? I have increased engine efficiency fifty seven percent. 
KIRK: You will destroy my ship. Its structure cannot stand the stress of that much power. Turn off your repair operation. 
NOMAD: Acknowledged. It is reversed as ordered, Creator. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, give Sulu warp two and keep her there. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(Spock enters, leaving two guards outside.) 
SPOCK: Captain. I've examined the brig. The forcefield door on the security cell is damaged and the guards have vanished. I must assume they are dead. 
KIRK: You killed two of my 
NOMAD: Creator, your biological units are inefficient. 
KIRK: Nomad, it's about time I told you who and what you are! I'm a biological unit, and I created you. 
NOMAD: (pause) Non sequitur. Biological units are inherently inferior. This is an inconsistency. 
KIRK: Nomad, there are two men waiting outside. You will not harm them. They will escort you back to the waiting area. You will stay there. You will do nothing. 
NOMAD: I am programmed to investigate. 
KIRK: I have given you new programming and you will implement it. 
NOMAD: There is much to be considered before I return to launch point. I must re-evaluate. 
(Nomad follows the guards down the corridor away from Engineering.) 
KIRK: Reevaluate? 
SPOCK: I suspect it is about to re-evaluate its creator. Captain, it may have been unwise to admit to Nomad that you are a biological unit. In Nomad's eyes, you must now undoubtedly appear imperfect. 
KIRK: It was a foolish mistake. 
SPOCK: Even worse. Nomad just now made a reference to its launch point, Earth. 
KIRK: Spock, do you think it's possible that it got a fix on Earth when it tapped the computers earlier? 
SPOCK: I do not believe there is much beyond Nomad's capabilities. 
KIRK: And we've shown it the way home. And when it gets there 
SPOCK: It will find the Earth infested with imperfect biological units. 
KIRK: And it will carry out its prime directive. Sterilise.

Captain's log, stardate 3541.9. The presence of Nomad aboard my ship has become nightmarish. Now it apparently means to return to Earth. Once there, it would automatically destroy all life.

[Corridor]

(The guards, who are now behind Nomad, turn right. Nomad goes straight on.) 
GUARD: Hey. Nomad, stop. Nomad, this way. 
(They fire at it, and the inevitable follows. Strike two more red-shirts. Nomad uses the access tubes between decks instead of the turbolift.)
(In another corridor.) 
MCCOY [OC]: Captain Kirk to Sickbay. Emergency. 
(Kirk and Spock run to a door labeled 'Leonard McCoy, MD' but it does not open automatically for them.) 
KIRK: Manual controls. 
SPOCK: No response. 
(The doors open and Nomad comes out. KIRK: Nomad. Nomad? Stop. Nomad, stop! Nomad.

[Sickbay]

(McCoy is cradling Chapel in his arms.) 
KIRK: Is she all right? 
MCCOY: I think so. Looks like some kind of shock. 
KIRK: What happened? 
MCCOY: Nomad examined the personnel files and the medical histories. She tried to stop him. 
KIRK: Whose history? 
MCCOY: Yours. 
SPOCK: Since it specifically examined your history, I suggest it has completed its re-evaluation. 
KIRK: And found that its creator is as imperfect as all the other biological units. 
SCOTT [OC]: Bridge to Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Life support systems are out all over the ship.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Manual override has been blocked. Source, Engineering.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Nomad. 
SPOCK: Undoubtedly. 
MCCOY: Jim, with all the systems out we'll only have enough air and heat for 
KIRK: Get Scotty, some antigravs and meet me in Engineering.

[Engineering]

(Everyone appears to be unconscious as Kirk runs in alone.) 
KIRK: Nomad? Stop what you're doing and effect repairs on the life-support systems. 
NOMAD: Stop. 
KIRK: You're programmed to obey the orders of your creator. 
NOMAD: I am programmed to destroy those life-forms which are imperfect. These alterations will do so without destroying the vessel which surrounds them. It, too, is imperfect, but can be adjusted. 
KIRK: Nomad, I admit that biological units are imperfect, but a biological unit created you. 
NOMAD: I am perfect. I am Nomad. 
KIRK: No, you're not Nomad. You're an alien machine. Your programming tapes have been altered. 
NOMAD: You are in error. You are a biological unit. You are imperfect. 
KIRK: But I am your creator. 
NOMAD: You are the Creator. 
KIRK: I created you? 
NOMAD: You are the Creator. 
KIRK: But I admit I'm imperfect. How could I have created such a perfect thing as you? 
NOMAD: Answer unknown. I shall analyse. 
(Spock enters, with Scott, two engineers and the requested anti-grav units) 
NOMAD: Analysis complete. Insufficient data to resolve problem, but my programming is whole. My purpose remains. I am Nomad. I am perfect. That which is imperfect must be sterilised. 
(The engineers remove the unconscious men and take their places at the controls.) 
KIRK: Then you will continue to destroy that which thinks and lives and is imperfect? 
NOMAD: I shall continue. I shall return to launch point Earth. I shall sterilise. 
KIRK: You must sterilise in case of error? 
NOMAD: Error is inconsistent with my prime functions. Sterilisation is correction. 
KIRK: Everything that is in error must be sterilised. 
NOMAD: There are no exceptions. 
KIRK: Nomad, I made an error in creating you. 
NOMAD: The creation of perfection is no error. 
KIRK: I did not create perfection. I created error. 
NOMAD: Your data is faulty. I am Nomad. I am perfect. 
KIRK: I am the Kirk, the creator? 
NOMAD: You are the Creator. 
KIRK: You are wrong! Jackson Roykirk, your creator, is dead. You have mistaken me for him. You are in error. You did not discover your mistake. You have made two errors. You are flawed and imperfect and you have not corrected by sterilisation. You have made three errors. 
NOMAD: Error. Error. Error. Examine. 
KIRK: You are flawed and imperfect! Execute your prime function! 
NOMAD: I shall analyse error. Analyse error, 
KIRK: Now. Get those antigravs on it. 
NOMAD: Examine error. Error. 
(The anti-gravs are not stopped by any forcefields.) 
KIRK: We've got to get rid of it while it's trying to think. 
SPOCK: Your logic was impeccable, Captain. We are in grave danger. 
KIRK: Scotty, the transporter room. 
NOMAD: Analyse error. 
(Kirk and Spock carry Nomad out, followed by Scott.)

[Transporter room]

NOMAD: Error. 
KIRK: Scotty, set the controls for deep space. Two ten, mark one. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
NOMAD: Faulty! 
Ready, sir? 
NOMAD: Faulty! 
KIRK: Nomad, you are imperfect! 
NOMAD: Error. Error. 
KIRK: Exercise your prime function. 
NOMAD: Faulty! Faulty! Must sterilise. Sterilise, 
KIRK: Now! 
SCOTT: Energising. 
(They observe the satisfying explosion on a monitor.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: My congratulations, Captain. A dazzling display of logic. 
KIRK: You didn't think I had it in me, did you Spock? 
SPOCK: No, sir. 
MCCOY: I thought you might like to know that Lieutenant Uhura is back to college level. She'll be back on the job within a week. 
KIRK: Good, Bones, good. 
SPOCK: Remarkable. 
KIRK: What? 
SPOCK: The destruction of Nomad was a great waste, Captain. It was a remarkable instrument. 
KIRK: Which might well have destroyed more billions of lives. It's well gone. Besides, what are you feeling so badly about? It's not easy to lose a bright and promising son. 
SPOCK: Sir? 
KIRK: Well, it thought I was its mother, didn't it? Do you think I'm completely without feelings, Mister Spock? You saw what it did for Scotty. What a doctor it would've made. My son, the doctor. Kind of gets you right there, doesn't it?

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Who Mourns For Adonais?
Stardate: 3468.1 
Original Airdate: 22 Sep, 1967

[Bridge]
CAROLYN: Here's the report on Pollux Five, Captain. This entire system has been almost the same. A strange lack of intelligent life on the planets. It bugs the percentages. 
KIRK: Bugs the? Well, carry out the standard procedures on Pollux Four. 
CAROLYN: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: Lieutenant, you look a bit tired this morning. 
CAROLYN: Well, I was up all night working on this report, sir. 
SCOTT: Well in that case, there's nothing like a wee bit of coffee to get you back in shape. Join me, Carolyn? 
CAROLYN: All right, Scotty. Just let me give this to Mister Spock. 
KIRK: Bones, could you get that excited over a cup of coffee? 
MCCOY: Even from here I can tell his pulse rate's up. 
SCOTT: Gentlemen. Come along, my dear. 
MCCOY: I'm not sure I like that, Jim. 
KIRK: Why, Bones? Scotty's a good man. 
MCCOY: And he thinks he's the right man for her, but I'm not sure she thinks he's the right man. On the other hand, she's a woman. All woman. One day she'll find the right man and off she'll go, out of the service. 
KIRK: I like to think of it not so much losing an officer as gaining 
SCOTT: Come along. 
(He and Carolyn enter the turbolift.) 
KIRK: Actually, I'm losing an officer. 
CHEKOV: Entering standard orbit around Pollux Four, sir. 
KIRK: Cartographic Detail, stand by. 
UHURA: Standing by, sir. 
KIRK: Preliminary reports, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Pollux Four. Class M type planet, oxygen and nitrogen atmosphere. Sensors indicate no life forms. Approximate age four billion years. Judged no reason for contact. In all respects, quite ordinary, Captain. 
KIRK: Cartographic Sections, implement standard orders. 
UHURA: All cartographic standards full automatic. 
SULU: Captain? 
MCCOY: What in the name of? 
(Where there was originally an image of a nice blue and white planet there is now a .... hand?) 
KIRK: Analysis, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Momentarily. 
CHEKOV: Am I seeing things? 
SULU: Not unless I am, too. Captain, that thing's a giant hand. 
KIRK: What is it, Mister Spock? Is it a hand? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. Not living tissue. 
KIRK: A trick, then? A projection? 
SPOCK: Not a projection, sir. A field of energy. 
KIRK: Hard about. 
SULU: Hard about. We can't seem to get away from it. 
UHURA: It's almost as if it means to grab us. 
KIRK: Reverse all engines. 
SULU: All engines reverse. 
(Everyone is thrown forward as the ship is grabbed by the hand and stopped in its tracks.) 
SULU: We're dead still, Captain. Helm doesn't answer. We can't move.

Captain's log, stardate 3468.1. While approaching Pollux Four, a planet in the Beta Geminorum system, the Enterprise has been stopped in space by an unknown force of some kind.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Lieutenant, relay our position and circumstances to Starbase Twelve immediately. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu try rocking the ship. Full impulse power forward and back. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
UHURA: Damage report coming in, Captain. Situation under control. Minor damage, stations three, seven, and nineteen. 
MCCOY: Sickbay reports five minor injuries, all being treated. 
KIRK: Thank you. Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Applying thrust, sir. No results, Captain. We're stuck tight. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. Status. 
SPOCK: The ship is almost completely encircled by the field. It resembles a conventional force field but on unusual wavelengths. Despite its appearance, that of a human appendage, it is definitely not living tissue. It is energy. 
KIRK: Thank you. Mister Sulu. Our forward tractor beams, adjust to repel. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. Standing by. 
KIRK: Activate. 
SULU: Ineffective, Captain. There doesn't seem to be anything to push against. 
SPOCK: Captain, a most curious development on scanner five seven. 
KIRK: Let's all take a look at it, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Screen on, Captain. 
(Now a face appears in space, a male human wearing a laurel wreath.) 
UHURA: Activity on hailing channel three, sir. 
KIRK; Put it on audio, Lieutenant. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: The eons have passed and what has been written has come about. You are most welcome, my beloved children. Your places await you. 
KIRK: Response frequencies, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Calculated. Channel open, sir. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: You have left your plains and valleys and made this bold venture. So it was in the beginning. You have made me proud. Now you can rest. 
KIRK: This is Captain James T. Kirk, commanding the USS Enterprise. Please identify yourself. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: We shall remember together. We shall drink the sacramental wine. There shall be the music of the pipes. The long wait has ended. 
KIRK: Are you responsible for stopping the ship? 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: Yes. I caused the wind to withdraw from your sails. 
KIRK: Give it back, then we'll talk. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: It has been five thousand years. Have you learned no patience in that time? 
KIRK: I don't know who or what you are, but I must warn you we have the power to defend ourselves. If you value your safety, release this ship. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: You have the same fire. How like your fathers you are. Agamemnon, Hector, Odysseus. 
KIRK: Never mind the history lesson. Release the ship! 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: You will obey me, lest I close my hand thus. 
SCOTT: External pressure building up, Captain. Eight hundred GSC and climbing. 
KIRK: Compensate. 
SCOTT: One thousand GSC and climbing. (The crew react to increasing air pressure) Becoming critical, Captain. We can't handle it. 
KIRK: All right! Whatever you're doing, turn it off! You win! 
SCOTT: Pressure is gone, Captain. Space normal on hull. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: hat was your first lesson. Remember it. Captain Kirk, I invite you and your officers to join me. But do not bring that one, the one with the pointed ears. He is much like Pan, and Pan always bored me. No sad faces. This is a time to rejoice, not to fear. You are returning home. Let your hearts prepare to sing. 
KIRK: Let's go, Bones. You in good voice? 
MCCOY: Sure it's wise, Jim? 
KIRK: If we don't accept his invitation, we'll have a crushed eggshell where this ship used to be. 
SPOCK: Verbose, isn't he? 
KIRK: Insulted, Spock? 
SPOCK: Insults are effective only where emotion is present. 
KIRK: Good. We'll tackle him together. We already know the questions. You're the best man to find the answers.

[Temple]

(Kirk, Scott, Chekov, McCoy and Lt Carolyn Palamas beam down into a lightly wooded area in front of a Greek temple.) 
KIRK: Tricorders. 
CAROLYN: What am I doing down here, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Well, you're the A and A officer, aren't you? Archaeology, anthropology, ancient civilisations. 
CAROLYN: Correct. 
MCCOY: We're going to need help in all those areas. 
KIRK: Come on. 
(Apollo is sitting on a throne, lyre by his feet) 
APOLLO: My children, long have I waited for this moment. The memories you bring of your lush and beautiful Earth, the green fields and blue skies, the simple shepherds and their flocks. 
KIRK: You know of Earth? You've been there? 
APOLLO: Once I stretched out my hand, and Earth trembled. And I breathed upon it, and spring returned. 
KIRK: You mentioned Agamemnon, Hector, Odysseus. How do you know about them? 
APOLLO: Search your most distant memories, those of the thousands of years past, and I am there. Your fathers knew me, and your father's fathers. I am Apollo. 
CHEKOV: And I am the tsar of all the Russias. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: I'm sorry, Captain. I never met a god before. 
KIRK: And you haven't yet. Readings, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Simple humanoid, Captain. 
KIRK: Evidently not so simple. 
APOLLO: Earth, mother of the most beautiful of women in the universe. That at least has not changed. I am pleased. Yes, my children. Zeus, Athena, Aphrodite, Artemis. A gallant band of travellers. We knew your Earth well, five thousand of your years ago. 
KIRK: All right. We're here at your invitation. Would you mind telling us what you want without all the Olympian generalities? 
APOLLO: You will not leave this place. 
KIRK: Transporter room. 
APOLLO: Your transportation device no longer functions. 
KIRK: Enterprise, come in. 
APOLLO: I will not permit that device to work, either, Captain. 
KIRK: What is it you want? 
APOLLO: You will worship me, as your fathers did before you. 
KIRK: If you want to play god and call yourself Apollo, that's your business, but you're no god to us, Mister. 
APOLLO: I said you would worship me. 
KIRK: And you've got a lot to learn! 
APOLLO: And so have you! Let the lesson begin! (Apollo grows as tall as his temple.) Welcome to Olympus, Captain Kirk.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise is still held by the hand.) 
UHURA: Mister Spock, I can't contact the landing party. All frequencies are jammed. 
SPOCK: Try to break through it, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KYLE: Transporter and communications? 
SPOCK: Very efficient. Mister Sulu, rig all transmission circuits for maximum power generation. Compute for reversal of polarity of the field around the ship. 
SULU: Working, sir. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant Kyle, I want a complete sensor scan of the planet. 
KYLE: Aye sir. 
SPOCK: Locate all the lifeforms. I want to know what's going on down there.

[Temple]

(The giant Apollo suddenly looks weary, and vanishes.) 
MCCOY: To coin a phrase, fascinating. 
KIRK: Analysis. Lieutenant Palamas, what do you know about Apollo? 
CAROLYN: Apollo, twin brother of Artemis, son of the god Zeus and Leto, a mortal. He was the god of light and purity. He was skilled in the bow and lyre. 
KIRK: And this thing? (the temple) 
CAROLYN: Obviously he has some knowledge of Earth. His classical references and the appearance of all this. 
KIRK: I think the appearance of this is for our benefit. Bones? 
MCCOY: I can't say much till I check our these readings. He looks human, but of course that doesn't mean a thing. 
CHEKOV: Whatever he is, he seems to control a remarkable technology. 
SCOTT: Power is what he controls. You can't do tricks like that without energy. 
KIRK: Fine, but what power, and where is it? Scout around with your tricorders. Find the source of that power. Bones. 
(Scott, Chekov and Carolyn wander off.) 
MCCOY: Yes? 
KIRK: Bones, I wonder if five thousand years ago 
MCCOY: You have a theory? 
KIRK: I have an idea. What if he is really Apollo? 
MCCOY: What? 
CAROLYN: Captain. 
(Apollo is back on his throne.) 
APOLLO: I want from you that which is rightfully mine. Your loyalty, your tribute, and your worship. 
MCCOY: May I ask what you offer in exchange for this worship? 
APOLLO: Life in paradise. As simple and as pleasureful as it was those thousands of years ago on that beautiful planet so far away. 
KIRK: Apollo, we're willing to talk, but you'll find we don't bow to every creature who happens to have a bag of tricks. 
APOLLO: Agamemnon was one such as you, and Hercules. Pride and arrogance. They defied me until they felt my wrath. 
SCOTT: I would like to point out that we are quite capable of some wrath ourselves. 
KIRK: I have four hundred and thirty people on that ship up there. 
APOLLO: No, you do not, Captain. They are mine. To save, to cherish, or to destroy at my will. 
CAROLYN: But why? What you've said so far makes no sense at all. 
APOLLO: How like Aphrodite and Athena. The beauty, grace. And you seem wise for a woman. What is your name? 
CAROLYN: Lieutenant Palamas. 
APOLLO: I mean your name. 
CAROLYN: Carolyn. 
APOLLO: Carolyn. Yes. You are beautiful. You would do Aphrodite credit. I will tell you a thousand tales, stories of courage and love. You will know what it is to be a goddess. 
SCOTT: Leave her alone. 
APOLLO: You protest? You risk much. 
SCOTT: And so do you. 
(Scott draws his phaser and Apollo blasts it out of his hand with a point of his finger. Chekov finds his phaser doesn't work.) 
KIRK: Scotty. (picks up the twisted and melted weapon) Very impressive. How'd you do it? 
APOLLO: I've grown weary of discussion and argument. 
CHEKOV: Captain, the phasers. All the working parts are fused. 
APOLLO: None of your toys will function. Yes. You are a beauty. But like Artemis, the bow arm should be bare. 
(He waves his hand and her clothes turn into Greek-style draperies, with her hair piled very tall.) 
CAROLYN: Oh, it's beautiful. 
APOLLO: Yes. Come. (he takes her hand and leads her away) 
SCOTT: She's not going with you. 
(Scott gets thrown over a table with a flick of the wrist.) 
APOLLO: He shall learn the discipline of the temple. So shall you all. Come. 
CAROLYN: It's all right, Captain. I'll go. 
APOLLO: Without fear. She is fit indeed. 
(They both vanish as they walk away.) 
KIRK: Bones, how is he? 
MCCOY: Stunned but coming around. I'm not sure it's wise to let her go off like that. 
KIRK: He would have been rather difficult to stop. 
MCCOY: You saw how capricious he is. Benevolent one minute, angry the next. One more wrong move from her and he could kill her. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, I think you'd better continue your investigation. 
CHEKOV: Aye, aye, sir. 
(leaves) 
KIRK: How do you feel, Scotty? 
SCOTT: I am tingling all over. Did he take her with him? 
KIRK: It would seem so. 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got to stop him. He wants her. The way he looks at her. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, I understand your concern over her, but she volunteered to go with him, hopefully to find out more about him. She's doing her job. I think it's about time you started doing yours. We've got to find out the source of his power. You've got a tricorder. Use it if you're able to. 
SCOTT: I'm able, sir. 
KIRK: And one more thing. I want no more unauthorised action against Apollo or whatever he is. That's an order! 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Besides, you stiff-necked thistle head, you could have gotten yourself killed. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
(leaves) 
MCCOY: Scotty doesn't believe in gods. 
KIRK: Apollo's no god. But he could have been taken for one, though, once. Say five thousand years ago, a highly sophisticated group of space travellers landed on Earth around the Mediterranean. 
MCCOY: Yes. To the simple shepherds and tribesmen of early Greece, creatures like that would have been gods. 
KIRK: Especially if they had the power to alter their form at will and command great energy. In fact, they couldn't have been taken for anything else.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Ready to reverse polarity, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Computed and standing by to generate, sir. 
SPOCK: Activate all units. 
(The ship jolts several times, but) 
SULU: No good, Mister Spock. We didn't even faze it. We're still locked tight. 
SPOCK: Cut power, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant, we must restore communications with the landing party. 
UHURA: I'm working, sir, but I can't do anything with this. 
SPOCK: Oh? 
UHURA: I might be able to rig up a subspace bypass circuit. 
SPOCK: Good. Do so. Sensor report, Mister Kyle. 
KYLE: I've located the landing party, but one of them seems separated from the other four. 
SPOCK: And Apollo? 
KIRK: I've just picked up readings for our own people, sir. 
SULU: Mister Spock, here's something. There seems to be a radiated energy pulsation coming from the planet. I don't know what it is, sir. 
SPOCK: Origin? 
SULU: I can't seem to pinpoint it. 
SPOCK: I would suggest, Mister Sulu, if you cannot find out where the power source is, you should find out where it is not. A simple process of elimination. 
SULU: The whole planet, sir? Yes, sir. The whole planet.

[Water's side]

(At a marble bench by a tranquil water scene.) 
CAROLYN: Oh, it's lovely. 
APOLLO: I've known other women. Daphne, Cassandra, but none more beautiful than you. Are you frightened of me? 
CAROLYN: Frightened? No, I don't think so. Of course, a girl doesn't go walking with a 
APOLLO: A god? 
CAROLYN: All right, a god every day. What happened to the others? Artemis, Hera? 
APOLLO: They returned to the cosmos on the wings of the wind. 
CAROLYN: You mean they died? 
APOLLO: No, not as you understand it. We're immortal, we gods. But the Earth changed. Your fathers changed. They turned away until we were only memories. A god cannot survive as a memory. We need love, admiration, worship, as you need food. 
CAROLYN: You really think you're a god? 
APOLLO: In a real sense, we were gods. We had the power of life and death. We could have struck out from Olympus and destroyed. We have no wish to destroy, so we came home again. It was an empty place without worshippers, but we had no strength to leave, so we waited, all of us, through the long years. 
CAROLYN: But you said the others didn't die. 
APOLLO: Even for a god, there's a point of no return. Hera was first. She stood in front of the temple and spread herself upon the wind, thinner and thinner, until only the wind remained. But I knew you would come. You striving, bickering, foolishly brave humans. I knew you would come to the stars one day. Of all the gods, I knew and I waited, waited for you to come and sit by my side. 
CAROLYN: I don't understand. 
APOLLO: Even five thousand years ago, the gods took mortals to them to love, to care for, like Zeus took Leto, my mother. We were gods of passion, of love. 
(They kiss.)

[Temple]

CHEKOV: There is a repeated occurrence of registrations, a regular pulsating pattern of radiated energy. 
SCOTT: Unquestionably, an immensely powerful field of energy is being generated around here somewhere. We're just having difficulty focusing on it. 
KIRK: Apollo has no difficulty focusing. He taps that energy, Mister Scott. 
CHEKOV: Sir, some creatures can generate and control energy with no harm to themselves. The electric eel on Earth, the giant dry worm of Antos Four, the fluffy 
MCCOY: Not the whole encyclopaedia, Chekov. 
CHEKOV: The captain requires complete information. 
MCCOY: Spock's contaminating this boy, Jim. 
KIRK: Are you suggesting that he, Apollo, taps a flow of energy and channels it through his body? 
CHEKOV: That would seem most likely, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, I think you've earned your pay for the week. But where is the source of that power? 
MCCOY: Number one on our list of things to do. 
KIRK: Is that all you have to offer? 
MCCOY: Yes, except my estimation for his physical condition. In spite of Apollo's bag of tricks, he comes up essentially normal with just a few variations. However, there's an extra organ in his chest that I can't even make a guess about. 
KIRK: Bones, is it possible 
MCCOY: Jim. 
(Apollo walks back in out of thin air.) 
KIRK: Where's Lieutenant Palamas? 
APOLLO: She is no longer of any concern to you. 
SCOTT: You bloodthirsty Saracen, what have you done with her? 
(Scott picks up a statuette and rushes at Apollo. He gets another finger blast of electricity for his effort.) 
KIRK: Scotty! 
MCCOY: Not good. Severe shock. 
KIRK: All right, mister. You wanted worshippers? You've got enemies. You want us to bow down, you'll have to 
(Kirk clutches his throat and falls to the ground, choking.) 
APOLLO: You will learn discipline. You will learn 
(Again, he suddenly becomes tired and vanishes.) 
MCCOY: Chekov, give me a hand. 
KIRK: Take care of Scotty. 
CHEKOV: Are you all right, Captain? 
KIRK: Where's Apollo? 
CHEKOV: He disappeared again like the cat in that Russian story. 
KIRK: Don't you mean the English story, the Cheshire Cat? 
CHEKOV: Cheshire? No, sir. Minsk perhaps, but 
KIRK: All right, all right, all right. 
CHEKOV: Sir, there is something I noticed. Apollo looked very strange when he disappeared, tired or in pain. I don't know if it means anything. 
KIRK: Very good, Mister Chekov. That might very well mean something. 
MCCOY: How do you feel? 
SCOTT: I can't get my arm to move. 
MCCOY: Some neural damage. 
KIRK: We've got to get out of here. 
CHEKOV: How? 
KIRK: Well, let's assume that five thousand years ago creatures like our friend Apollo did indeed visit Earth and form the basis of the Greek classic myths. 
MCCOY: Makes sense. 
KIRK: Most mythology has its basis in fact. If I remember my ancient legends, the gods, after expending energy, required rest, even as we humans. 
CHEKOV: And Apollo's gone, after attacking you and Mister Scott. You think maybe he's off somewhere recharging his energy cells? 
KIRK: Something like that. Remember, he's keeping a force field on the ship and he's expending energy down here. You said he looked pained and tired when he disappeared. If we can wear him out, overwork him, that might do it. 
MCCOY: The trouble with overworking him is that it can get us killed. 
KIRK: If we can provoke him so that he strikes one of us again, there's a chance that he'll be drained enough so the rest of us can jump him. 
MCCOY: I still say it can get us killed. 
KIRK: Not all of us, Bones. When he comes back, it's a chance we'll have to take.

[Bridge]

(Uhura is underneath the communications station, doing some soldering.) 
SPOCK: Progress report. 
UHURA: I'm connecting the bypass circuit now, sir. It should take another half hour. 
SPOCK: Speed is essential, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Mister Spock, I haven't done anything like this in years. If it isn't done just right, I could blow the entire communications system. It's very delicate work, sir. 
SPOCK: I can think no one better equipped to handle it, Miss Uhura. Please proceed. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. Right away. 
SPOCK: Progress, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Sectors one through twenty five charted and examined. No chance at all of power originating in those areas. 
SPOCK: Continue the search. 
SULU: Aye, sir. Fourteen B by twenty six index. 
SPOCK: Mister Kyle. 
KYLE: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: We're unable to break completely loose from this force field, but we might be able to punch some holes through it. 
KYLE: What for, sir? 
SPOCK: To shoot through. It might also relieve Lieutenant Uhura's communications problem. Take these equations to the nuclear electronics lab. I want them to work on the problem of negating the force field in selected areas. That might be done by generating a strong pinpoint charge of M-rays on some of these selected wave lengths and tying them in with the combined output of all our engines. 
KYLE: Right away, sir.

[Temple]

(Apollo reappears on his throne, Carolyn standing by his side.) 
APOLLO: Come here! I know you're trying to escape me. It's useless. I know everything you do. I tried to be compassionate toward your kind. 
KIRK: You know nothing about our kind. You know only our remote ancestors who trembled before your tricks. Your tricks don't frighten us, neither do you. We've come a long way in five thousand years. 
APOLLO: But you're of the same nature. I could sweep you out of existence with a wave of my hand and bring you back again. I can give life or death. What else does mankind demand of its gods? 
KIRK: Mankind has no need for gods. We find the one quite adequate. 
APOLLO: We shall not debate, mortal. I offer you eternal rest and happiness according to the ancient ways. I ask little in return, but what I ask for I insist upon. Approach me. (the four men turn their backs on him) I said approach me! 
KIRK: We're busy. (quietly) Look after the girl. 
APOLLO: You will gather laurel leaves, light the ancient fires, kill a deer, make your sacrifices to me. Apollo has spoken! 
KIRK: Go! Gather laurel leaves? You must be joking! 
ALL: Ha ha ha ha. 
MCCOY: Kill a deer. That's the funniest thing I ever heard. 
CAROLYN: Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, get back. 
APOLLO: You shall reap the rewards of your insolence! 
KIRK: We're tired of your phony fireworks! 
APOLLO: Mortal, you have earned this! 
CAROLYN: No, don't! 
KIRK: Lieutenant! 
CAROLYN: A father doesn't destroy his children. You said you were gentle and understanding. 
KIRK: Lieutenant! 
CAROLYN: How can they worship you if you hurt them? 
KIRK: Lieutenant. 
CAROLYN: Apollo, please. (taking his hand) You know so much of love. Please don't hurt them. Please. 
APOLLO: I shall be lenient with you, for her sake. You will make plans to bring the rest of your people down. Be sure your artisans bring tools. You will need homes. 
KIRK: And you will supply the herds of sheep, and the pipes we'll play, and the simple skins we'll wear for clothes. 
APOLLO: You will dismantle your ship for the supplies you need, and I'll crush its empty hull. I have been too patient. I shall be patient no longer. 
(He disappears with Carolyn still holding his hand.) 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got to do something! 
KIRK: We were doing something until our brave lady stepped in and saved us. 
MCCOY: Any more good ideas, Jim? 
KIRK: Yes, I have. One more. And it depends on the lieutenant's loyalty. If she fails us, we'd better get used to herding goats.

[Water's side]

APOLLO: Fools. I offer them more than they could know. Not just a world, but all that makes it up. Man thinks he's progressed. They're wrong. He's merely forgotten those things which gave life meaning. You'll all be provided for, cared for, happy. There is an order of things in this universe. Your species has denied it. I come to restore it. And for you, because you have the sensitivity to understand, I offer you more than your wildest dreams have ever imagined. You'll become the mother of a new race of gods. You'll inspire the universe. All men will revere you almost as a god yourself. And I shall love you for time without end, worlds without end. You shall complete me, and I you. 
(She embraces him happily.)

[Temple]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in. Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Kirk to 
SCOTT: Carolyn. What's happened to her? 
KIRK: Scotty, I'll find out. 
CHEKOV: Perhaps if I assisted. 
KIRK: How old are you? 
CHEKOV: Twenty two, sir. 
KIRK: Then I'd better handle it. (goes over to a very satisfied looking woman) You all right? 
CAROLYN: Oh, yes, I'm all right. I have a message for you. 
KIRK: Come over there. Well? 
CAROLYN: He wants us to live in peace. He wants to provide for us. He'll give us everything we ever wanted, and he can do it, too. 
KIRK: All right, Lieutenant, you can come down from Mount Olympus now. You've got work to do. 
CAROLYN: I don't understand. 
KIRK: He thrives on love, worship, attention. 
CAROLYN: Yes? 
KIRK: We can't give him that worship, none of us can. Especially you. 
CAROLYN: What? 
KIRK: Spurn him. Reject him. You must. You're special to him. 
CAROLYN: Yes. I love him. 
KIRK: Lieutenant. All our lives, here and on the ship, depend on you. 
CAROLYN: No, not on me. 
KIRK: On you, Lieutenant! Reject him, and we have a chance to save ourselves. Accept him, and you condemn all of us to slavery, nothing less than slavery. We might never get help this far out. Or perhaps the thought of spending an eternity bending knee and tending sheep appeals to you. 
CAROLYN: Oh, but you don't understand. He's kind, and he wants the best for us. And he's so lonely. What you ask would break his heart. How can I? 
KIRK: Give me your hand. Your hand. (she does) Now feel that. Human flesh against human flesh. We're the same. We share the same history, the same heritage, the same lives. We're tied together beyond any untying. Man or woman, it makes no difference. We're human. We couldn't escape from each other even if we wanted to. That's how you do it, Lieutenant. By remembering who and what you are. A bit of flesh and blood afloat in a universe without end. The only thing that's truly yours is the rest of humanity. That's where our duty lies. Do you understand me? 
CAROLYN: Yes. Yes, I understand. He's calling me. 
KIRK: Lieutenant. You have your orders and your duty. 
CAROLYN: Yes, sir. My orders and my duty. 
(She walks away slowly, looking back.)

[Bridge]

UHURA: I think we can try it now, sir. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain.

[Temple]

KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Spock here, Captain.

[Temple]

(The rest of the men gather to listen) 
SPOCK [OC]: We've pinpointed a power source on the planet's surface which seems to have something to do with the force field.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Is there a structure of some sort near you?

[Temple]

KIRK: There is indeed, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK [OC]: The power emanates from there. 
KIRK: Very good. How are you doing on the force field?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: We can negate sections of it, creating openings through which we can fire our phaser banks.

[Temple]

KIRK: Well, that ought to do it. Have Sulu lock all phaser banks onto the structure. Fire on my order only. Cut it fine. We'll be standing nearby.

]Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain. I would recommend a discreet distance. 
KIRK [OC]: I'd love to oblige you, Mister Spock, but we're not all together. Besides, we have Apollo to deal with.

[Temple]

KIRK: If that structure is the source of his power, I want to know where he is when we attack it.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Kirk out.

[Temple]

KIRK: Bones, do you think that mysterious organ in Apollo's chest could have something to do with the transmission of energy? 
MCCOY: Well, it doesn't serve any other purpose I know of. 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got to wait until Carolyn comes back before we fire on the temple. We don't know what would happen to her if he was suddenly attacked. She might get killed. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. I know. Scotty. We'll wait.

[Water's side]

(There's some very passionate kissing going on.) 
CAROLYN: I must say, Apollo, the way you ape human behaviour is remarkable, but there are some other things I must know. Your evolutionary patterns and your social development. 
APOLLO: My what? 
CAROLYN: I'm sure they're unique. I've never encountered a specimen like you before. 
APOLLO: I am Apollo. I've chosen you. 
CAROLYN: I'm sure that's very flattering, but I must get on with my work now. 
APOLLO: Your work? 
CAROLYN: I'm a scientist. My particular specialty is ancient civilisations, relics, and myths. Surely you know I've only been studying you. 
APOLLO: I don't believe it. You love me. 
CAROLYN: Love you? Be logical. I'm not some simple shepherdess you can awe. Why, I could no more love you than I could love a new species of bacteria. 
APOLLO: Carolyn! I forbid you to go. I order you to stay. 
CAROLYN: Is that the secret of your power over women, the thunderbolts you throw? 
(She walks away, and a strong wind begins to blow. Thunder rumbles.)

[Temple]

MCCOY: What the devil is that? 
KIRK: (answers communicator) Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock, Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Sensors are picking up an atmospheric disturbance in your area.

[Temple]

KIRK: Stand by your phasers, Mister Spock. Prepare to fire on my signal. Kirk out. 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got to go and find her! 
KIRK: We've got to be here when he comes back. 
SCOTT: But what if he doesn't. What if he 
KIRK: Scotty, just hold on! 
(Carolyn falls to the ground in the strong winds, and a giant image of Apollo looms over her amid the lightning flashes.) 
SCOTT: Captain! 
KIRK: All right. The temple is his power source. Let's bring him back to it. Get to cover. Mister Spock, fire those phasers. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain, you're too close. 
KIRK: Fire those phasers! That's an order, Mister Spock!

[Bridge]

SULU: All phaser banks, fire!

[Temple]

(The white marble starts to glow pink under the phaser beams, and Apollo runs back.) 
APOLLO: No! Stop! Stop, I say!

[Bridge]

(Enterprise shudders under his anger. There is no longer a hand holding the ship.) 
SULU: All phaser banks, maintain firing rate! 
SPOCK: More power to the shields.

[Temple]

APOLLO: Stop! 
(Carolyn totters into view, and Scotty dashes to her.) 
KIRK: Scotty! 
APOLLO: Stop, I say! (the temple is now yellow) I command it!

[Bridge]

SPOCK: All banks maintain firing rate. 
SULU: Maintaining, sir.

[Temple]

APOLLO: Stop! Stop! Stop! 
(His lightning bolts end, and the temple dissolves into rubble. Scott helps Carolyn to her feet as Apollo walks around, surveying the ruins.) 
APOLLO: I would have cherished you, cared for you. I would have loved you as a father loves his children. Did I ask so much? 
KIRK: We've out grown you. You asked for something we could no longer give. 
APOLLO: Carolyn, I loved you. I would have made a goddess of you. I've shown you my open heart. See what you've done to me. 
(He becomes a giant.) 
APOLLO: Zeus, Hermes, Hera, Aphrodite. You were right. Athena, you were right. The time has passed. There is no room for gods. Forgive me, my old friends. Take me. Take me. 
(And he disappears one last time. Carolyn cries.) 
MCCOY: I wish we hadn't had to do this. 
KIRK: So do I. They gave us so much. The Greek civilisation, much of our culture and philosophy came from a worship of those beings. In a way, they began the Golden Age. Would it have hurt us, I wonder, just to have gathered a few laurel leaves?

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Amok Time
Stardate: 3372.7
Original Airdate: 15 Sep, 1967

[Corridor]
(Kirk has just climbed up a ladder to this deck when McCoy exits the turbolift.) 
MCCOY: Oh, Captain. Got a minute? 
KIRK: A minute. 
MCCOY: It's Spock. Have you noticed anything strange about him? 
KIRK: No, nothing in particular. Why ? 
MCCOY: Well, it's nothing I can pinpoint without an examination, but he's become increasingly restive. If he were not a Vulcan, I'd almost say nervous. And for another thing, he's avoiding food. I checked and he hasn't eaten at all in three days. 
KIRK: That just sounds like Mister Spock in one of his contemplative phases. 
MCCOY: Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: (carrying a tray and sounding embarrassed) Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Captain. 
CHAPEL: Captain. 
MCCOY: What's this? 
CHAPEL: Oh. 
MCCOY: Oh! Vulcan plomeek soup, and I'll bet you made it too. You never give up hoping, do you? 
CHAPEL: Well, Mister Spock hasn't been eating, Doctor, and I, I just happened to notice. 
MCCOY: It's all right. Carry on, Miss Chapel. 
(She turns and rings the bell on Spock's quarters. The door opens and she enters.) 
KIRK: Bones, I'm a busy man. 
MCCOY: Jim, when I suggested to Spock that it was time for his routine check-up, your logical, unemotional first officer turned to me and said, you will cease to pry into my personal matters, Doctor, or I shall certainly break your neck. 
KIRK: Spock said that? 
SPOCK [OC]: What is this? 
(The door to his quarters opens and Chapel rushes out with a scream, just before the soup bowl hits the opposite wall.)
SPOCK [OC]: Poking and prying! If I want anything from you, I'll ask for it! 
(Everyone stops and stares as he come to his door.) 
SPOCK: Captain, I should like to request a leave of absence on my home planet. On our present course you can divert to Vulcan with a loss of but two point eight light days. 
KIRK: Spock, what the devil is this all about? 
SPOCK: I have made my request, Captain. All I require from you is that you answer it. Yes or no.

[Spock's quarters]

KIRK: All right, Spock, let's have it. 
SPOCK: It is undignified for a woman to play servant to a man who is not hers. 
KIRK: I'm more interested in your request for shore leave. In all the years 
SPOCK: You have my request, Captain. Will you grant it or not? 
KIRK: In all the years that I've known you, you've never asked for a leave of any sort. In fact, you've refused them. Why now? 
SPOCK: Captain, surely I have enough leave time accumulated. 
KIRK: Agreed, but that isn't the question, is it? If there's a problem of some sort, illness in the family 
SPOCK: No. Nothing of that nature, Captain. 
KIRK: Then since we're headed for Altair Six, and since the shore facilities there are excellent 
SPOCK: No! I must. I wish to take my leave on Vulcan. 
KIRK: Spock, I'm asking you. What's wrong? 
SPOCK: I need rest. I'm asking you to accept that answer. 
KIRK: Bridge. Helm. 
SULU [OC]: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: Alter course to Vulcan. Increase speed to warp four. 
SULU [OC]: Aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Captain. 
KIRK: I suppose most of us overlook the fact that even Vulcans aren't indestructible. 
(He leaves.) 
SPOCK: No. (looking at his shaking hand) We're not.

Captain's log, stardate 3372.7. On course, on schedule, bound for Altair Six via Vulcan. First Officer Spock seems to be under stress. He has requested and been granted shore leave. Ship surgeon McCoy has him under medical surveillance.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, something's coming in on the Starfleet channel. Priority and urgent, sir. 
KIRK: Put it on audio over here, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Message complete, sir. Switching over. 
STARFLEET [OC]: To Captain, USS Enterprise from Starfleet Sector Nine. Inauguration ceremonies, Altair Six, have been advanced seven solar days. You are ordered to alter your flight plan to accommodate, by order of Komack, Admiral, Starfleet Command. Acknowledge. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, acknowledge that message. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, compute course and speed necessary for compliance. 
CHEKOV: (a bit of a Russian accent) We'll have to head directly there at warp six, sir. Insufficient time to stop off at Vulcan. 
KIRK: Head directly for Altair Six. Sailor's luck, Mister Spock. Or, as one of Finagle's Laws puts it, 'Any home port the ship makes ill be somebody else's, not mine'. The new president of Altair Six wants to get himself launched a week early, so we have to be there a week early. Don't worry. I'll see that you get your leave as soon as we're finished. 
SPOCK: I quite understand, Captain.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Kirk is resting in the dark when he has an idea.) 
KIRK: Bridge. Navigation. 
CHEKOV [on monitor]: Navigation. Chekov here. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, how late will we arrive for the ceremonies if we increase speed to maximum and divert to Vulcan just long enough to drop off Mister Spock? 
CHEKOV [on monitor]: I don't understand, Captain. 
KIRK: How far behind schedule will diverting to Vulcan put us? 
CHEKOV [on monitor]: We're on course for Vulcan, Captain, as Mister Spock ordered. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Chekov. Kirk, out.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Spock. Come with me, please.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Deck five. You've changed course for Vulcan, Mister Spock. Why? 
SPOCK: Changed the course? 
KIRK: Do you deny it? 
SPOCK: No. No, by no means, Captain. It is quite possible. 
KIRK: Then why'd you do it? 
SPOCK: Captain, I accept on your word that I did it, but I do not know why, nor do I remember doing it. Captain, lock me away. I do not wish to be seen. I cannot. No Vulcan could explain further. 
KIRK: I'm trying to help you, Spock. 
SPOCK: Ask me no further questions. I will not answer. 
KIRK: I order you to report to the Sickbay. 
SPOCK: Sickbay? 
KIRK: Complete examination. McCoy's waiting.

[Sickbay]

(Spock wanders in like a man in a dream.) 
MCCOY: Come in, Spock. I'm all ready for you. 
SPOCK: My orders were to report to Sickbay, Doctor. I have done so. And now I'll go to my quarters. 
MCCOY: My orders were to give you a thorough physical. In case you hadn't noticed, I have to answer to the same commanding officer that you do. Come on, Spock. Yield to the logic of the situation. 
SPOCK: Examine me, for all the good it'll do either of us.

[Bridge]

SULU: How do you figure it, Chekov? First we're going to Vulcan, then we're going to Altair, then we're headed to Vulcan again, and now we're headed back to Altair. 
CHEKOV: I think I'm going to get space sick.

[Kirk's quarters]

MCCOY: Jim, you've got to get Spock to Vulcan. 
KIRK: Bones, I will, I will. As soon as this mission is 
MCCOY: No! Now. Right away. If you don't get him to Vulcan within a week eight days at the outside, he'll die. He'll die, Jim. 
KIRK: Why must he die? Why within eight days? Explain. 
MCCOY: I don't know. 
KIRK: You keep saying that. Are you a doctor, or aren't you? 
MCCOY: There's a growing imbalance of body functions, as if in our bodies huge amounts of adrenalin were constantly being pumped into our bloodstreams. Now, I can't trace it down in my biocomps. Spock won't tell me what it is. But if it isn't stopped somehow, the physical and emotional pressures will simply kill him. 
KIRK: You say you're convinced he knows what it is? 
MCCOY: He does, and he's as tightlipped about it as an Aldebaran Shellmouth. No use to ask him, Jim. He won't talk.

[Spock's quarters]

(Spock is staring at the picture of a young girl on his monitor, but switches it off when the doorbell buzzes.) 
SPOCK: Come. 
KIRK: Stay. McCoy has given me his medical evaluation of your condition. He says you're going to die unless something is done. What? Is it something only your planet can do for you? Spock! You've been called the best first officer in the fleet. That's an enormous asset to me. If I have to lose that first officer, I want to know why. 
SPOCK: It is a thing no out-worlder may know except those very few who have been involved. A Vulcan understands, but even we do not speak of it among ourselves. It is a deeply personal thing. Can you see that, Captain, and understand? 
KIRK: No, I do not understand. Explain. Consider that an order. 
SPOCK: Captain, there are some things which transcend even the discipline of the service. 
KIRK: Would it help if I told you that I'll treat this as totally confidential? 
SPOCK: It has to do with biology. 
KIRK: What? 
SPOCK: Biology. 
KIRK: What kind of biology? 
SPOCK: Vulcan biology. 
KIRK: You mean the biology of Vulcans? Biology as in reproduction? Well, there's no need to be embarrassed about it, Mister Spock. It happens to the birds and the bees. 
SPOCK: The birds and the bees are not Vulcans, Captain. If they were, if any creature as proudly logical as us were to have their logic ripped from them as this time does to us. How do Vulcans choose their mates? Haven't you wondered? 
KIRK: I guess the rest of us assume that it's done quite logically. 
SPOCK: No. No. It is not. We shield it with ritual and customs shrouded in antiquity. You humans have no conception. It strips our minds from us. It brings a madness which rips away our veneer of civilisation. It is the pon farr. The time of mating. There are precedents in nature, Captain. The giant eelbirds of Regulus Five, once each eleven years they must return to the caverns where they hatched. On your Earth, the salmon. They must return to that one stream where they were born, to spawn or die in trying. 
KIRK: But you're not a fish, Mister Spock. You're 
SPOCK: No. Nor am I a man. I'm a Vulcan. I'd hoped I would be spared this, but the ancient drives are too strong. Eventually, they catch up with us, and we are driven by forces we cannot control to return home and take a wife. Or die. 
KIRK: I haven't heard a word you've said, and I'll get you to Vulcan somehow.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Lieutenant, get me Admiral Komack at Starfleet Command, Sector Nine. Pipe it down to McCoy's office. 
UHURA: Starfleet Command. Yes, sir. 
CHEKOV: Mister Sulu, you don't think 
SULU: Maybe you ought to plot a course back for Vulcan, just in case.

[Spock's quarters]

(Spock is playing his lyre when the intercom whistles.) 
UHURA [OC]: Communication to Mister Spock. Lieutenant Uhura here. The captain asked me to 
SPOCK: Let me alone. Let me alone! 
(He pounds his desk monitor into a pulp.)

[Sickbay]

KOMACK [on monitor]: Captain, you're making a most unusual request. 
KIRK: I'm aware of that, sir, but it's of the utmost importance. You must give me permission to divert to Vulcan. 
KOMACK [on monitor]: But you refuse to explain why it is so important. 
KIRK: I can't, sir, but believe me, I wouldn't make such a request 
KOMACK [on monitor]: Altair Six is no ordinary matter. That area is just putting itself together after a long interplanetary conflict. This inauguration will stabilise the entire Altair system. Our appearance there is a demonstration of friendship and strength which will cause ripples clear to the Klingon Empire. 
KIRK: Sir, the delay would be, at most, a day. I can hardly believe that 
KOMACK [on monitor]: You will proceed to Altair Six as ordered. You have your orders. Starfleet out. 
MCCOY: Well, that's that. 
KIRK: No, it's not. I know the Altair situation. We would be one of three starships. Very impressive, very diplomatic, but it's simply not that vital. 
MCCOY: You can't go off to Vulcan against Starfleet orders. You'll be busted 
KIRK: I can't let Spock die, can I, Bones? And he will if we go to Altair. I owe him my life a dozen times over. Isn't that worth a career? He's my friend. Bridge. Navigation.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Bridge. Navigation.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Vulcan. Tell Engineering I want warp eight or better. Push her for all she'll take. 
(Nurse Chapel leaves Sickbay, beaming.)

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Course already plotted. Laying it in, sir.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: I see. Very well. Carry on, Mister Chekov. Kirk, out.

[Spock's quarters]

(Spock is lying on his bed, apparently asleep. Christine thinks about touching him and then goes to leave.) 
SPOCK: Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Yes, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I had a most startling dream. You were trying to tell me something, but I couldn't hear you. It would be illogical for us to protest against our natures. Don't you think? 
CHAPEL: I don't understand. 
SPOCK: Your face is wet. 
CHAPEL: I came to tell you that we are bound for Vulcan. We'll be there in just a few days. 
SPOCK: Vulcan. Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: My name is Christine. 
SPOCK: Yes, I know, Christine. Would you make me some of that plomeek soup? 
CHAPEL: Oh, I'd be very glad to do that, Mister Spock.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Bridge. 
SPOCK: It is obvious that you have surmised my problem, Doctor. My compliments on your insight. Captain, there is a thing that happens to Vulcans at this time. Almost an insanity, which you would no doubt find distasteful. 
KIRK: Will I? You've been most patient with my kinds of madness. 
SPOCK: Then would you beam down to the planet's surface and stand with me? There is a brief ceremony. 
KIRK: Is it permitted? 
SPOCK: It is my right. By tradition, the male is accompanied by his closest friends. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: I also request McCoy accompany me. 
MCCOY: I shall be honoured, sir.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain. We're standing by on Vulcan hailing frequencies, sir. 
KIRK: Open the channel, Lieutenant. Vulcan Space Central, this is the USS Enterprise requesting permission to assume standard orbit. 
VULCAN [OC]: USS Enterprise from Vulcan Space Central. Permission granted. And from all of Vulcan, welcome. Is Commander Spock with you? 
SPOCK: This is Spock. 
VULCAN [OC]: Standby to activate your central viewer, please. 
(Nurse Chapel enters.) 
CHAPEL: Doctor, what's going on? 
(The viewscreen lights up with the image of a very beautiful woman.) 
T'PRING [on viewscreen]: Spock, it is I. 
SPOCK: T'Pring, parted from me and never parted, never and always touching and touched. We meet at the appointed place. 
T'PRING [on viewscreen]: Spock, parted from me and never parted, never and always touching and touched. I await you. 
UHURA: She's lovely, Mister Spock. Who is she? 
SPOCK: She is T'Pring. My wife.

[Vulcan]

(The trio have beamed down onto a very red planet. Sky, ground, all shades of hot orange-red. Spock leads them into an area marked out by stone structures.) 
SPOCK: This is the land of my family. It has been held by us for more than two thousand Earth years. This is our place of Koon-ut-kal-if-fee, 
MCCOY: He called it Koon-ut what? 
KIRK: He described it to me as meaning marriage or challenge. In the distant past, Vulcans killed to win their mates. 
MCCOY: They still go mad at this time. Perhaps it's the price they pay for having no emotions the rest of the time. 
KIRK: It's lovely. I wish the breeze were cooler. 
MCCOY: Yeah. Hot as Vulcan. Now I understand what that phrase means. 
KIRK: The atmosphere is thinner than Earth. 
(Spock strikes a gong.) 
MCCOY: I wonder when his T'Pring arrives. 
SPOCK: The marriage party approaches. I hear them. 
KIRK: Marriage party? You said T'Pring was your wife. 
SPOCK: By our parents' arrangement. A ceremony while we were but seven years of age. Less than a marriage but more than a betrothal. One touches the other in order to feel each other's thoughts. In this way our minds were locked together, so that at the proper time, we would both be drawn to Koon-ut-kal-if-fee. 
(A jingling sound gets louder, and Spock strikes the gong again. Two men enter shaking contraptions with lots of bells, followed by a woman carried on a chair. T'Pring and others come behind her.) 
KIRK: Bones, you know who that is? T'Pau. The only person to ever turn down a seat on the Federation Council. 
MCCOY: T'Pau. Officiating at Spock's wedding? 
KIRK: He never mentioned that his family was this important. 
(T'Pau's chair is placed on a dais, and Spock greets her. She gives him a quick mind-meld.) 
T'PAU: Spock, are our ceremonies for outworlders? 
SPOCK: They are not outworlders. They are my friends. I am permitted this. 
(She gestures for them to approach.) 
SPOCK: This is Kirk. 
KIRK: Ma'am. 
T'PAU: And thee are called? 
MCCOY: Leonard McCoy, ma'am. 
T'PAU: Thee names these out worlders friends. How does thee pledge their behaviour? 
SPOCK: With my life, T'Pau. 
T'PAU: What they are about to see comes down from the time of the beginning, without change. This is the Vulcan heart. This is the Vulcan soul. This is our way. Kah-if-farr. 
(Spock is about to strike the gong again, when T'Pring intervenes.) 
T'PRING: Kal-if-fee! 
KIRK: What is it? What happened? 
T'PAU: She chooses the challenge. 
MCCOY: (pointing at T'Pau's bodyguard) With him? 
T'PAU: He acts only if cowardice is seen. She will choose her champion. 
KIRK: Spock? 
T'PAU: Do not attempt to speak with him, Kirk. He is deep in the plak-tow, the blood fever. He will not speak with thee again until he has passed through what is to come. If thee wishes to depart, thee may leave now. 
KIRK: We'll stay. 
T'PAU: Spock chose his friends well. 
MCCOY: Ma'am, I don't understand. Are you trying to say that she rejected him? That she doesn't want him? 
T'PAU: He will have to fight for her. It is her right. T'Pring, thee has chosen the kal-if-fee, the challenge. Thee are prepared to become the property of the victor? 
T'PRING: I am prepared. 
T'PAU: Spock, does thee accept the challenge according to our laws and customs? 
(A single nod. T'Pring looks at the young man who followed her in.) 
KIRK: Think Spock can take him? 
MCCOY: I doubt it. Not in his present condition. 
T'PAU: T'Pring, thee will choose thy champion. 
T'PRING: As it was in the dawn of our days, as it is today, as it will be for all tomorrows, I make my choice. This one. 
(She steps past the expectant Stonn and points at Kirk.) 
STONN: No! I am to be the one. It was agreed. 
T'PAU: Be silent. 
STONN: Hear me. I have made the ancient claim. I claim the right. The woman is 
T'PAU: Kroykah! 
STONN: I ask forgiveness. 
T'PAU: Kirk? T'Pring is within her rights, but our laws and customs are not binding on thee. Thee are free to decline with no harm on thyself. 
SPOCK: T'Pau. 
T'PAU: Thee speaks? 
SPOCK: My friend does not understand. 
T'PAU: The choice has been made, Spock. It is up to him now. 
SPOCK: He does not know. I will do what I must, T'Pau, but not with him! His blood does not burn. He is my friend! 
T'PAU: It is said thy Vulcan blood is thin. Are thee Vulcan or are thee human? 
SPOCK: I burn, T'Pau. My eyes are flame. My heart is flame. Thee has the power, T'Pau. In the name of my fathers, forbid. Forbid! T'Pau. I plead with thee! I beg! 
T'PAU: Thee has prided thyself on thy Vulcan heritage. It is decided. 
KIRK: What happens to Spock if I decline? 
T'PAU: Another champion will be selected. Do not interfere, Kirk. Keep thy place. 
MCCOY: You can't do it, Jim. 
KIRK: I can't? 
MCCOY: No. She said their laws and customs were not binding on you. 
KIRK: And you said Spock might not be able to handle him. If I can knock Spock out without really hurting him 
MCCOY: In this climate? If the heat doesn't get you, the thin air will. You can't do it! 
KIRK: If I get into any trouble, I'll quit. And Spock wins, and honour is satisfied. 
MCCOY: Jim, listen, if you 
KIRK: Bones. He's my first officer and my friend. I disregarded Starfleet orders to bring him here. Another thing, that's T'Pau of Vulcan. All of Vulcan in one package. How can I back out in front of her? 
T'PAU: It is done. Kirk, decide. 
KIRK: I accept the challenge. 
T'PAU: Here begins the act of combat for possession of the woman, T'Pring. As it was at the time of the beginning, so it is now. Bring forth the lirpa. 
(They are presented with wicked-looking half moon blades set in a wooden shaft, with a counterweight at the other end.) 
T'PAU: If both survive the lirpa, combat will continue with the ahn woon. 
KIRK: What do you mean, if both survive? 
T'PAU: This combat is to the death. 
KIRK: Now wait a minute, ma'am. Who said anything about a fight to the death? 
MCCOY: These men are friends. To force them to fight until one of them is killed 
T'PAU: I can forgive such a display only once. Challenge was given and lawfully accepted. It has begun. Let no one interfere. 
(And so the fight begins, first with a trial of brute strength, then a good swing by Spock slices open Kirk's tunic and cuts his chest. It is clear that the first officer will kill his captain, given the chance. When Kirk is down and unarmed, Spock goes in for the final blow.) 
MCCOY: Spock! No! 
(And Kirk rolls away just in time, then disarms Spock.) 
T'PAU: Kroykah! 
MCCOY: Is this Vulcan chivalry? The air's too hot and thin for Kirk. He's not used to it. 
T'PAU: The air is the air. What can be done? 
MCCOY: (holding up a hypo) I can compensate for the atmosphere and the temperature with this. At least it'll give Kirk a fighting chance. 
T'PAU: Thee may proceed. 
MCCOY: You're going to have to kill him, Jim. 
KIRK: Kill Spock? That's not what I came to Vulcan for, is it? What's that? 
MCCOY: It's a tri-ox compound. It'll help you breathe. Now be careful! 
KIRK: Sound medical advice. 
T'PAU: The ahn woon. 
(The bells sound, and both men are given long straps with weights and tassels on the ends. Spock demonstrates it use by lassoing Kirk's legs and knocking him down with it before holding it in the middle to use first as a flail, and finally to strangle his opponent.) 
T'PAU: Kroykah! 
MCCOY; Get your hands off of him, Spock! He's finished. He's dead. 
T'PAU: I grieve with thee. 
MCCOY: McCoy to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura here. 
MCCOY: Have the transporter room stand by to beam up the landing party. (ends communication) As strange as it may seem, Mister Spock, you're in command now. Any orders? 
SPOCK: Yes. I'll follow you up in a few minutes. You will instruct Mister Chekov to plot a course for the nearest Starbase where I must surrender myself to the authorities. (the sound of a transporter off screen) T'Pring. Explain. 
T'PRING: Specify. 
SPOCK: Why the challenge, and why you chose my captain as your champion. 
T'PRING: Stonn wanted me, I wanted him. 
SPOCK: I see no logic in preferring Stonn over me. 
T'PRING: You have become much known among our people, Spock. Almost a legend. And as the years went by, I came to know that I did not want to be the consort of a legend. But by the laws of our people, I could only divorce you by the kal-if-fee. There was also Stonn, who wanted very much to be my consort, and I wanted him. If your Captain were victor, he would not want me, and so I would have Stonn. If you were victor you would free me because I had dared to challenge, and again I would have Stonn. But if you did not free me, it would be the same. For you would be gone, and I would have your name and your property, and Stonn would still be there. 
SPOCK: Logical. Flawlessly logical. 
T'PRING: I am honoured. 
SPOCK: Stonn. She is yours. After a time, you may find that having is not so pleasing a thing after all as wanting. It is not logical, but it is often true. Spock here. Stand by to beam up. Live long, T'Pau, and prosper. 
T'PAU: Live long and prosper, Spock. 
SPOCK: I shall do neither. I have killed my captain and my friend. Energize.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Doctor, I shall be resigning my commission immediately, of course. 
MCCOY: Spock, I 
SPOCK: So I would appreciate your making the final arrangements. 
MCCOY: Spock, I 
SPOCK: Doctor, please, let me finish. There can be no excuse for the crime of which I'm guilty. I intend to offer no defence. Furthermore, I shall order Mister Scott to take immediate command of this vessel. 
KIRK: Don't you think you better check with me first? 
SPOCK: Captain! Jim! 
(There's a big, big grin across his face, which fades when McCoy and Chapel's own smiles are noticed) 
SPOCK: I'm pleased to see you, Captain. You seem uninjured. I am at something of a loss to understand it, however. 
KIRK: Blame McCoy. That was no tri-ox compound he shot me with. He slipped in a neural paralyser. Knocked me out, simulated death. 
SPOCK: Indeed. 
MCCOY: Nurse, would you mind, please? 
(Chapel leaves in a slight huff.) 
MCCOY: Spock, what happened down there? The girl? The wedding? 
SPOCK: Ah, yes, the girl. Most interesting. It must have been the combat. When I thought I had killed the captain, I found I had lost all interest in T'Pring. The madness was gone. 
(Intercom whistle) 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain Kirk. Message from Starfleet Command, top priority.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Relay it, Lieutenant.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Response to T'Pau's request for diversion of Enterprise to planet Vulcan

[Sickbay]

UHURA [OC]: Hereby approved. Any reasonable delay granted. Komack, Admiral, Starfleet Command. 
KIRK: Well, a little late, but I'm glad they're seeing it our way. How about that T'Pau? They couldn't turn her down. Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Altair Six. Leave orbit when ready. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: There's just one thing, Mister Spock. You can't tell me that when you first saw Jim alive that you weren't on the verge of giving us an emotional scene that would have brought the house down. . 
SPOCK: Merely my quite logical relief that Starfleet had not lost a highly proficient captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. I understand. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Captain. 
MCCOY: Of course, Mister Spock, your reaction was quite logical. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Doctor. 
MCCOY: In a pig's eye! 
KIRK: Come on, Spock. Let's go mind the store.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

A Private Little War
Stardate: 4211.4 
Original Airdate: 2 Feb, 1968

[Planet surface]
(Doctor McCoy is sampling the local vegetation when his communicator beeps.) 
MCCOY: Yes, Jim. 
KIRK [OC]: How much longer, McCoy? 
MCCOY: Oh, about another thirty minutes. I've come across some most interesting organic compounds. Hey, Starfleet was right.

[Rocky outcrop]

(Kirk is also on the planet.) 
MCCOY [OC]: These roots and soil cultures can be a medical treasure house. Any problems there? 
KIRK: No sign of the inhabitants so far. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: Large prints. The ape-like carnivore in the reports? 
KIRK: Yes, the mugato. No problem, though. Those prints are several days old. They seldom stay in one place. 
SPOCK: Aside from that, you say it's a Garden of Eden? 
KIRK: Or so it seemed to the brash young Lieutenant Kirk on his first planet survey. 
SPOCK: Class M in all respects. Quite Earth-like. 
KIRK: Except these people stayed in their Garden of Eden. Bows and arrows for hunting, but absolutely no fighting among themselves. Remarkably peaceful and tranquil. 
VOICE [OC]: Ho! Take cover here! 
(Kirk and Spock dash off to investigate, and see three dark-haired locals laying an ambush, armed with long-barreled guns.) 
SPOCK: Bows and arrows, Captain? 
KIRK: Villagers with flintlocks? That's impossible. They hadn't progressed nearly that far. 
SPOCK: Captain, look. 
(A group of blond hunters is approaching. They do have bows and arrows.) 
KIRK: One of those men walking into ambush is Tyree. The friend I lived with here. (He draws his phaser.) 
SPOCK: Captain, use of our phasers is expressly forbidden. 
(So instead Kirk throws a rock which startles a villager into firing his weapon early.) 
TYREE: Villagers! 
(There's a chase, hunters after the villagers, and the villagers pursuing Kirk and Spock. A shot is fired, which McCoy hears.)

[Planet surface]

MCCOY: Enterprise, alert! Stand by to beam up landing party. 
(Kirk and Spock come running, then Spock gets shot in the back.) 
KIRK: Spock? Your phaser. (it is missing, so Kirk prepares to use his to defend his friend.) 
SPOCK: No, Captain. I can travel. 
(They join McCoy.) 
KIRK: Beam us up, quickly. 
MCCOY: Now, Scotty. Have medics stand by. 
(They beam out just before the villagers arrive.)

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: What happened, Captain? 
KIRK: Lead projectile. Primitive firearm. 
M'BENGA: (an African doctor, to Nurse Chapel) Vitalizer B. 
MCCOY: Pressure packet. Lucky his heart's where his liver should be, or he'd be dead now. 
M'BENGA: Not good, sir. 
MCCOY: Coranalin. 
KIRK: Bones, can you save him? 
UHURA [OC]: All decks, Red Alert! Battle stations, battle stations! Go to Red Alert! 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
UHURA [OC]: Uhura, sir. We have a Klingon vessel on our screen. 
KIRK: On my way. Scotty. Bones? 
MCCOY: I don't know yet, Jim.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Captain, we're holding the planet between us and the Klingons. I don't think they've spotted us. 
UHURA: Make that definite, sir. They're sending a routine message to their home base with no mention of us. 
KIRK: Good. Go to Yellow Alert. 
UHURA: Yellow Alert. All stations go to Yellow Alert. 
KIRK: Do you think you can keep us out of their sight, Chekov? 
CHEKOV: I can try, Captain. 
UHURA: Message to Starbase, sir? 
KIRK: No point in giving ourselves away, Lieutenant. Not until we find out what's going on. 
SCOTT: We can hide for a while, sir, but we may have to go out of orbit to keep it up for long. 
KIRK: Kirk to Sickbay. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy here. I'll call you soon as I know anything. Sickbay out. 
KIRK: So, they've broken the treaty. 
SCOTT: Not necessarily, Captain. They have as much right to scientific missions here as we have. 
KIRK: Research is not the Klingon way. 
SCOTT: True, but since this is a hands-off planet, how are you going to prove they're doing otherwise? 
KIRK: When I left there thirteen years ago, those villagers had barely learned to forge iron. Spock was shot with a flintlock. How many centuries between those two developments? 
UHURA: On Earth, about twelve, sir. 
SCOTT: On the other hand, a flintlock would be the first firearm the inhabitants would normally develop. 
KIRK: Yes, I'm aware of that, Mister Scott. 
CHEKOV: And, sir, the fact Earth took twelve centuries doesn't mean they had to. 
UHURA: We've seen different development at rates on different planets. 
SCOTT: And were the Klingons behind it, why didn't they give them breechloaders? 
CHEKOV: Or machine guns? 
UHURA: Or old-style hand lasers? 
KIRK: I did not invite a debate. I'm sorry. I'm worried about Spock and concerned about what's happened to something I once knew down there. You have the conn, Scotty. I'll be in Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

M'BENGA: We've no replacements for the damaged organs, sir. If he's going to live, his Vulcan physiology will have to do it for him. 
MCCOY: Agreed. Sterilite off. 
CHAPEL: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: He'll live or die now, Jim. I don't know which. Doctor M'Benga interned on a Vulcan ward. He couldn't be in better hands. 
KIRK: Then you and I are transporting down. 
MCCOY: I can't leave Spock at this time. 
KIRK: You just indicated you could. There are Klingons here. If their mission is a legitimate research interest in the planet's organic potential, then you're the one man who can tell me. 
MCCOY: And if that's not it? 
KIRK: Then I need help. Advice I can trust as much as Spock's. 
MCCOY: I appreciate the compliment, Jim, but 
KIRK: Bones, I'm as worried about Spock as you are, but if the Klingons are breaking the treaty it could be interstellar war. Kirk to Bridge. 
SCOTT [OC]: Bridge, Scott here. 
KIRK: McCoy and I are transporting back down. Inform ship's stores that we'll need native costumes.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain, we may have to break out of orbit any minute to keep out of their sight. We'd be out of communicator range with you.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: I understand. We'll arrange a rendezvous schedule. Kirk out.

Captain's log, stardate 4211.4. Keeping our presence here secret is an enormous tactical advantage, therefore I cannot risk contact with Starfleet Command. I must take action on my own judgment. I've elected to violate orders and make contact with planet inhabitants.

[Planet surface]

(McCoy and Kirk are dressed in the leathers of hill people.) 
KIRK: Perfect. Tyree's camp's a quarter of a mile away. 
MCCOY: Want to think about it again, Jim? Starfleet's orders about this planet state no interference with 
KIRK: No interference with normal social development. I'm not only aware of it, it was my survey thirteen years ago that recommended it. 
MCCOY: I read it. Inhabitants superior in many ways to humans. Left alone, they undoubtedly someday will develop a remarkably advanced and peaceful culture. 
KIRK: Indeed. And I intend to see that they have that chance. You coming with me? 
MCCOY: Do I have a choice? 
(So they make their way down the slope, and Kirk gets pounced on by a big white ape with a large horn on it's head and spines down it's back. It easily throws off McCoy as it concentrates on it's first victim, biting him, Throwing rocks makes it stand up, then McCoy vaporizes it with his phaser.) 
KIRK: (shaking) Contact ship. Took full poison. Fangs. 
MCCOY: Enterprise, McCoy. Emergency. Come in. Enterprise, come in. McCoy! Emergency! 
KIRK: They left. Out of orbit. 
MCCOY: (giving an injection) Jim, there is no antitoxin for this poison. I can only keep you alive a few hours with this. 
KIRK: Tyree. Some of his men. Cure. 
(Three men are standing in front of them.) 
MCCOY: Are you hill people? Do you know a hunter named Tyree? A mugato attacked him. He's James Kirk. He's a friend of Tyree's. Blast it! Do something! He's dying! 
(Kirk passes out.)

{Tyree's camp]

YUTAN: Take him to the cave. I bring Tyree.

[Cave]

MCCOY [OC]: Medical log, stardate 4211.8. Kirk is right about the people here. Despite their fear and our strangeness, they're compassionate and gentle. I've learned the hunter Tyree is now their leader. He is expected to return shortly with his wife, who they say knows how to cure this poison. My problem. The captain is in deep shock. I must keep him warm and alive until then. 
(McCoy wraps plenty of furs around Kirk.) 
MCCOY: You and your Garden of Eden.

[Hillside]

(A man and a dark-haired woman come out of hiding after two armed villagers pass.) 
NONA: We must obtain the same firesticks, husband. You could be killing them instead. We could take their houses, their goods. 
TYREE: Nona, enough. In time the villagers will return to their ways of friendship. 
NONA: In time? They kill your people! I am a Kahn-ut-tu woman. In all this land, how many are there? Men seek us because through us they become great leaders. 
TYREE: I took you because you cast a spell upon me. 
NONA: And I have spells that help me keep you. Remember this leaf? The night we camped by the water? 
TYREE: The night of madness. 
NONA: Oh, Tyree, did you really hate that madness? 
(She rubs the leaf down his arm, scratching him and leaving pieces attached to his skin.) 
TYREE: No, Nona. No! It brought up evil beasts from my soul. 
NONA: Only one lovely beast, Tyree, my huge, angry man. 
(They kiss passionately.) 
YUTAN: Forgive me. 
NONA: What is it? 
YUTAN: There are strangers in our camp. One has taken the mugato bite. He dies. 
NONA: Strangers? 
YUTAN: It is said the dying one is a friend of Tyree, from long ago. 
NONA: That one. Bring him when his head clears.

[Cave]

(Kirk is shivering under his furs, so McCoy uses his phaser to heat a rock.)

[Tyree's camp]

NONA: The stranger, where is he? 
(She is pointed to the cave.)

[Cave]

(McCoy is heating another couple of rocks when she arrives. The sight of such a powerful weapon stops her from going in.)

[Tyree's camp]

(Tyree arrives, running.) 
TYREE: Nona, where's Kirk? The cave? 
NONA: Tyree, you wish me to save him? 
TYREE: You must. He is the one I told you of. The friend of my younger days. 
NONA: My remedies require I know what kind of man he is. All that is known of him. 
TYREE: I gave him my promise of silence. He was made my brother. 
NONA: And I am your wife, his sister. I promise silence also. 
TYREE: Nona 
NONA: Quickly! Or he dies.

[Sickbay]

(The indicators over Spock's bed are very low. Chapel is holding his hand, but puts it down quickly when the door opens.) 
M'BENGA: Don't let these low panel readings bother you. I've seen this before in Vulcans. It's their way of concentrating all their strength, blood, and antibodies onto the injured organs. A form of self-induced hypnosis. 
CHAPEL: You mean he's conscious? 
M'BENGA: Well, in a sense. He knows we're here and what we're saying, but he can't afford to take his mind from the tissue he's fighting to heal. I suppose he even knows you were holding his hand. (leaves) 
CHAPEL: A good nurse always treats her patients that way. It proves she's interested.

[Cave]

TYREE: I am Tyree. 
NONA: And I'm Tyree's woman. 
TYREE: It is Kirk. She will cure him. 
(Nona takes a strange object out of her bag. It is moving slightly.) 
MCCOY: What's that? 
NONA: A mahko root. 
MCCOY: A plant? It moves. 
NONA: For those who know where to find it, how to use it, how to pick it. 
(She holds out her hand, and Tyree cuts it with his knife. Then she starts writhing for a few moments before putting the mahko root onto Kirk's wound and holding it there with her bleeding hand.) 
NONA: Take this of my soul. This of my soul. Thine own. Into thine. Deeply. Together. Your pain is mine. All mine. Your soul and mine, together! Return. It is past. Return. Return! 
(Tyree beats a drum then she collapses, exhausted, across Kirk's bare chest. The root is shriveled. Kirk wakes up.) 
KIRK: Bones. I had the strangest dream. 
MCCOY: How do you feel, Jim? 
KIRK: Tired. Very tired. You did a fine job, Bones. I think I'll sleep. 
(McCoy removes the root. The would has healed completely.)
MCCOY: I want to thank you for saving his life. (Nona's hand is healed too) I would like to learn more about this. 
NONA: Our blood has passed through the mahko root together. Our souls have been together. He is mine now. 
TYREE: She must sleep also. 
MCCOY: He is hers? 
TYREE: When a man and woman are joined in this manner, he can refuse her no wish. But it is only legend.

(Later, McCoy wakes to find Jim is out of bed. He finds him by Nona's bed.) 
MCCOY: Jim. 
KIRK: Bones. What are you doing here? (their voices wake Tyree) Tyree. My old friend. 
TYREE: Yes, James! James, it's good to see you. 
KIRK: What am I doing here? A mugato bite! I remember. I told him to take me to Tyree's camp. I knew you'd find a kahn-ut-tu to cure me. The kahn-ut-tu is the local witch people here. They've studied (Nona gets up and stands in front of him) They've studied the roots and the herbs. 
NONA: I am a kahn-ut-tu, Captain. I cured you. 
TYREE: My wife, Nona. 
KIRK: Yes, of course. I should've guessed. Congratulations. Tyree, we must talk now. The villagers, their new weapons. I want to hear all about that. We must make plans. 
NONA: Good. It is past time to plan. 
TYREE: Much has happened since you left, James. Come, we'll speak of it. 
NONA: And of things to be done. 
TYREE: Come. (the men leave, but he stops Nona from following.) We will speak of it.

[Sickbay]

(The markers on the indicator board above Spock's head are going up and down like crazy.) 
CHAPEL: The readings are beginning to fluctuate. 
M'BENGA: Just as they should. This is Doctor M'Benga. There will be someone with you constantly now. When the time comes, I'll be called. (to Chapel) As soon as he shows any signs of consciousness, call me immediately. 
CHAPEL: Yes, Doctor. 
M'BENGA: After you've called me, if he speaks, do whatever he says. 
CHAPEL: Do whatever he says? 
M'BENGA: Yes. That's clear enough, isn't it?

[Cave]

TYREE: The firesticks first appeared nearly a year ago. Since that time, many of my people have died. 
KIRK: You say they make the firesticks themselves? How can you be sure? 
TYREE: I've looked into their village. I have seen it being done. 
MCCOY: Have you seen any strangers among the villagers? 
TYREE: Strangers? No. 
KIRK: Can you take us to their village while it's still dark? 
TYREE: Yes, but the mugatos travel at night also. You killed one. Its mate will not be far. 
KIRK: (showing his phaser) You've seen how these work. 
NONA: I've seen them also, and I know you have many ways to make your friend Tyree a man of great importance. 
MCCOY: Many ways? What else does she know about us? 
NONA: Tyree has told me much of you. Do not blame him. It was the price for saving your life. 
KIRK: We're simply strangers from 
NONA: From one of the lights in the sky, and you have ways as far above firesticks as the sky above our world. 
TYREE: You will not speak of this to others. 
NONA: I will not if I am made to understand. Teach me. There's an old custom among my people. When a woman saves a man's life, he is grateful. 
KIRK: I am grateful. 
MCCOY: A splendid custom if not carried to extremes. 
KIRK: We once were as you are, Spears, arrows. There came a time when our weapons grew faster than our wisdom, and we almost destroyed ourselves. We learned from this to make a rule during all our travels, Never to cause the same to happen to other worlds. Just as a man must grow in his own way and in his own time. 
NONA: Some men never grow. 
KIRK: Perhaps not as fast or in the way another thinks he should. But we're wise enough to know that we are wise enough not to interfere with the way of a man or another world. 
NONA: You must let the villagers destroy us? You will not help your friend and brother kill them instead? 
TYREE: No! I said I will not kill! 
NONA: We must fight or die! Is dying better? You would let him die when you have weapons to make him powerful and safe? Then he has the wrong friends. And I have the wrong husband. (leaves) 
TYREE: You will help in ways she does not understand. I have faith in our friendship, James. Come, before we lose the darkness. (leaves) 
MCCOY: What's bothering you, Jim? If we find the Klingons have helped the villagers, there's certainly something we can do. 
KIRK: That's what's bothering me. The something we may have to do.

[Village]

(Smooth walled buildings with tiled roofs, shrubs in terracotta jars. An armed guard patrols in front of one with a verandah.) 
TYREE: The guard. We must wait. 
KIRK: Tyree, supposing you had to fight? What then? 
MCCOY: Jim, this man believes in the same thing we believe in. That killing is stupid and useless. 
KIRK: Tyree? 
TYREE: Now. Come. 
(Kirk sneaks around behind the guard and puts a sleeper hold on him.) 
KIRK: The gun. Ammunition. Doctor. 
(McCoy and Kirk run off while Tyree picks up the flintlock.)

[Building]

(A Klingon is sitting behind a simple wooden table.) 
KRELL: You are late, my friend Apella. 
APELLA: A quarrel by my people. A division of some skins and a hill woman taken this morning. It's hard to divide one woman. 
KRELL: Give her to the man who killed the most of her people. The others will see the profit in bravery. I'll make a Klingon of you yet. 
(He hands over another flintlock.) 
Your next improvement. Notice what we've done to the striker. See how it holds the priming powder more securely? Fewer misfires. When I return, we will give you other improvements. A rifled barrel. 
APELLA: What? 
KRELL: A way to shoot further and straighter.

[Village]

MCCOY: Jim. Coal for forge, sulphur for gun powder. 
KIRK: Let's take a look inside.

[Forge]

(A big bellows runs straight into the base of the fire.) 
KIRK: Well, here's your forge. People's exhibit number one. A chrome steel drill point. 
MCCOY: (scanning) This pig iron is almost carbon-free. That village furnace certainly didn't produce it. People's exhibit number two. Cold-rolled gun barrel rod fashioned to look homemade. You were right about the Klingons, Jim. KIRK: Make recorder and scanner tapes of everything. 
MCCOY: Right. It's a pity we can't include a live Klingon. That'd just about wrap it 
(He is interrupted by voices from outside. They hide.) 
APELLA [OC]: Is it difficult to cut grooves into the barrels? 
KRELL [OC]: It's quite simple. I'll show you. 
(Apella and Krell enter the forge.) 
APELLA: I thought my people would grow tired of killing. But you were right. They see that it is easier than trading and it has pleasures. I feel it myself. Like the hunt, but with richer rewards. 
KRELL: You will be rich one day, Apella, beyond your dreams. The leader of a whole world. A governor in the Klingon Empire. 
(Then McCoy's scanner whistles. So Kirk jumps the Klingon while McCoy hits Apella with the steel rod he took.) 
KIRK: Bones! 
(They open the door, but there are two more armed villagers outside. Nevertheless, they knock them out and get away.)

[Village]

KRELL [OC]: Guards! Intruders!
KIRK: (to Tyree) Move! Fast! 
(Shots are fired as the three run for their lives out of the village.)

[Sickbay]

(Spock starts gasping for air.) 
SPOCK: Nurse. 
CHAPEL: Yes? 
SPOCK: Hit me. The pain will help me to consciousness. Hit me.
CHAPEL: Hit you? No! I can't 
SPOCK: Blast you, strike me! If I don't regain consciousness soon, it may be too late. Hit me. (she slaps his face) Harder! 
(She does, with tears in her eyes.) 
SPOCK: Again. Continue. The pain will help me to consciousness. 
SCOTT: (running in and dragging her away) What are you doing, woman? 
CHAPEL: Leave me alone! 
SCOTT: Have you gone daft? 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock needs me! Let go! 
(M'Benga rushes in and helps Spock to sit up before giving him some pretty vicious hits across the face. Scott stares, astonished. Finally Spock grabs M'Benga's arm.) 
SPOCK: That will be quite enough. Thank you, doctor. 
M'BENGA: Please, release her. 
SCOTT: What's this all about? 
SPOCK: She was doing as I requested, Mister Scott. A Vulcan form of self-healing. 
M'BENGA: As you saw, they must wait until the last possible moment then fight their way back to consciousness. 
CHAPEL: Here, let me help you, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Thank you, nurse. I'm quite fully recovered. 
CHAPEL: Yes, I see you are.

[Tyree's camp]

(Just slightly away from the tents, Kirk is giving a rifle shooting lesson.) 
KIRK: Men, this is the pan. This is the hammer. The hammer striking the pan causes a spark, ignites the powder, and fires the flintlock. Now aim it as I showed you. Hold your breath and squeeze the trigger gently. (Tyree shoots the clay pot target) Well done. Very, very, very good. 
MCCOY: Jim, I want to talk to you. 
KIRK: Not here, Bones. In the cave. Yutan, your turn.

[Cave]

MCCOY: Do I have to say it? It's not bad enough there's one serpent in Eden teaching one side about gun powder. You want to make sure they all know about it! 
KIRK: Exactly. Each side receives the same knowledge and the same type of firearm. 
MCCOY: Have you gone out of your mind? Yes, maybe you have. Tyree's wife, she said there was something in that root. She said now you can refuse her nothing. 
KIRK: Superstition. 
MCCOY: Is it a coincidence this is exactly what she wants? 
KIRK: Is it? She wants superior weapons. That's the one thing neither side can have. Bones. Bones, the normal development of this planet was the status quo between the hill people and the villagers. The Klingons changed that with the flintlocks. If this planet is to develop the way it should, we must equalize both sides again. 
MCCOY: Jim, that means you're condemning this whole planet to a war that may never end. It could go on for year after year, massacre after massacre. 
KIRK: All right, Doctor! All right. Say I'm wrong. Say I'm drugged. Say the woman drugged me. What is your sober, sensible solution to all this? 
MCCOY: I don't have a solution. But furnishing them firearms is certainly not the answer. 
KIRK: Bones, do you remember the twentieth century brush wars on the Asian continent? Two giant powers involved, much like the Klingons and ourselves. Neither side felt could pull out. 
MCCOY: Yes, I remember. It went on bloody year after bloody year. 
KIRK: What would you have suggested, that one side arm its friends with an overpowering weapon? Mankind would never have lived to travel space if they had. No. The only solution is what happened back then. Balance of power. 
MCCOY: And if the Klingons give their side even more? 
KIRK: Then we arm our side with exactly that much more. A balance of power. The trickiest, most difficult, dirtiest game of them all, but the only one that preserves both sides. 
MCCOY: And what about your friend Tyree? Will he understand this balance of power? 
KIRK: No. Probably not. But I'm going to have to try and make him understand. I never had a more difficult task. 
MCCOY: Well, Jim, here's another morsel of agony for you. Since Tyree won't fight, he will be one of the first to die. 
KIRK: Well, war isn't a good life, but it's life. His wife is the only way to reach him. If I tell her we're going to supply guns, maybe she'll convince him.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Position, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Entering distant orbit, sir. Approaching rendezvous time. 
SPOCK: The Klingons? 
CHEKOV: They haven't spotted us yet, sir. Looks like they're beaming someone aboard. 
SPOCK: Stand by to signal the captain. 
UHURA: Aye, sir.

[Countryside]

(Kirk finds Nona near a stream which is running over a rock. She has been bathing. KIRK: Nona. Pardon me. 
NONA: You are here because I wished you here. 
KIRK: Oh? I thought it was my idea. 
NONA: Yes. They always believe they come of free will. Tyree thought the same when I cast my first spell on him. 
KIRK: Nona 
NONA: Can you smell this fragrance? Some find it pleasing. 
(It is the same planet that she used on Tyree.) 
KIRK: I'd like to talk to you. 
NONA: Again. Some find it soothing. Yes. 
KIRK: I would like 
NONA: Happy. Yes. You feel good. 
(Tyree overhears her, and he is carrying a gun.) 
KIRK: I feel dizzy. Yes, you are lovely. You're beautiful. 
(Tyree takes aim.) 
NONA: Kiss me. 
(Kirk gives in, but Tyree cannot bring himself to squeeze the trigger. He throws the gun down in disgust and runs. Nona and Kirk are interrupted by the shriek of a mugato. Kirk is so besotted that Nona has difficulty getting out of his embrace and trying to escape. Eventually Kirk thinks to draw his phaser and kill the attacking creature. She decides to hit him over the head to get the phaser for herself.)

[Tyree's camp]

(Tyree returns.) 
MCCOY: Where's Captain Kirk? Tyree, the firestick. Where is it? 
TYREE: There! I left it there. 
MCCOY: That's a fine thing to leave lying around. Show us where it is.

[Countryside]

(Nona has just left when McCoy, Tyree and Yutan arrive. Yutan picks up the rifle.) 
TYREE: I do not want it. 
MCCOY: Jim? Jim. Who hit you? 
KIRK: Nona.

[Hillside]

(Nona greets a band of villagers.) 
NONA: I bring you victory for Apella! 
) MAN 1: Tyree's woman. 
MAN 2: She's a Kahn-ut-tu. 
MAN 1: We won't trust this division to Apella. 
NONA: Take me to him. He will have the strength to use this new weapon. 
(Villager number one grabs Nona, and she slaps him off.) 
NONA: Touch me again, and this small box will kill you. 
(They don't believe her, and all four men struggle with her.

[Countryside]

(McCoy is about to give Kirk an injection to go with the headache pills.) 
KIRK: No, no. I'm all right. My phaser. She took it.

[Hillside]

NONA: This weapon I bring you is far greater than your firesticks. 
(Still, all the men want is to have their wicked way with her, and she screams. Kirk, Tyree and McCoy come running over the brow.) 
TYREE: Nona! 
MAN 4: Hill people! 
MAN 1: It's a trap. The woman's tricked us. 
(He stabs her. Another man shoots McCoy in the arm. Yutan fires back, then there is a good old-fashioned hand-to-hand struggle. Tyree smashes one man's head repeatedly with a large rock, until Kirk stops him. He goes to his wife.) 
MCCOY: She's dead. 
(Tyree picks up a rifle.) 
TYREE: I want more of these, Kirk. Many more! Yutan, two of those who killed my wife have escaped. Track them down. I will kill them. 
(McCoy finds the phaser in the dirt nearby.) 
MCCOY: Here. 
KIRK: Tomorrow in the palm of her hands. 
MCCOY: Well, you got what you wanted. 
KIRK: Not what I wanted, Bones. What had to be. (McCoy hands him a communicator from his bag) Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC] Spock, Captain. I trust all has gone well. 
MCCOY: Spock, are you alive?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: An illogical question, Doctor, since obviously you are hearing my voice.

[Hillside]

MCCOY: Well, I don't know why I was worried. You can't kill a computer. 
KIRK: Spock, ask Scotty how long it would take him to reproduce a hundred flintlocks.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: (losing his grin) I didn't get that exactly, Captain. A hundred what?

[Hillside]

KIRK: A hundred serpents. Serpents for the Garden of Eden. We're very tired, Mister Spock. Beam us up home.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


KIRK: You say your people built all this. Who are you? What planet are you from?
CARETAKER: My impression is that your race is not yet ready to understand us, Captain.
SPOCK: I tend to agree.
(a communicator beeps) 
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: This is the bridge, Captain. Our power systems have just come back in. Do you require assistance?
KIRK: No, everything is in order, Lieutenant. Stand by.
CARETAKER: However. 
UHURA [OC]: Aye, aye, sir.
CARETAKER: If you would use the proper caution, this amusement planet of ours could be an ideal place for your people to enjoy themselves, if you wish.
MCCOY: It's what the doctor ordered, Jim.
KIRK: Lieutenant. 
UHURA [OC]: Sir?
KIRK: Commence transporting shore leave parties. Tell them to prepare for the best shore leave they've ever had. Kirk out.
SPOCK: (handing the girl over to Sulu) Captain, I'll go back aboard ship and take over. With all due respect to the young lady, I've already had as much shore leave as I care for.
KIRK: No, Mister Spock. I'll go. You. (then he sees Ruth walking towards the group) On the other hand, I'll stay for a day or two.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Did you enjoy your rest, gentlemen?
KIRK: Yes, we did, Mister Spock. I think we did.
MCCOY: Indeed we did, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Most illogical.
KIRK: Ahead warp factor one, Mister Sulu.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Balance of Terror
Stardate: 1709.2
Original Airdate: 15 Dec, 1966

[Ship's Chapel]
SCOTT: The ceremony will be carried on all viewing screens, sir. 
KIRK: Good. 
MCCOY: There was a call for you from the Bridge. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Still no answer from Earth Outpost number two, Captain, and now number three's gone silent. 
KIRK: Maintain course to outpost four. Keep me informed. Kirk out. 
(At the door, a young lady in gold uniform and a pretty head-dress takes Scott's arm and is escorted into the room, to the strains of 'Here Comes The Bride'. Kirk goes to the rostrum.) 
KIRK: Since the days of the first wooden vessels, all shipmasters have had one happy privilege. That of uniting two people in the bonds of matrimony. We are gathered here today with you, Angela Martine, and you, Robert Tomlinson, in the sight of your fellows, in accordance with our laws and our many beliefs so that you may pledge your 
SULU [OC]: Alert! Alert! All decks alert! Alert! Alert! Captain to the Bridge. All decks alert. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Earth Outpost four reports they're under attack. A space vessel, identity unknown. 
KIRK: Full ahead. All decks, condition red.

[Corridor]

SULU [OC]: All decks, condition red. All decks, condition red.

Captain's Log, stardate 1709.2. Patrolling outposts guarding the neutral zone between planets Romulus and Remus and the rest of the galaxy, received emergency call from outpost 4. The U.S.S. Enterprise is moving to investigate and assist.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Outpost 4 reported under attack, sir. Then message terminates. 
SPOCK: Verified, Captain. 
SULU: Our speed is now maximum, sir. 
STILES: Position, eight minutes from Outpost four at this velocity, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty. 
SCOTT: I've talked to my engine room, sir. We'll get more speed out of her. 
KIRK: Did Outpost 4 give anything at all on the attacking vessel, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: No identification, sir. 
STILES: There can't be much doubt who's attacking, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, put this star sector on our screen. Now show our position. Signal this to all decks, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: All decks standing by, sir.

[Corridor]

KIRK [OC]: This is the Captain speaking. In our next action, we can risk neither miscalculation nor error

[Bridge]

KIRK: By any man aboard. Listen carefully. Science Officer. 
SPOCK: Referring to the map on your screens, you will note beyond the moving position of our vessel, a line of Earth outpost stations. Constructed on asteroids, they monitor the Neutral Zone established by treaty after the Earth-Romulan conflict a century ago.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK [OC]: As you may recall from your histories, this conflict was fought,

[Engineering]

SPOCK [OC]: By our standards today, with primitive atomic weapons and in primitive space vessels

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Which allowed no quarter, no captives. Nor was there even ship-to-ship visual communication. Therefore, no human, Romulan, or ally has ever seen the other. Earth believes the Romulans to be warlike, cruel, treacherous, and only the Romulans know what they think of Earth. The treaty, set by sub-space radio, established this Neutral Zone, entry into which by either side, would constitute an act of war. The treaty has been unbroken since that time. Captain. 
KIRK: What you do not know and must be told is that my command orders on this subject are precise and inviolable. No act, no provocation

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Will be considered sufficient reason to violate the zone. We may defend ourselves,

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: But if necessary to avoid interspace war,

[Bridge]

KIRK: Both these outposts and this vessel will be considered expendable. Captain out. 
STILES: We know Outpost four has been attacked, sir, so if we intercept Romulans now 
KIRK: After a whole century, what will a Romulan ship look like, Mister Stiles? I doubt they'll radio and identify themselves. 
STILES: You'll know, sir. They're painted like a giant bird-of-prey. 
KIRK: I had no idea that history was your specialty. 
STILES: Family history. There was a Captain Stiles was in the space service then. Two Commanders and several junior officers. All lost in that war, sir. 
KIRK: Their war, Mister Stiles. Not yours. Don't forget it. 
STILES: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Outpost two coming into sensor range, Captain. 
KIRK: Outpost 2 was the first to go silent, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Yes, Captain, then Outpost three an hour later. 
SPOCK: Sweeping the area of Outpost two. Sensor reading indefinite. Double-checking Outpost three. I read dust and debris. Both Earth outposts gone, and the asteroids they were constructed on, pulverised. 
KIRK: Open a channel to our nearest command base. Quarter hour reports on our position and status. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Call battle stations, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Battle stations. All hands to battle stations. Battle stations. Battle stations. All decks acknowledge. All decks acknowledge, sir. All stations show green. 
KIRK: Energise main phasers, Mister Styles. All weapons to full power. 
STILES: All weapons to full power. Phaser control room.

[Phaser Control]

STILES [OC]: Energise. Acknowledge. 
ANGELA: (the bride) Phaser control acknowledging. All weapons energising to full. 
ROBERT: (the groom) Happy wedding day, almost. 
ANGELA: You won't get off my hook this easily. I'm going to marry you, Mister, battle or phaser weapons notwithstanding. 
ROBERT: Well, meanwhile, temporarily at least, I am still your superior officer. So get with it, Mister. 
TEC 1: Port weapons show ready. 
TEC 2: Starboard and midship weapons show ready. 
ANGELA: Acknowledge. All weapons batteries ready.

[Bridge]

STILES: Outpost four now five minutes away, sir. 
SPOCK: And showing on my sensors, Captain. At least it's still there. 
UHURA: Sir, regaining contact with Outpost four. Switching to speakers. 
HANSEN [OC]: Outpost four. Do you read me, Enterprise? This is Commander Hansen. 
KIRK: Kirk here. We're minutes away, Hansen. What's your status? 
HANSEN [OC]: Outposts two, three, and eight are gone. Unknown weapon. Completely destroyed, even though we were alerted. Had our deflector shield on maximum. Hit by enormous power. First attack blew our deflector shield. If they hit us again with our deflector shield gone. Do you read me, Enterprise? 
KIRK: Confirm what hit you, Hansen. What vessel? Identity? 
HANSEN [OC]: Space vessel, only glimpse of. 
KIRK: Can you locate the intruder for us? 
HANSEN [OC]: Negative. It seems to have disappeared somehow. I have you on my screen now. Switching to visual. 
KIRK: Tie us in. 
UHURA: Tied in, sir. 
(The viewscreen shows a man in a wrecked room, surrounded by fires) 
HANSEN [on viewscreen]: Enterprise, can you see it? My command post here. We're a mile deep on an asteroid. Almost solid iron. And even through our deflectors, it did this. Can you see? 
KIRK: Affirmative. You're visual, Hansen. What do you have on the intruder? 
HANSEN [on viewscreen]: No identification. No answer to our challenge. Only a glimpse of it. Then they fired something at us, some form of high-energy plasma. Fantastic power. And then the whole vessel disappeared. But it's out there somewhere. Our sensors show that much. Enterprise, something coming on our viewing screen, coming at us fast. 
KIRK: Lock us onto your screen. 
HANSEN [on viewscreen]: Switching. Can you see it, Enterprise? Can you see it? It's becoming visible in the centre of my screen. 
(A ship appears from nowhere on the screen) 
KIRK: Do you have phaser capacity? We're still out of range. 
HANSEN: Negative. Phasers gone. Weapons crew dead. 
KIRK: Make a challenge. Warn that ship off. 
UHURA: Trying to, sir. They don't acknowledge. 
(The alien ship fires a big red plasma ball, and the viewscreen switches to Hansen as the outpost is hit, then just bright light. Back to the attacking ship, which then vanishes.) 
SPOCK: Outpost four disintegrated, Captain. 
KIRK: Position of the intruder, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Disappeared. Interesting how they became visible for just a moment. 
KIRK: When they opened fire. Perhaps necessary when they use their weapon. SPOCK: I have a blip on the motion sensor. Could be the intruder. 
KIRK: Go to full magnification. 
SULU: Screen is on full mag, sir. 
KIRK: I don't see anything. I can't understand it. 
SPOCK: Invisibility is theoretically possible, Captain, with selective bending of light. But the power cost is enormous. 
They may have solved that problem. 
UHURA: Continuing to challenge, sir. Still no response. 
KIRK: Discontinue. Contact remaining outposts. Have them signal us any sightings or sensor readings in their area. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Blip has changed its heading. And in a very leisurely manoeuvre. They may not be aware of us. 
KIRK: Their invisibility screen may work both ways. With that kind of power consumption, they may not be able to see us. 
SPOCK: His heading is now one eleven mark fourteen. The exact heading a Romulan would take, Jim, for the Neutral Zone and home. 
KIRK: Parallel course. 
STILES: Don't you mean interception course, sir? 
KIRK: Negative. You and Mister Sulu will match its course and speed with the object on our sensors exactly, move for move. If he has sensors, I want him to think we're a reflection, an echo. Under no circumstances are you to cross into the Neutral Zone without my direct orders. 
SULU: Acknowledged, sir. 
KIRK: Cancel battle stations. All decks, standby alert. 
SULU: Cancel battle stations. 
STILES: Captain, may I respectfully remind the Captain what has happened? The Romulans have crossed the Neutral Zone, attacked our outposts, killed our men. 
KIRK: Mister Stiles. 
STILES: Add to that the fact it was a sneak attack. 
KIRK: Mister Stiles, are you questioning my orders? 
STILES: Negative, sir. I'm pointing our that we could have Romulan spies aboard this ship. 
SULU: I agree, sir. Respectfully recommend all decks maintain security alert. 
KIRK: Very well. All decks, security alert. 
SULU: Security alert, sir. 
UHURA: Picking up communication. It's from their ship. 
KIRK: Pipe it in. 
UHURA: Sounds like code, sir. 
SPOCK: I have a fix on it, Captain. I believe I can lock on it, get a picture of their Bridge. 
KIRK: Put it on the screen. 
(Up shimmers an image of a group of four humanoids around a console. One leaves his post and salutes the figure with his back to us. That figure then turns, and we see someone who looks just like - a Vulcan. Both Spock's eyebrows hit the ceiling. There's a long silence and a lot of stares.) KIRK: Decoding? 
UHURA: Cryptography is working on it, sir. 
STILES: Give it to Spock. 
KIRK: I didn't quite get that, Mister Stiles. 
STILES: Nothing, sir. 
KIRK: Repeat it. 
STILES: I was suggesting that Mister Spock could probably translate it for you, sir. 
KIRK: I assume you're complimenting Mister Spock on his ability to decode. 
STILES: I'm not sure, sir. 
KIRK: Well, here's one thing you can be sure of, Mister. Leave any bigotry in your quarters. There's no room for it on the Bridge. Do I make myself clear? 
STILES: You do, sir. 
UHURA: Transmission has been cut off. (to Spock) I made a tape of it, sir. 
SPOCK: Very well. (runs the tape through his computer) 
SULU: Something visual ahead, Captain, at extreme range. He's changing course, sir. 
KIRK: Stay with him, helm. 
SULU: Turning, sir.

[Romulan ship]

(We're given a lovely shot of the bird painted on it's belly) 
COMMANDER: We grow visible. Attend the cloaking system. 
ROMULAN: It consumes much power, Commander. With no enemy to concern us. 
COMMANDER: That Earth outpost called to an Earth vessel. Now it follows us. 
ROMULAN: Which neither retreats nor grows nearer. It turns as we turn. Commander, it is our judgment we run from a reflection. 
COMMANDER: Perhaps so, but my judgment prevails. 
ROMULAN: Cloaking system on, sir. 
COMMANDER: It is good we approach the Neutral Zone. Not too soon for me to see the stars of home. I know they are following. 
CENTURION: (an older man) If an Earth ship, why does he not attack? 
COMMANDER: First study the enemy, seek weakness. If I were their commander, that is what I would do. 
DECIUS: My Commander sent for Decius. 
COMMANDER: A message was dispatched. You've broken the rule of silence. 
DECIUS: Only in code, Commander. To inform our Praetor of this glorious mission. 
COMMANDER: Your carelessness might have ended this glorious mission. You're reduced two steps in rank. Return to post. 
CENTURION: Take care, Commander. He has friends, and friends of his kind mean power. And power is danger. 
COMMANDER: Danger and I are old companions. 
CENTURION: We've seen a hundred campaigns together, and still I do not understand you. 
COMMANDER: I think you do. No need to tell you what happens when we reach home with proof of the Earthmen's weakness. And we will have proof. The Earth commander will follow. He must. When he attacks, we will destroy him. Our gift to the homeland, another war. 
CENTURION: If we are the strong, isn't this the signal for war? 
COMMANDER: Must it always be so? How many comrades have we lost in this way? 
CENTURION: Our portion, Commander, is obedience. 
COMMANDER: Obedience. Duty. Death and more death. Soon even enough for the Praetor's taste. Centurion, I find myself wishing for destruction before we can return. Worry not. Like you, I am too well-trained in my duty to permit it. Continue evasive manoeuvres. Now, back to the first course.

[Bridge]

SULU: They're turning, sir. We're staying with them. 
SPOCK: Steady on one eleven mark fourteen. Back on their original course, Captain, toward the Neutral Zone. 
KIRK: What's our position, navigator? 
STILES: We'll enter the Neutral Zone in less than an hour, sir. Assuming, of course, that we don't turn back. 
SCOTT [OC]: We now have aboard debris from Outpost four, Captain. 
KIRK: Bring it to the briefing room. Are you ready, gentlemen?

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: From the outpost's protective shield. Cast rodinium. This is the hardest substance known to our science. 
(He crushes it with his hand) 
SPOCK: Lab theorises an enveloping energy plasma forcing an implosion. 
KIRK: Comments? 
SPOCK: Obviously, their weaponry is superior to ours, and they have a practical invisibility screen. 
MCCOY: You're discussing tactics. Do you realise what this really comes down to? Millions and millions of lives hanging on what this vessel does. 
SPOCK: Or on what this vessel fails to do, Doctor. 
KIRK: Yes, well gentlemen, the question still remains. Can we engage them with a reasonable possibility of victory? 
SCOTT: No question. Their power is simple impulse. 
KIRK: Meaning we can outrun them? 
STILES: To be used in chasing them or retreating, sir? 
KIRK: Go ahead, Mister Styles. I called this session for opinions. 
STILES: We have to attack immediately. 
KIRK: Explain. 
STILES: They're still on our side of the Neutral Zone. There would be no doubt they broke the treaty. 
SULU: Attack, without a visible target? How do we aim our phasers? 
STILES: Aim with sensors. Not accurate, but if we blanket them 
SULU: And hope for a lucky shot before they zero in on us? 
STILES: And if we don't? Once back, they'll report that we saw their weapons and ran. 
SULU: And if they could report they destroyed us? 
STILES: These are Romulans! You run away from them and you guarantee war. They'll be back. Not just one ship but with everything they've got. You know that, Mister Science Officer. You've the expert on these people, always left out that one point. Why? I'm very interested in why. 
KIRK: Sit down, Mister. 
SPOCK: I agree. Attack. 
KIRK: Are you suggesting we fight to prevent a fight? 
MCCOY: Based on what? Memories of a war over a century ago? On theories about a people we've never even met face to face? 
STILES: We know what they look like. 
SPOCK: Yes, indeed we do, Mister Stiles. And if Romulans are an offshoot of my Vulcan blood, and I think this likely, then attack becomes even more imperative. 
MCCOY: War is never imperative, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: It is for them, Doctor. Vulcan, like Earth, had its aggressive colonising period. Savage, even by Earth standards. And if Romulans retain this martial philosophy, then weakness is something we dare not show. 
SPOCK: Do you want a galactic war on your conscience? 
KIRK: Captain to Bridge. 
UHURA [OC]: This is Uhura, Captain. 
KIRK: What's our position? 
UHURA [OC]: Course unchanged, sir. Estimating treaty boundary in twenty one minutes. 
KIRK: Are you continuing to broadcast tactical reports? 
UHURA [OC]: Affirmative, Captain. 
KIRK: And at this distance? 
UHURA [OC]: Approximately three hours before receiving a reply to our first message. 
KIRK: Thank you, Lieutenant. Check our course ahead, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: A comet, magnitude seven, dead ahead, and the intruder changing course toward it. 
KIRK: Comet Icarus four. Composition? 
SPOCK: Quite ordinary. An ionised mass, a trail of frozen vapour particles. 
KIRK: And when an object passes through it, even an invisible object? 
SPOCK: It leaves a visible trail. 
KIRK: Our chance, gentlemen. Prepare to attack. All hands, battle stations. I hope we won't need your services, Bones. 
MCCOY: Amen to that. We're taking a big gamble, Jim.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Battle status? 
SULU: All stations manned, Captain. 
STILES: Phaser weapons energised. Set for proximity blast. 
SPOCK: Intruder now bearing directly for comet's tail. 
KIRK: Plot his exact point of entry, Mister Stiles. 
STILES: Computed. On the board, sir. 
KIRK: The moment he begins entering the comet's tail, he becomes visible. End run, gentlemen. We'll swing around the other side and catch him at that moment. 
SULU: Acknowledged, Captain. 
SPOCK: He's maintaining that bearing, Captain. 
KIRK: Let's get him, Mister Sulu.

[Romulan ship]

COMMANDER: How pleasing to the eye it is. Behold a marvel in the darkness. 
CENTURION: You spoke of entrapment. 
COMMANDER: Its many particles will obscure their sensing device, Centurion. 
ROMULAN: We enter it, Commander. 
COMMANDER: Once fully obscured, we will turn suddenly back upon our adversary. 
ROMULAN: At last the screen is clear, Commander. 
COMMANDER: Clear? 
ROMULAN: Our reflection no longer follows us. 
COMMANDER: Escape manoeuvre one, quickly!

[Bridge]

SPOCK: We're losing sensor contact, Captain. 
KIRK: Steady as she goes. Phaser crews ready? 
SULU: Phaser crew signal ready, sir. 
KIRK: He'll only be visible for a moment. Stand by. 
SULU: Sir, nothing in 
KIRK: At the last moment he must have guessed our move. Hard to starboard, helm! 
SULU: Hard to starboard. 
KIRK: He did exactly what I would have done. I won't underestimate him again. Now, fire blind. Lay down a pattern. 
STILES: Traverse pattern. All phasers fire.

[Phaser control]

ROBERT: Phaser one, fire. 
CREWMAN: Phaser one, fire. 
(Pulse phaser shots go into the darkness, rocking the Romulan ship) 
ROBERT: Phaser two, fire. 
CREWMAN: Phaser two, fire.

[Romulan ship]

(The Centurion pushes his Commander out of the way of a falling beam) 
COMMANDER: Divert all power to weapons.

[Bridge]

SULU: Phaser overload. Control circuit burnout. 
(Spock goes under his station to put out the flames) 
SPOCK: It'll take time to correct, sir. 
SULU: Captain, are they surrendering? 
(The Romulan ship has become visible) 
KIRK: Full astern! Emergency warp speed! 
(A red plasma blast is heading towards them) 
KIRK: Do we have emergency warp? 
SULU: Full power, sir. It's still overtaking us. If we can get one phaser working, sir, one shot might detonate it. 
KIRK: Navigation? 
STILES: Estimate it'll overtake us in two minutes, sir. 
KIRK: Phasers, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Impossible, Captain. 
KIRK: Feed this to the space recorder and jettison immediately. 
RAND: Captain, should I continue log entry? 
KIRK: Yeoman. Affirmative. Continue log entries. 
RAND: Yes, sir. 
SULU: Ten seconds to impact. Captain, It's dissipating, sir. 
STILES: It must have a range limit. 
(Rand stands as close as humanly possible to Kirk) 
SULU: Five, four, three, two, one. Impact! 
(Everyone gets thrown about a bit) 
KIRK: Limited range. 
SPOCK: Phasers operational, Captain. Intruder bearing one eleven mark fourteen. 
KIRK: Back to his old course. 
SPOCK: He may think we're destroyed, Captain. 
KIRK: I wouldn't make that assumption. I don't think their Captain will either. 
SPOCK: Intruder holding steady. Course one eleven mark fourteen. 
KIRK: Same as before, Mister Sulu. Stay with him.

[Romulan ship]

(The Commander tends to his injured friend) 
ROMULAN: Commander, the reflection returns. 
COMMANDER: Activate our cloak. 
ROMULAN: Commander, our fuel runs low. 
COMMANDER: Quickly! 
DECIUS: The Earth vessel? Impossible. 
ROMULAN: It moves as we move. 
COMMANDER: Its commander is not one to repeat a mistake.

[Bridge]

STILES: We'll enter the Neutral Zone in one minute, Captain. 
MCCOY: Do we violate the treaty, Captain? 
SPOCK: They did, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Once inside, they can claim we did. A set-up. They want war, we furnish the provocation. 
SPOCK: We're still on our side, Captain. 
KIRK: Let's get them while we are. Before we enter the Neutral Zone. Full ahead, Mister Sulu. Maximum warp. 
SULU: Ahead, sir. Maximum. 
KIRK: Phasers, stand by. 
STILES: Sir, at this distance? 
KIRK: We know their Achilles heel, Mister Stiles. Their weapon takes all their energy. They must become visible in order to launch it. 
STILES: A phaser hit at this distance would be the wildest stroke of luck. 
KIRK: I'm aware of that, Mister Stiles. Are phasers ready? 
STILES: Phasers show ready, sir.

[Romulan ship]

ROMULAN: Commander! 
COMMANDER: Evasive action. The Earth ship again. 
(They are hit by phaser fire again)

[Bridge]

STILES: Twenty seconds to Neutral Zone, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, inform Command base, In my opinion, no option. On my responsibility, we are proceeding into the Neutral Zone. Steady as we go, Mister Sulu. Continue firing.

[Romulan ship]

DECIUS: Commander, they stay within range. I will tend to the centurion. 
COMMANDER: No need. The Centurion is dead. 
DECIUS: Why don't we fire, Commander? 
COMMANDER: No. No, he's shrewd, this starship commander. He tries to make us waste energy. He has estimated we have only enough. It is time. All debris into disposal tubes. 
DECIUS: Yes, Commander. 
COMMANDER: The body of the Centurion, too. Forgive me, my old friend, but I must use all my experience now to get home.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Motion sensor signal stopped. 
KIRK: Cease fire. 
SULU: Debris scatter ahead, sir. We've hit him. 
SPOCK: Vessel wreckage. Metal moulds, conduit, plastoform and a body, Captain. However. 
KIRK: However? 
SPOCK: Insufficient mass, sir. 
KIRK: What? 
SPOCK: Simple debris. Not a vessel, a trick. 
KIRK: Go to sensor probes. 
SPOCK: Nothing, sir. No motion out there at all. We've lost them, Captain.

Captain's log, Stardate 1709.6. We are at the Neutral Zone. Have lost contact with the intruder. No reaction on our motion sensors but believe the Romulan vessel to be somewhere close by. With all engines and systems shut down, the Enterprise is also playing the silent waiting game in hope of regaining contact.

[Bridge]

(The lights are being dimmed and systems shut down as they rig for silent running) 
SPOCK: Captain, I must make further repairs on the transfer coil. It's giving out again. 
KIRK: All right, Mister Spock, work quietly.

[Romulan ship]

DECIUS: Now twenty full cycles, Commander. Still no sign. I say he's been fooled. He must have gone on. 
COMMANDER: Shh. He is there, somewhere. I feel it.

Captain's log, supplemental. Now motionless for nine hours, forty seven minutes.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Yeoman Rand walks in without knocking, to find the Captain lying on his bed.) 
RAND: Can I get you something from the galley, sir? Coffee, at least? 
KIRK: Thank you, Yeoman. Bring it to the Bridge. I'll be there in a moment. 
RAND: Yes, sir. 
(McCoy walks in unannounced, and Rand leaves.) 
KIRK: I wish I were on a long sea voyage somewhere. Not too much deck tennis, no frantic dancing, and no responsibility. Why me? I look around that Bridge, and I see the men waiting for me to make the next move. And Bones, what if I'm wrong? 
MCCOY: Captain, I 
KIRK: No, I don't really expect an answer. 
MCCOY: But I've got one. Something I seldom say to a customer, Jim. In this galaxy, there's a mathematical probability of three million Earth-type planets. And in all of the universe, three million million galaxies like this. And in all of that, and perhaps more, only one of each of us. Don't destroy the one named Kirk.

[Bridge]

(Spock carefully closes the cover on his repairs, and is reaching up to his station to help himself up when he accidentally touches a button, turning on a system) 
STILES: What? 
KIRK: It's all right. It's all right.

[Romulan ship]

ROMULAN: A signal, Commander. 
COMMANDER: We have him. Move toward him.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Power on. Reverse course. He'll try to slip under us. 
SULU: Lateral power, sir. 
STILES: Coming around, sir. 
KIRK: Phasers, fire. 
STILES: Phasers, fire.

[Romulan ship]

(They are taking damage) 
DECIUS: How, Commander. How? 
COMMANDER: He's a sorcerer, that one. He reads the thoughts in my brain. Our fuel supply all but gone and he stays out of reach. 
DECIUS: We are beaten. Can it be true? The Praetor's finest and proudest flagship beaten. 
COMMANDER: Perhaps we can yet save your Praetor's pride for him. More debris into the tubes. Decius, do we have the old-style nuclear warheads aboard? 
DECIUS: Yes Commander, but only for self-destruction. 
COMMANDER: Place one with the debris. Proximity fuse. 
DECIUS: Yes, Commander. At once.

[Bridge]

SULU: More wreckage, sir, scattering across our path. 
KIRK: Cease fire. 
SPOCK: Debris on our scanners. 
KIRK: Analysis, quickly. 
SPOCK: Same type as before, sir, except, one metal-cased object! 
KIRK: Helm, hard over. Phasers, fire point-blank. 
STILES: Phasers, fire! 
(There's a big explosion, everyone gets thrown across the Bridge. Enterprise hangs crooked and motionless in space.)

[Romulan ship]

DECIUS: Glorious. Glorious. 
COMMANDER: Now we go home. 
DECIUS: They're at our mercy. Commander, I remind you of your duty.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Captain to Sickbay. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy here. 
KIRK: Casualties? 
MCCOY [OC]: Twenty two so far. Mainly radiation burns, mostly from the ship's outer areas. Could have been much, much worse, Captain. 
KIRK: Thank you, Doctor. (the lights come back on) Report, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Nuclear device of some kind, sir. Our phasers detonated it less than one hundred metres away. 
KIRK: Ship damage? 
SPOCK: Mainly overloads and circuit burnouts. 
KIRK: Weapons status? 
SCOTT [OC]: We've only the forward phaser room, Captain. 
KIRK: Fully operable, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Yes, sir. But Specialist Tomlinson is manning it alone. No standby crew available. 
STILES: Sir, my first assignment was in weapons control. 
KIRK: Go. Lieutenant Uhura, take over navigation. 
UHURA: Yes, Captain. 
SPOCK: We have engine power now, Captain, if you'd like to move off and make repairs. 
KIRK: Maybe we can pull them back to our side of the Neutral Zone. Hold our position. Play dead.

[Romulan ship]

DECIUS: Still no sign of movement, Commander. 
COMMANDER: We've damaged ourselves. Our fuel reserve is gone. 
DECIUS: And it is our duty to crush the Praetor's enemies. 
COMMANDER: I do not trust their Captain. 
DECIUS: We are in the Neutral Zone. They will not enter. If you refuse, permit me the glory of the kill, Commander. 
COMMANDER: We will attack, but on my order.

[Phaser control]

SPOCK: Damage reports, Mister Stiles? 
STILES: Negative. 
SPOCK: Will you require assistance here? 
STILES: This time, we'll handle things without your help, Vulcan. 
(Spock leaves. then Stiles notices purple gas escaping from a seal) 
STILES: Tomlinson!

[Bridge]

SULU: Enemy vessel becoming visible, sir. 
KIRK: Forward phasers, stand by. (the Romulan becomes a clear image) Fire! Fire! Stiles, can you hear me? Fire!

[Corridor]

(Spock is walking slowly when he hears the Captain's commands over the intercom) 
KIRK [OC]: Fire! Stiles, can you hear me? Fire! 
(Spock turns and runs back to Phaser Control) 
KIRK [OC]: Fire!

[Phaser Control]

(The room is full of purple smoke) 
KIRK: Stiles, can you hear me? Fire! Stiles! 
(Spock enters just as Stiles tries and fails to reach the firing button. He activates the controls and the phaser pulses hit the Romulan ship)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Sulu, prepare to move in on the Romulan vessel. Ship-to-ship, Uhura. Put this on the screen. 
UHURA: (still at the navigation station) Hailing frequencies open, sir. 
(The viewscreen shows a wrecked room and just the Commander still on his feet) 
KIRK: Captain. Standing by to beam your survivors aboard our ship. Prepare to abandon your vessel. 
COMMANDER [on viewscreen]: No. No, that is not our way. I regret that we meet in this way. You and I are of a kind. In a different reality, I could have called you friend. 
KIRK: What purpose will it serve to die? 
COMMANDER [on viewscreen]: We are creatures of duty, Captain. I have lived my life by it. Just one more duty to perform. 
(He goes to the control console, turns a switch, and the whole ship explodes)

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Are you all right, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, very well, thank you, Captain. 
KIRK: And you, Stiles? 
STILES: I'm alive, sir. But I wouldn't be. Mister Spock pulled me out of the phaser room. He saved my life. He risked his life after I 
SPOCK: I saved a trained navigator so he could return to duty. I am capable of no other feelings in such matters. 
KIRK: How many men did we lose, Bones? 
MCCOY: Only one. Tomlinson. The boy who was getting married this morning. His fiance is at the chapel. 
(Kirk turns to go, and Rand enters) 
RAND: We finally received an answer from Command base, sir. They say they'll support whatever decision you have to make. 
(Kirk leaves)

[Ship's Chapel]

(Angela is kneeling in front of the altarpiece, crying, when Kirk enters. She gets up and hugs him.) 
KIRK: It never makes any sense. We both have to know that there was a reason. 
ANGELA: I'm all right.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Conscience of the King
Stardate: 2817.6 
Original Airdate: 8 Dec, 1966

[Theatre]
(On stage, a velvet-clad arm raises a bloody knife, then plunges it again into his sleeping victim. The audience are rapt.) 
KIRK: Interesting. An Arcturian Macbeth. 
LEIGHTON: (a man with an eyepatch) Watch him. Watch Macbeth. 
LENORE: (as Lady M) Is he dead? Speak. Is King Duncan dead? 
KARIDIAN: Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hands. 
LEIGHTON: That voice. He's back. That man on the stage. I'm certain of it. That's Kodos the Executioner. 
KARIDIAN: Pluck out mine eyes!

Captain's log, star date 2817.6. Starship Enterprise diverted from scheduled course. Purpose, to confirm discover by Doctor Thomas Leighton of an extraordinary new synthetic food which would totally end the threat of famine on Cygnia Minor, a nearby Earth colony.

[Leighton's home]

KIRK: You mean to tell me you've called me three light years off my course just to accuse an actor of being Kodos? 
LEIGHTON: He is Kodos. I'm sure of it. 
KIRK: You said you discovered a new food concentrate. What am I supposed to put in my log, that you lied? That you diverted a starship with false information? You're not only in trouble, you've put me in trouble, too. 
LEIGHTON: I did it to trap Kodos! 
KIRK: Kodos is dead. 
LEIGHTON: Is he? Is anyone sure? A body burned beyond recognition? 
KIRK: Tom, the authorities closed the book on that case years ago. 
LEIGHTON: Then let's reopen it. Jim, four thousand people were butchered. 
KIRK: Martha, you tell him. 
MARTHA: I can't tell him anything, Jim. He's been like this since the company of actors arrived. 
KIRK: Kodos is dead. I'm satisfied of that. 
LEIGHTON: Well, I'm not. I remember him. That voice. The bloody thing he did. 
(He turns his head to reveal it's not just an eyepatch, but a covering over half his face) 
LEIGHTON: Jim, Jim, I need your help. There were only eight or nine of us who actually saw Kodos. I was one, you were another. If he's to be exposed, 
KIRK: He's dead. 
LEIGHTON: Then it will be a ghost Martha and I receive in our home tonight. I invited the entire company to a cocktail party. I have to be sure. 
KIRK: And I have to get back to my ship and figure out how I'm going to enter all this in my log. Tom. Martha.

[Briefing room]

COMPUTER: Library computer. 
KIRK: History files. Subject, former Governor Kodos of Tarsus Four, also known as Kodos the Executioner. After that, background on actor Anton Karidian. 
COMPUTER: Working. Kodos the Executioner, summary. Governor of Tarsus Four twenty Earth years ago. Invoked martial law. Slaughtered fifty percent of population Earth colony, that planet. Burned body found when Earth forces arrived. No positive identification. Case closed. Detailed information follows. On stardate 2794.7, 
KIRK: Stop. Information on Anton Karidian. 
COMPUTER: Director and star of travelling company of actors sponsored by galactic cultural exchange project, touring official installations last nine years. Has daughter, Lenore, nineteen years old, 
KIRK: Stop. Give comparative identification between actor Karidian and Governor Kodos. 
COMPUTER: No identification records available on actor Anton Karidian. 
KIRK: Give information on actor Karidian prior to Kodos' death. 
COMPUTER: No information available, Anton Karidian, prior to twenty years ago 
KIRK: Photograph Kodos. (an image of a red-haired man with a beard comes on the monitor) Photograph Karidian. (the grey-haired man with a small moustache) Now photograph both. 
(Door opens) 
KIRK: Mister Spock. You know Doctor Leighton, don't you? Would you say he's given to fantasy? 
SPOCK: A good empirical research scientist. Steady, reputable, occasionally brilliant. 
KIRK: With a very long memory. 
SPOCK: I have no information on that, Captain. We are ready to leave orbit. 
KIRK: We'll delay departure for a time. I'm beaming back down to the planet.

[Leighton's home]

(The cocktail party is in full swing in the main room, and Martha is bringing another tray of drinks for her guests.)
KIRK: Where's Tom? 
MARTHA: He went to town. He called. He's on his way back. 
(The lovely young blonde Lenore Karidian enters, and Kirk beams) 
KIRK: The others are on the patio. 
LENORE: I take it you're the welcoming committee. (referring to his glass) Is that for me? 
KIRK: Why not? I saw your performance today. May I extend my appreciation? 
LENORE: My father will be delighted, Mister. Mister? 
KIRK: Captain James Kirk, Starship Enterprise. 
LENORE: We are honoured. 
KIRK: I had hoped to meet your father, here, tonight, personally. 
LENORE: I'm sorry, Captain Kirk. He has a rigid rule about that. He never sees anyone personally, and he never attends parties. 
KIRK: An actor turning away his admirers? Very unusual. 
LENORE: Karidian is a most unusual man. You saw Macbeth. That was my father. 
KIRK: Then I'll talk to Lady Macbeth. 
(They sit) 
LENORE: So. Captain of the Enterprise. Interesting. 
KIRK: So, Lady Macbeth. Interesting. What's your next move? 
LENORE: We play two performances at Benecia, if the AstraI Queen can get us there. 
KIRK: She's a good ship. (takes a glass from a passing tray) Thank you. You were very impressive as Lady Macbeth. 
LENORE: Thank you. And as Lenore Karidian? 
KIRK: Very impressive. Lenore. I'd like to see you again. 
LENORE: You mean professionally? 
KIRK: Not necessarily. 
LENORE: I think I'd like that. Unfortunately, we must keep a schedule. 
KIRK: You don't have a schedule now, do you? 
LENORE: You mean leave? But I've only just arrived. 
KIRK; So have I. 
LENORE: And you hate to overstay a welcome. 
KIRK: Exactly. 
LENORE: Why not? 
KIRK: Good. I'll make our apologies to our hostess. I'll meet you outside.

[Countryside]

(Meandering between rocks and scrubby trees, arm in arm) 
KIRK; Tired of walking? 
LENORE: No. Just thinking. 
KIRK: About what? 
LENORE: At the party, you were such a brash young man. 
KIRK; And now? 
LENORE: Now somehow different. Not a ship's Captain with all those people to be strong and confident in front of. You know, you're really very dear, aren't you? In some ways, very lonely. 
(But just as their lips are about to meet, Kirk spots a body among the rocks and goes to investigate) 
KIRK: It's Tom Leighton. He's dead.

[Leighton's home]

(Tom's body is laid out on the couch, and Martha covers it) 
MARTHA: At least he has peace now. He never really had that before. Oh, why was Tom killed if what he suspected wasn't true? 
KIRK: I don't know. I'll try and find out. 
MARTHA: Oh, Jim. How I'll miss him. (bursts into tears and leaves) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge here, Captain. 
KIRK: Put me through to Captain Jon Daily of the AstraI Queen on orbit station, and put it on scramble. 
UHURA [OC]: Captain Daily's on, sir. 
KIRK; Jon? Jim Kirk. 
DAILY [OC]: Hi, Jim. 
KIRK: Can you do me a favour? 
DAILY [OC]: I owe you a dozen. Just ask. 
KIRK: Don't make your pick-up here. 
DAILY [OC]: You mean strand all those actors? 
KIRK: I'll pick them up. And if there's any trouble, it'll be my responsibility. 
DAILY [OC]: Will do. Anything else? 
KIRK: Just keep this between the two of us and accept my thanks. Over and out. Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge here, Captain. 
KIRK: Transporter room, ready to beam up.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Ready to resume course, Captain. 
KIRK: I think we're due for a pick-up. 
SPOCK: What kind? Personnel? Cargo? 
UHURA: Captain? A Miss Karidian has been transported aboard ship. She requests permission to see you. 
KIRK: Tell her to come up to the Bridge, Lieutenant.

[Transporter room]

UHURA [OC]: Escort Miss Karidian to the Bridge.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: How did you know this lady was coming aboard? 
KIRK: I'm the Captain. 
LENORE: Captain Kirk, I didn't think we'd be meeting again so soon. 
KIRK: You probably wouldn't believe me if I told you I arranged it. 
LENORE: No, but it's a delightful thought. Captain, I'm afraid we need your help. We've been stranded. It seems that our transportation has cancelled out on us. 
KIRK: Can't you make other arrangements? 
LENORE: Yes, but not in time. You see, our schedule is like a chain. One break and it all collapses. 
KIRK: It'd be a shame if that happened. 
LENORE: If ever we needed a Good Samaritan. 
KIRK: Well. 
LENORE: I appeal to you. 
(Spock's eyebrow hits the ceiling) 
KIRK: The regulations are very clear about taking on passengers. 
LENORE: I'll make a bargain with you, Captain. 
KIRK: What have you got to trade? 
LENORE: Special performance for the crew in exchange for a lift. 
KIRK: You make it sound very interesting. The crew has been on patrol for a long time. They could use a break in the monotony. 
LENORE: Then you'll do it? 
KIRK: You've got me backed into a corner. The men would never forgive me if I deprived them of your performance, and your presence. 
LENORE: Thank you, Captain. I'm eternally grateful. I'll get the company ready. This means so much to them. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, prepare to leave orbit as soon as the Karidian company is aboard the ship. 
(Lenore and her escort enter the turbolift) 
SPOCK: May I inquire as to our course, Captain? 
KIRK: Benecia Colony. 
SPOCK: Benecia Colony is eight light years off our course. 
KIRK: If my memory needs refreshing, Mister Spock, I'll ask you for it. In the meantime, follow my orders.

Captain's log, stardate 2818.9. There are many questions in my mind, too many, perhaps, about the actor Karidian and his daughter. For personal reasons, I'm almost afraid to learn the answers.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Spock, ETA the Benecia Colony. 
SPOCK: We'll arrive stardate 2825.3, Captain, approximately fifteen hundred Benecia time. 
(Kirk goes over to Spock's station and throws a few switches) 
COMPUTER: Library computer. 
KIRK: Data on question submitted to personnel files. 
COMPUTER: Data being received. Kodos file of all survivors. There are nine actual eye witnesses who can identify Kodos. 
KIRK: Stop. Give list. 
COMPUTER: Kirk, J., presently Enterprise Captain, Leighton, T., Moulton, E., Riley, K., Eames, D., 
KIRK: Stop. Is that star service Lieutenant Kevin Riley? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. Riley, Kevin. Presently assigned U.S.S. Enterprise communications section. 
KIRK: Stop. Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Kevin Riley in communications, I wish to have him transferred down to the engineering decks. 
SPOCK: He came up from engineering, Captain. 
KIRK: I'm sending him back. 
SPOCK: Any explanation? He's a fine young officer. He's bound to consider this transfer a disciplinary action. 
KIRK: I don't wish to discuss it, Mister Spock. Please follow my orders.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Mister Spock, the man on top walks a lonely street. The chain of command is often a noose. 
SPOCK: Spare me your philosophical metaphors, Doctor. The Captain is acting strangely. I'm asking if you've noticed. 
MCCOY: Negative. Did you know this is the first time in a week I've had time for a drop of the true? Would you care for a drink, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: My father's race was spared the dubious benefits of alcohol. 
MCCOY: Now I know why they were conquered. What are you so worried about, anyway? I find Jim generally knows what he's doing. 
KIRK: It was illogical for him to bring those players aboard. 
MCCOY: Illogical? Did you get a look at that Juliet? That's a pretty exciting creature. Of course your, personal chemistry would prevent you from seeing that. Did it ever occur to you that he simply might like the girl? 
SPOCK: It occurred. I dismissed it. 
MCCOY: You would. 
SPOCK: Did you know that he suddenly transferred Lieutenant Riley to engineering? 
MCCOY: Lots of things go on around here that I don't know, Mister Spock. Now, he's the Captain. He can transfer whoever he pleases. You can look that up in a hundred volumes of space regulations somewhere. All right? Come on, have a drink. 
SPOCK: No, thank you. 
MCCOY: You're welcome. But I will. And please, Mister Spock, if you won't join me, don't disapprove of me. At least not until you've tried it, huh?

[Observation deck]

(Lenore is getting a personal tour of the ship) 
KIRK: This is the observation deck. That's the flight deck down there with the shuttle craft. 
LENORE: Interesting. 
KIRK: Isn't it? 
LENORE: Tell me, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Anything. 
LENORE: Did you order the soft lights especially for the occasion? 
KIRK: If I had ordered soft lights, I'd also have arranged for music and flowers. Unfortunately, it isn't so. On the Enterprise, we try to duplicate earth conditions of night and day as closely as possible. 
LENORE: Star light, star bright. I wish I may, I wish I might. Do you remember that, Captain? 
KIRK: It's very old. 
LENORE: Almost as old as the stars themselves. And this ship. All this power, surging and throbbing, yet under control. Are you like that, Captain? All this power at your command, yet the decisions that you have to make 
KIRK: Come from a very human source. 
LENORE: Are you, Captain? Human? 
KIRK: You can count on it. 
LENORE: Tell me about the women in your world, Captain. 
KIRK: I'd rather talk about you. You must have wanted to perform since you first saw your father act. When was that? 
LENORE: In the beginning. 
KIRK: Tell me about it. 
LENORE: That's not fair. You haven't answered my question about the women. 
KIRK: What would you like to know? 
LENORE: Has the machine changed them? Made them just people instead of women? 
KIRK: Worlds may change, galaxies disintegrate, but a woman always remains a woman. 
LENORE: All this and power too. The Caesar of the stars and the Cleopatra to worship him. 
(Finally, a passionate embrace)

[Bridge]

(Spock is on duty, and thinking) 
COMPUTER: Library computer. 
SPOCK: Full personal dossiers on the following names. Doctor Thomas Leighton, Anton Karidian, Lieutenant Kevin Riley, and Captain James T. Kirk. 
COMPUTER: Accomplished. Standing by. 
SPOCK: Correlate. Check their past histories. Report any item, any past episode or experience they all have in common. 
COMPUTER: Affirmative.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: I appreciate whatever concern you may have for the ship's company, Mister Spock, 
SPOCK: I will continue, Doctor. According to our library banks, it started on the Earth colony of Tarsus Four, when the food supply was attacked by an exotic fungus and largely destroyed. There were over eight thousand colonists and virtually no food. And that was when Governor Kodos seized full power and declared emergency martial law. 
MCCOY: I've heard of it. 
SPOCK: You may not have heard it all. Kodos began to separate the colonists. Some would live, be rationed whatever food was left. The remainder would be immediately put to death. Apparently he had his own theories of eugenics. 
MCCOY: Unfortunately, he wasn't the first. 
SPOCK: Perhaps not. But he was certainly among the most ruthless, to decide arbitrarily who would survive and who would not, using his own personal standards, and then to implement his decision without mercy. Children watching their parents die. Whole families destroyed. Over four thousand people. They died quickly, without pain, but they died. Relief arrived, but too late to prevent the executions. And Kodos? There never was a positive identification of his body. 
MCCOY: What has Karidian to do with it? 
SPOCK: His history begins almost to the day where Kodos disappeared. 
MCCOY: You think Jim suspects he's Kodos? 
SPOCK: He'd better. There were nine eye witnesses who survived the massacre, who'd actually seen Kodos with their own eyes. Jim Kirk was one of them. With the exception of Riley and Captain Kirk, every other eye witness is dead. And my library computer shows that wherever they were, on Earth, on a colony, or aboard ship, the Karidian Company of Players was somewhere near when they died. 
MCCOY: It's unbelievable.

[Engineering]

(There's just one officer on duty, and he hasn't touched the meal lying on a plate nearby) 
RILEY: Hey. Rec room. Somebody.

[Rec room]

RILEY [OC]: Talk to me. 
MATSON: Larry Matson here. Is that you, Riley?

[Engineering]

MATSON [OC]: What's up? 
RILEY: Not me. I am down. In the engineering room. 
MATSON [OC]: You've been a bad boy. 
RILEY: Maybe so. Whatever I've done, they're sure keeping it a secret from me.

[Rec room]

RILEY [OC]: Hey. Is that Uhura playing? Let me talk to her. 
MATSON: I think his heart is sore. 
UHURA: What can I do for you, Riley?

[Engineering]

RILEY: A song. Make it a love song. Just something to reassure me I'm not the only living thing left in the universe, huh?

[Rec room]

UHURA: Well, you're not, and I'll prove it to you. 
(sings) The skies are green and glowing

[Engineering]

UHURA [OC]: Where my heart is 
Where my heart is 
Where the scented lunar flower is growing 
Somewhere beyond the stars 
Beyond Antares. 
(As Riley listens, we see a shadow moving)

[Rec room]

UHURA: I'll be back, though it takes forever 
Forever is just a day 
Forever is just another journey

{Engineering]

UHURA [OC]: Tomorrow a stop along the way 
(Something gets squirted into Riley's milk) 
UHURA [OC]: Then let the years go fading

[Rec room]

UHURA: Where my heart is

[Engineering]

(Riley reaches for his tray) 
UHURA [OC]: Where my heart is 
Where my love eternal is waiting' 
Somewhere beyond the stars 
Beyond Antares. 
(He drinks)

[Rec room]

UHURA: How'd you like that, Riley?

[Engineering]

(But Riley is sweating and choking) 
RILEY: Help me, please. 
(He collapses)

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: You've got to pull him through. 
MCCOY: I'm not sure I can. 
SPOCK: If he dies, the only one who'll be able to identify Kodos is the Captain. And he'll be the next target.

Captain's log, stardate 2819.1. Ship's officer Riley's condition worsening. Doctor McCoy making lab analysis to determine cause and antidote. Entire crew deeply concerned.

[McCoy's office]

MCCOY: As of this date, lab report indicates presence of appreciable amount of tetralubisol, a highly volatile lubricant in use aboard ship. 
SPOCK: Someone tried to poison him. 
MCCOY: Tetralubisol us a milky substance. Someone could have gotten careless, made a mistake. 
SPOCK: I don't believe that and neither do you. I want the Captain to see that report. 
MCCOY: When I've finished logging it. 
SPOCK: Now.

[Captain's quarters]

KIRK: Come. 
MCCOY: My report on Lieutenant Riley. 
KIRK: Will he make it? 
MCCOY: He's got a good chance. 
SPOCK: Can we predict the same for you, Captain? 
KIRK: All right, Mister Spock. Let's have it. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant Riley was a witness. So were you. 
KIRK: All right. 
SPOCK: Someone tried to kill him. 
MCCOY: Could have been an accident. 
SPOCK: You should be told the difference between empiricism and stubbornness, Doctor. I checked with the library computer, just as you did. I got the same information. 
KIRK: Aren't you getting a little out of line, Mister Spock? My personal business, 
SPOCK: Is my personal business when it might interfere with the smooth operation of this ship. 
KIRK: You think that happened? 
SPOCK: It could happen. 
KIRK: I don't like anyone meddling in my private affairs. Not even my second in command. 
MCCOY: Jim, Spock's simply trying, 
KIRK: I know what he's doing, and I don't like it. 
MCCOY: It's his job, and you know it. 
KIRK: And you also know that nothing is proven. 
SPOCK: Even in this corner of the galaxy, Captain, two plus two equals four. Almost certainly an attempt will be made to kill you. Why do you invite death? 
KIRK: I'm not. I'm interested in justice. 
MCCOY: Are you? Are you sure it's not vengeance? 
KIRK: No, I'm not sure. I wish I was. I've done things I've never done before. I've placed my command in jeopardy. From here on I've got to determine whether or not Karidian is Kodos. 
SPOCK: He is. 
KIRK: You sound certain. I wish I could be. Before I accuse a man of that, I've got to be. I saw him once, twenty years ago. Men change. Memory changes. Look at him now, he's an actor. He can change his appearance. No. Logic is not enough. I've got to feel my way, make absolutely sure. 
MCCOY: What if you decide he is Kodos? What then? Do you play God, carry his head through the corridors in triumph? That won't bring back the dead, Jim. 
KIRK: No, but they may rest easier. 
(A scene break, during which McCoy apparently leaves) 
SPOCK: Logic, Captain. Doctor Leighton was murdered while the Karidian Company was on Planet Q. Now an attempt has been made against Riley while the company is on board the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Doc isn't sure it was a murder attempt. Besides, I have an idea may prove 
SPOCK: Shh. Listen. Do you hear it? That low hum. 
KIRK: A phaser. 
SPOCK: On overload. (starts searching) 
KIRK: This is the Captain. There's a phaser on overload in my quarters. If it blows, it'll take out the entire deck. Evacuate all personnel in this quadrant. Double Red Alert. (now starts searching himself) You get out of here. 
SPOCK: You can't stay. 
KIRK: Go on. Block off this section. Hurry. I'll find it.

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Evacuate this section. Seal it off. Clear section C4 and C5. 
(In Kirk's quarters the noise gets louder, and finally he sees the phaser silhouetted against the Red Alert light high in a bulkhead. He gets it, dashes into the corridor and drops it into a convenient pressure waste disposal unit directly opposite. Spock returns in time for the bang that throws them against the opposite wall)

[Karidian's quarters]

KIRK: (barging in without knocking) We're overdue for our talk, aren't we? 
KARIDIAN: I hoped you would have respected my privacy, Captain. 
KIRK: A moment ago, we narrowly averted an explosion which would have destroyed several decks of this ship. Before that, someone tried to poison one of my crewmen. 
KARIDIAN: I am sorry to hear that. 
KIRK: I'm sure you are. Are you Kodos? I asked you a question. 
KARIDIAN: Do you believe that I am? 
KIRK: I do. 
KARIDIAN: Then I am Kodos, if it pleases you to believe so. I am an actor. I play many parts. 
KIRK: You're an actor now. What were you twenty years ago? 
KARIDIAN: Younger, Captain. Much younger. 
KIRK: So was I. But I remember. Let's see if you do. Read this into that communicator on the wall. It will be recorded and compared to a piece of Kodos' voice film we have in our files. The test is virtually infallible. It will tell us whether you're Karidian, or Kodos the Executioner. (switches on comm.) Ready for voice test. Disguising your voice will make no difference. 
KARIDIAN: (reading) The revolution is successful, but survival depends on drastic measures. Your continued existence represents a threat to the well-being of society. (stops looking at the paper) Your lives means slow death to the more valued members of the colony. Therefore I have no alternative but to sentence you to death. Your execution is so ordered. Signed, Kodos, governor of Tarsus Four. 
KIRK: I remember the words. I wrote them down. You said them like you knew them. You hardly glanced at the paper. 
KARIDIAN: I learn my parts very quickly. 
KIRK: Are you sure? Are you sure you didn't act this role out in front of a captive audience whom you blasted out of existence without mercy? 
KARIDIAN: I find your use of the word mercy strangely inappropriate, Captain. Here you stand, the perfect symbol of our technical society. Mechanised, electronicised, and not very human. You've done away with humanity, the striving of man to achieve greatness through his own resources. 
KIRK: We've armed man with tools. The striving for greatness continues. But Kodos 
KARIDIAN: Kodos, whoever he was 
KIRK: Or is. 
KARIDIAN: Or is. Kodos made a decision of life and death. Some had to die that others might live. You're a man of decision, Captain. You ought to understand that. 
KIRK: All I understand is that four thousand people were needlessly butchered. 
KARIDIAN: In order to save four thousand others. And if the supply ships hadn't come earlier than expected, this Kodos of yours might have gone down in history as a great hero. 
KIRK: But he didn't. And history has made its judgment. 
KARIDIAN: If you're so sure that I'm Kodos, why not kill me now? Let bloody vengeance take its final course! And see what difference it makes to this universe of yours. 
KIRK: Those beautiful words, well acted, change nothing. 
KARIDIAN: I suppose not. They're merely tools, like this ship of yours. 
KIRK: There are no previous records to Anton Karidian prior to twenty years ago. 
KARIDIAN: Blood thins. The body fails. One is finally grateful for a failing memory. I no longer treasure life, not even my own. I am tired! And the past is a blank. Did you get everything you, wanted, Captain Kirk? 
KIRK: If I had gotten everything I wanted, you might not walk out of this room alive. 
LENORE: Captain Kirk. 
(She enters from the next room) 
LENORE: (to Karidian) You'd better rest now. There's a stain of cruelty on your shining armour, Captain. You could have spared him, and me. You talked of using tools. I was a tool, wasn't l? A tool to use against my father. 
KIRK: In the beginning perhaps. But later, I wanted it to be more than that. 
LENORE: Later. Everything's always later. Later. Latest. Too late. Too late, Captain. You are like your ship, powerful, and not human. There is no mercy in you. 
KIRK: If he is Kodos, then I've shown him more mercy than he deserves. And if he isn't, then we'll let you off at Benecia, and no harm done. 
LENORE: Captain Kirk. Who are you to say what harm was done? 
KIRK: Who do I have to be?

[Sickbay]

(Kevin is pacing up and down in the background, overhearing what is being dictated) 
MCCOY: Medical log. Lieutenant Riley's sufficiently recovered to be discharged, but the Captain's ordered him restricted to Sickbay to prevent contact with the passenger who calls himself Karidian and who's suspected of being Kodos the Executioner and of murdering the Lieutenant's family.

Captain's log, stardate 2819.8. Suspect under surveillance. Strategic areas under double guard. Performance of the Karidian Players taking place as scheduled.

[Ship's Theatre]  

LENORE: (on stage) Tonight, the Karidian Players present Hamlet, another in a series of living plays presented in space, dedicated to the tradition of classic theatre. Hamlet is a violent play about violent times when life was cheap and ambition was God.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Two pieces of paper are lined up on his desk) 
SPOCK: I believe we have a match, Captain. 
KIRK: But not an exact match, Mister Spock. We're dealing with a man's life. No machine can make that decision.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: In the long history of medicine, no doctor has ever caught the first few minutes of a play. Riley, don't forget to 
(but he's not there) 
MCCOY: Riley? Captain Kirk, McCoy here. 
KIRK [OC]: Yes, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Riley's gone. I was recording my log about Karidian and Kodos. If he overheard

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: You've made your point, Doctor. 
SECURITY [OC]: Captain? Security, H deck, The weapons locker has been broken into. One phaser is missing. 
KIRK: This is the Captain. Security two alert. Find and restrain Lieutenant Kevin Riley. He's armed and possibly headed towards the ship's theatre.

[Ship's Theatre]

(The Ghost summons Hamlet) 
HAMLET: Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, I'll go no further. 
KARIDIAN Mark me. 
HAMLET: I will. 
(Kirk comes creeping around backstage) 
KARIDIAN: My hour is almost come, when I to sulphurous and tormenting fires must render up myself. 
HAMLET: Speak. I am bound to hear. 
KARIDIAN: So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear. I am thy father's spirit, doomed for a certain term to walk the night, 
(Kirk spots Kevin with the phaser) 
KIRK: Riley, get back to the Sickbay. 
RILEY: He murdered my father, and my mother. 
KIRK: You could be wrong. Don't throw away your life on a mistake. 
RILEY: I'm not wrong. 
KARIDIAN: But that I am forbid to tell the secrets of my prison house, 
RILEY: I know that voice, that face, I know it. I saw it. He murdered them. 
KARIDIAN: Thy soul, freeze thy young blood. 
KIRK: It's an order. Give me the weapon. 
(Takes it from Riley) 
KIRK: Now get back to Sickbay. Go on. 
(Riley leaves, and there is polite applause at the end of the scene on stage. Karidian comes backstage.) 
LENORE: It's going beautifully. What is it? What's wrong? 
KARIDIAN: There was a voice out of the past haunting me, torturing me. There was another part I once played long ago. I never told you about it. Now that same curtain rises again. The time has come. 
LENORE: No, Father. The time will never come. Tonight, after my performance, the last two who can harm you will be gone. 
KARIDIAN: What are you saying? 
LENORE: There were nine. Now there are only two, and they will be gone as soon as I. Don't look at me like that. 
KARIDIAN: What have you done? 
LENORE: What had to be done. They had to be silenced. 
KARIDIAN: All of them? All seven? More blood on my hands? 
LENORE: No Father, not anymore. I'm strong, Father. It's nothing. 
STAGEHAND [OC]: Second act, three minutes. 
LENORE: We'll be ready. Don't you see? All the ghosts are dead. I've buried them. There's no more blood on your hands. 
KARIDIAN: Oh, my child, my child. You've left me nothing! You were the one thing in my life untouched by what I'd done. 
LENORE: But you're safe now, Father. I've saved you. Now, no one can touch you. Not even Captain Kirk. See Caesar come? He's awed by your greatness, your shining brightness. Bright as a blade before it is stained with blood. 
KIRK: Bright as a blade. Come with me, both of you. 
LENORE: Of course. After the play. 
KIRK: The play is over. It's been over for twenty years. 
KARIDIAN: I was a soldier in a cause. There were things to be done, terrible things. 
LENORE: Stop it, Father! You have nothing to justify. 
KARIDIAN: Murder, flight, suicide, madness. I never wanted the blood on my hands ever to stain you. 
LENORE: I did it for you. I've saved you. 
KIRK: By killing seven innocent men. 
LENORE: They weren't innocent! They were dangerous! I would have killed a world to save him! 
STAGEHAND [OC]: Curtain going up, one minute.
(Kirk takes Karidian's arm) 
LENORE: The play, Captain. He must go on. This is the great Karidian.
KIRK: Guard.
LENORE: You cannot deny him his last performance! 
(She grabs the security guard's phaser and runs out onto the stage) 
KARIDIAN: Lenore, don't!
KIRK: You'll never get off the ship.
LENORE: It will become a floating tomb, drifting through space with the soul of the great Karidian giving performances at every star he touches. (Kirk moves towards her) I know how to use this, Captain.
KARIDIAN: No.
LENORE: Caesar, beware the ides of March.
KARIDIAN: No, child! Don't! 
(As she squeezes the trigger, her father steps in front of Kirk, and takes the shot himself. Lenore screams at what she has done. and Kirk takes the phaser from her as she kneels over Karidian's body) 
LENORE: Father. Father! O, proud, death! What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, that thou, such a prince at a shot so bloodily hast struck? The curtain, the curtain rises. It rises. There's no time to sleep. The play. The play. The play's the thing, wherein we'll catch the conscience of the king.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Medical report. (hands it over) She'll receive the best of care, Jim. She remembers nothing. She even thinks her father's still alive giving performances before cheering crowds. You really cared for her, didn't you? 
SPOCK: Ready to leave Benecia orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Leslie. All channels cleared, Uhura?
UHURA: All channels clear, sir.
KIRK: Whenever you're ready, Mister Leslie.
LESLIE: Leaving orbit, sir.
MCCOY: You're not going to answer my question, are you?
KIRK: Ahead warp factor one, Mister Leslie.
MCCOY: That's an answer.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Menagerie, part 2
Stardate:3012.4 
Original Airdate: 24 Nov, 1966

Personal log, stardate 3013.1. I find it hard to believe the events of the past twenty four hours or the plea of Mister Spock standing general court-martial.
[Recap of part one]

MENDEZ: How do you plead to the charge of unlawfully taking command?
SPOCK: Guilty.
MENDEZ: Of sabotaging the computers of this vessel and locking it on a course for planet Talos Four?
SPOCK: Guilty.
MENDEZ: And of forcibly attempting to transport Captain Pike to that planet?
SPOCK: Guilty.
KIRK [OC]: Why? Why does Spock want to take to that forbidden world his former captain. Mutilated by a recent space disaster, now a shell of a man, unable to speak or move? The only answer Spock would give was on the hearing-room screen. How Spock could do this he refused to explain, but there before our eyes, actual images from thirteen years ago of Captain Pike as he was when he commanded this vessel, of Spock in those days, and of how the Enterprise had become the first and only starship to visit Talos Four. They had received a distress signal from that planet and discovered there, still alive after many years, the survivors of a missing vessel, only to find it was all an illusion. No survivors, no encampment, it was all a trap set by a race of beings who could make a man believe he was seeing anything they wished him to see, and Captain Pike was gone, a prisoner for some unknown purpose.
KIRK: And the images we've been seeing are
SPOCK: Are coming from Talos Four, sir.
MENDEZ: Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty.
KIRK: Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
SPOCK: Captain, Jim, please. Don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.

[Hearing room]

KIRK [OC]: The court-martial of Mister Spock has been convened in closed session. Despite all we can do, images continue to be transmitted to us from Talos Four.
MENDEZ: Starfleet has ordered no contact with Talos Four. They made no exceptions.
SPOCK: You have no choice, sir. I'm sorry. The Keeper has taken over control of our screen. Do you understand, sir? (flash) As you saw before, Captain Pike had been knocked unconscious and captured by the Talosians.

[Pike's cage]

(Pike discovers there is a transparent wall blocking his escape, and tests it's strength. A group of aliens arrive)
PIKE: Can you hear me? My name is Christopher Pike, commander of the space vehicle Enterprise from a stellar group at the other end of this galaxy. Our intentions are peaceful. Can you understand me?
(the aliens communicate with their minds, not voices)
TALOSIAN: It appears, Magistrate, that the intelligence of the specimen is shockingly limited.
MAGISTRATE: This is no surprise since his vessel was baited here so easily with a simulated message. As you can read in its thoughts, it is only now beginning to suspect that the survivors and encampment were a simple illusion we placed in their minds.
PIKE: You're not speaking, yet I hear you.
MAGISTRATE: You will note the confusion as it reads our thought transmissions.
PIKE: All right, then, telepathy. You can read my mind. I can read yours. Now, unless you want my ship to consider capturing me an unfriendly act
MAGISTRATE: You now see the primitive fear/threat reaction. The specimen is about to boast of his strength, the weaponry of his vessel, and so on. Next, frustrated into a need to display physical prowess, the creature will throw himself against the transparency.
PIKE: If you were in here, wouldn't you test the strength of these walls, too? There's a way out of any cage, and I'll find it.
MAGISTRATE: Despite its frustration, the creature appears more adaptable than our specimens from other planets. We can soon begin the experiment.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: The inhabitants of this planet must live deep underground, probably manufacture food and other needs down there. Our tests indicate the planet surface, without considerably more vegetation or some animals, simply too barren to support life.
NUMBER ONE: So we just thought we saw survivors there.
SPOCK: Exactly. An illusion placed in our minds by this planet's inhabitants.
BOYCE: It was a perfect illusion. They had us seeing just what we wanted to see, human beings who'd survived with dignity and bravery, everything entirely logical, right down to the building of the camp, the tattered clothing, everything. Now let's be sure we understand the danger of this. The inhabitants of this planet can read our minds, they can create illusions out of a person's own thoughts, memories, and experiences, even out of a person's own desires. Illusions just as real and solid as this table top and just as impossible to ignore.
TYLER: It's Captain Pike they've got. He needs help.
SPOCK: If we start buzzing about down there, we're liable to find their mental power's so great they could reach out and swat this ship as though it were a fly.
TYLER: Now that entry may have stood up against hand lasers but we can transmit the ship's power against it, enough to blast half a continent.
NUMBER ONE: Engineering deck will rig to transmit ship's power. We'll try blasting through that metal.

[Talosian monitoring room]

TALOSIAN: Thousands of us are already probing the creature's thoughts, Magistrate. We find excellent memory capacity.
MAGISTRATE: I read most strongly a recent death struggle in which it fought to protect its life. We will begin with this, giving the specimen something more interesting to protect.

[Rigel 7]

VINA: Come on, we must hide ourselves. Come, come, hurry. It's deserted. There'll be weapons and perhaps food.
PIKE: This is Rigel Seven.
VINA: Please, we must hide ourselves.
PIKE: I was in a cage, a cell, in some kind of a zoo. I must still be there.
VINA: Come on.
PIKE: They've reached into my mind and taken the memory of somewhere I've been.
VINA: The Kaylar!
PIKE: It's starting just as it happened two weeks ago, except for you.

[Hearing room]

SPOCK: A brilliant deduction by Captain Pike, gentlemen. Yes, he was still inside his cell, but knowing that couldn't help him.
KIRK: The Talosians controlled his brain.
SPOCK: And could make him live any place, any time, any situation they wished. He would see, taste, suffer with the same reality as you gentlemen sitting there.
PIKE [on screen]: Longer hair, different dress, but it is you, the one the survivors call Vina. Or rather the image of Vina. But why you again? Why didn't they create a different girl?

[Rigel 7]

VINA: Quick. If you attack while it's not looking.
PIKE: But it's only a dream.
VINA: You have to kill him as you did here before.
PIKE: You can tell my jailers I won't go along with it. I'm not an animal performing for its supper.
VINA: It doesn't matter what you call this, you'll feel it. That's what matters. You'll feel every moment of what happens to you.
(so Pike fights the Kaylar, first with mace and shield, then whatever he can grab. He is pushed off a ledge, and as it jumps off after him, he impales it on a barbed spearhead)

[Pike's cell]

VINA: It's over. (she hugs her hero, then sees the Talosians)

[Hearing room]

MENDEZ: What is it? Why have they stopped the images?
SPOCK: Because they know that Captain Pike is fatigued. We can reconvene later.
KIRK: Then they care about the Captain.
SPOCK: They want him back alive, sir.
MENDEZ: I demand to know why.
SPOCK: If you'll be patient, the answers to your questions
MENDEZ: You're forgetting you're on trial, Spock. You will answer all questions put to you.
SPOCK: My answer to your question would be quite unbelievable, sir. I regret we'll have to wait and see it there.

Personal log, stardate 3013.2. Reconvening court-martial of Mister Spock and the strangest trial evidence ever heard aboard a starship. From the mysterious planet now only one hour ahead of us, the story of Captain Pike's imprisonment there.

[Hearing room]

PIKE [on screen]: Why are you here?
VINA [on screen]: To please you.
PIKE [on screen]: Are you real?
VINA [on screen]: As real as you wish.

[Pike's cell]

PIKE: No, no. No, that's not an answer. I've never met you before, never even imagined you.
VINA: Perhaps they made me out of dreams you've forgotten.
PIKE: What, and dress you in the same metal fabric they wear?
VINA: I can wear whatever you wish, be anything you wish.
PIKE: So they can see how their specimen performs? They want to see how I react, is that it?
VINA: Don't you have a, a dream, something you've always wanted very badly?
PIKE: Or do they do more than just watch me? Do they feel with me, too?
VINA: You can have whatever dream you want. I can become anything, any woman you, you've ever imagined. You can have anything you want in the whole universe. Let me please you.
PIKE: Yes. Yes, you can please me. You can tell me about them. Is there any way I can keep them from probing my mind, from using my thoughts against me? Does that frighten you? Does that mean there is a way?
VINA: You're a fool.
PIKE: Since you're not real, there's not much point in continuing this conversation, is there?

[Planet surface]

NUMBER ONE: All circuits engaged, Mister Spock.
SPOCK [OC]: Standing by, Number One.
NUMBER ONE: Take cover.
SPOCK [OC]: Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
(the phaser cannon blasts at the rock face)
NUMBER ONE: Increase to full power! Can you give us any more?
SPOCK [OC]: Our circuits are beginning to heat. We'll have to cease power.
NUMBER ONE: Disengage. The top of that knoll should have been sheared off the first second.
BOYCE: Maybe it was. It's what I tried to explain in the briefing room. Their power of illusion is so great, we can't be sure of anything we do, anything we see.

[Pike's cell]

VINA: Perhaps if you asked me some questions I could answer.
PIKE: How far can they control my mind?
VINA: If I tell you, then will you pick some dream you've had and let me live it with you?
PIKE: Perhaps.
VINA: They can't actually make you do anything you don't want to do.
PIKE: But they try to trick me with their illusions.
VINA: And, er, they can punish you when you're not co-operative. You'll find out about that. 
PIKE: Did they ever live on the surface of this planet? Why did they go underground?
VINA: War, thousands of centuries ago.
PIKE: That's why it's so barren up there?
VINA; The planet's only now becoming able to support life again.
PIKE: So the Talosians who came underground found life limited here and they concentrated on developing their mental power.
VINA: But they found it's a trap, like a narcotic, because when dreams become more important than reality, you give up travel, building, creating. You even forget how to repair the machines left behind by your ancestors. You just sit, living and reliving other lives left behind in the thought record.
PIKE: Or sit probing minds of zoo specimens like me.
VINA: You're better than a theatre to them. They create the illusion for you, they watch you react, feel your emotions. They have a whole collection of specimens, descendants of life brought back long ago from all over this part of the galaxy.
PIKE: Which means they had to have more than one of each animal.
VINA: Please.
PIKE: They'll need a pair of humans too. Where do they get intend to get the Earth woman?
VINA: You said that if I answered questions
PIKE: But that was a bargain with something that didn't exist. You said you weren't real, remember?
VINA: I'm a woman as real and as human as you are. We are like Adam and Eve. If we. No, please, no! Don't punish me! I'll die! (disappears)

[Hearing room]

MENDEZ: An Earth woman? Then you were captured as breeding stock. (flash) 
KIRK: Why? Just to maintain a supply of zoo specimens?
SPOCK: Much more, Captain.

[Pike's cell]

(as Pike searches the walls for a door, a hatch opens and a glass is placed on the floor)
KEEPER: The vial contains a nourishing protein complex.
PIKE: Is the keeper actually communicating with one of his animals?
KEEPER: If the form and the colour is not appealing, it can appear as any food you wish to visualise.
PIKE: And if I prefer
KEEPER: To starve? You overlook the unpleasant alternative of punishment.
(Pike is surrounded by fire and brimstone, screaming in pain)
KEEPER: From a fable you once heard in childhood. You will now consume the nourishment.
PIKE: Why not just put irresistible hunger in my mind? Because you can't, can you? You do have limitations, don't you?
KEEPER: If you continue to disobey, from deeper in your mind, there are things even more unpleasant.
(he drinks the nourishment then launches himself at the glass wall. The Keeper steps back in surprise)
PIKE: That's very interesting.
KEEPER: Now to the female.
PIKE: You were startled. Weren't you reading my mind then?
KEEPER: As you've conjectured, an Earth vessel did crash on our planet, but with only a single survivor.
PIKE: No, let's stay on the first subject. All I wanted for that moment was to get my hands around your neck.
KEEPER: We repaired the survivor's injuries and found the species interesting.
PIKE: Do primitive thoughts put up a block you can't read through?
KEEPER: It became necessary to attract a mate.
PIKE: All right, all right. Let's talk about the girl. You seem to be going out of your way to make her attractive, to make me feel protective.
KEEPER; This is necessary in order to perpetuate the species.
PIKE: Seems more important to you now that I begin to accept her and like her.
KEEPER: We wish our specimens to be happy in their new life.
PIKE: Assuming that's a lie, why would you want me attracted to her? So I'll feel love in a husband-wife relationship? That would be necessary only if you intend to build a family group or perhaps a whole human community.
KEEPER: With the female now properly conditioned.
PIKE: You mean properly punished! I'm the one who's not cooperating! Why don't you punish me?
KEEPER: First, an emotion of protectiveness. Now one of sympathy. Excellent.

[Woodland glade]

VINA: You want some coffee, dear? I left the thermos hooked to my saddle.
PIKE: Tango! You old devil, you. Uh, I'm sorry I don't have any sugar. Well, they think of everything, don't they? (feeds lumps to the horse) 
VINA: Is it good to be home?
PIKE: They read our minds very well. Home, anything else I want if I co-operate, is that it?
VINA: My, it turned out to be a lovely day, didn't it? You're home. You can even stay if you want.
PIKE: But we're not here, neither of us. We're in a menagerie, a cage!
VINA: No.
PIKE; I can't help either one of us if you won't give me a chance. Now, you told me once they used illusions as a narcotic. They couldn't repair the machines left by their ancestors. Is that why they want us, to build a colony of slaves?
VINA: Stop it. Don't you care what they'll do to us?
PIKE: Back in my cage, it seemed for a couple of minutes that our keeper couldn't read my thoughts. Do emotions like hate, keeping hate in your mind, does that block off our mind from them?
VINA: Yes. They can't read through primitive emotions, but you can't keep it up for long enough. I've tried. They keep at you and at you year after year, tricking and punishing, and they won. They own me. I know you must hate me for that.
PIKE: Oh, no. I don't hate you. I can guess what it was like.
VINA: But that's not enough. Don't you see? They read my thoughts, my feelings, my dreams of what would be a perfect man. That's why they picked you. I can't help but love you and they expect you to feel the same way.
PIKE: If they can read my mind, then they know I'm attracted to you. I was from the very first moment I saw you in the survivor's camp. You were like a wild little animal. 
VINA; I'm beginning to see why none of this has worked for you. You've been home, and fighting as on Rigel. That's not new to you, either. A person's strongest dreams are about what he can't do. Yes, a ship's captain, always having to be so formal, so decent and honest and proper. You must wonder what it would be like to forget all that.

[Open air party]

(a band plays, and a green woman dances sensuously)
TRADER: Nice place you have here, Mister Pike.
PIKE: Vina?

[Hearing room]

KIRK: That's Vina again, as the green Orion slave girl? (flash)
MENDEZ: They're like animals, vicious, seductive. They say no human male can resist them.
KIRK [OC]: Strange evidence from the past, how the Talosians, planning to breed a society of human slaves, tempted Captain Pike with the Earth woman they held in captivity. And as she appeared to him in many forms, each more exciting than the last, Pike was beginning to weaken.

[Open air party]

OFFICER: Suppose you had all of space to choose from and this was only one small sample. 
TRADER: Wouldn't you say it was worth a man's soul?
(Pike gets up and leaves. Vina follows him into the rock room)

[Transporter room]

NUMBER ONE: Now, you all know the situation. We're hoping to transport down inside the Talosian community.
SPOCK: If our measurements and readings are an illusion also, one could find oneself materialised inside solid rock.
NUMBER ONE: Nothing will be said if any volunteer wants to back out.
(Pitcairn energises but only the two women dematerialise) 
SPOCK: The women!

[Pike's cage]

NUMBER ONE: Captain! Captain.
VINA: No! Let me finish!
NUMBER ONE: But we were a party of six.
COLT: We were the only ones transported.
VINA: It's not fair. You don't need them.
PIKE: (grabbing the phase pistols) They don't work.
NUMBER ONE: They were fully charged when we left. It's dead. (communicator) I can't make a signal. What is it?
PIKE: Don't say anything. I'm filling my mind with a picture of beating their huge, misshapen heads to pulp, thoughts so primitive they black out everything else. I'm filling my mind with hate.
VINA: How long can you block your thoughts? A few minutes, an hour? How can that help?
COLT: Leave him alone.
VINA: He doesn't need you. He's already picked me.
COLT: Picked her? For what? I don't understand.
VINA: Now, there's a fine choice for intelligent offspring.
COLT: Offspring, as in children?
NUMBER ONE: Offspring as in, he's Adam. Is that it?
VINA: You're no better choice. They'd have more luck crossing him with a computer.
NUMBER ONE: Well, shall we do some time computation? There was a Vina listed on that expedition as an adult crewman. Now, adding eighteen years to your age then.
(The Keeper approaches the cage)
VINA: It's not fair. I did what you asked.
KEEPER: Since you resist the present specimen, you now have a selection.
PIKE: I'll break out of this zoo somehow and get to you. Is your blood red like ours? I'm going to find out.
KEEPER: Each of the two new specimens has qualities in her favour. The female you call Number One has the superior mind and would produce highly intelligent children.
PIKE: All I want to do is get my hands on you. Can you read these thoughts, images of hate, killing?
KEEPER: The other new arrival has considered you unreachable but now is realising this has changed. The factors in her favour are youth and strength, plus unusually strong female drives. 
PIKE: You'll find my thoughts more interesting, thoughts so primitive you can't understand. Emotions so (stricken by pain)
KEEPER: Wrong thinking is punishable. Right thinking will be as quickly rewarded. You will find it an effective combination. (leaves)
NUMBER ONE: Captain.
PIKE: No. No, don't help me. I have to concentrate. They can't read through hate.
(the group are apparently dozing when the Keeper opens the hatch to get the laser pistols Pike dropped there. He grabs him and pulls him into the cage, and starts to throttle him)
PIKE: Hold still, or I'll break your neck.
VINA: Don't hurt them. They don't mean to be evil.
PIKE: I've had some samples of how good they are.
(the Talosian appears to be a vicious monster)
PIKE: You stop this illusion, or I'll twist your head off. All right, now you try one more illusion, you try anything at all, and I'll break your neck.
KEEPER: Your ship. Release me, or we'll destroy it.
VINA: He's not bluffing, Captain. With illusion they can make your crew work the wrong controls or push any button it takes to destroy your ship.
PIKE: I'm going to gamble you're too intelligent to kill for no reason at all. (hands him over to Number One and picks up the laser pistols, firing them at the glass wall) On the other hand, I've got a reason. I'm willing to bet you've created an illusion this laser is empty. I think it just blasted a hole in that window and you're keep us from seeing it. You want me to test my theory out on your head?
COLT: Captain. (there is a hole in the glass, and they all leave through it)

[Hearing room]

MENDEZ: It seems the Talosians have deserted you.
SPOCK: Gentlemen, a moment, please.
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock?
MENDEZ: (to Pike) May I have your verdict?
SPOCK: Signal you want them to wait. Captain, please. It's your life now, at least a chance for life.
KIRK: You keep talking about life, Mister Spock. A chance for life. How? As a prisoner, caged, a zoo specimen, living the illusions that amuse his keepers?
SPOCK: No, Captain. there's more to it. Watch. (the screen remains blank)
MENDEZ: Guilty, yes or no, Captain? (flash) Yes. I must also vote guilty as charged. And you, Captain?
KIRK: Guilty as charged.

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Bridge to Commander.

[Hearing room]

MENDEZ: Mendez here.
HANSEN [on monitor]: Sir, we're entering orbit Talos Four.
SPOCK: Talos controls the vessel now, sir, as they did thirteen years ago. You've asked me why. You'll see the answer now.

[Planet surface]

PIKE: Make contact, Number One.
NUMBER ONE: They kept us from seeing this, too. We cut through and never knew it. Captain.
KEEPER: As you see, your attempt to escape accomplished nothing.
PIKE: I want to contact our ship.
KEEPER: You are now on the surface where we wished you to be. With the female of your choice, you will now begin carefully guided lives.
PIKE: And start by burying you?
KEEPER: That is your choice. To help you reclaim the planet's surface, our zoological gardens will furnish a variety of plant life.
PIKE: Look, I'll make a deal with you. You and your life for the lives of these two Earth women. You give me proof that our ship is all right, send these two back, and I'll stay with Vina.
NUMBER ONE: (setting laser pistol to overload) It's wrong to create a whole race of humans to live as slaves.
KEEPER: Is this a deception? Do you intend to destroy yourselves?
VINA: What is that?
PIKE: The weapon is building up an overload, a force chamber explosion. You still have time to get underground. Well, go on! (pushes Vina away) Just to show you how primitive humans are, Talosian, you go with her.
VINA: If, if you all think it's this important, then I can't go, either. I suppose if they have one human being, they might try again. (more Talosians arrive) 
PIKE: Wait.
TALOSIAN: Their method of storing records is crude and consumed much time. Are you prepared to assimilate it?
KEEPER: We had not believed this possible. The customs and history of your race show a unique hatred of captivity. Even when it's pleasant and benevolent, you prefer death. This makes you too violent and dangerous a species for our needs.
VINA: He means that they can't use you. You're free to go back to the ship.
PIKE: And that's it. No apologies. You captured one of us, threatened all of us.
TALOSIAN: Your unsuitability has condemned the Talosian race to eventual death. Is this not sufficient?
KEEPER: No other specimen has shown your adaptability. You were our last hope.
PIKE: But wouldn't some form of trade, mutual cooperation.
KEEPER: Your race would learn our power of illusion and destroy itself, too.
NUMBER ONE: Captain, we have transporter control now.
PIKE: Let's get back to the ship.
VINA: I can't. I can't go with you.

[Transporter room]

PITCAIRN: Sir, it just came on. We can't shut the power off.
SPOCK: Mister Spock here.
TYLER [OC]: All power has come on, Mister Spock. The helm is answering to control.
(first Colt, then Number One are beamed aboard)
??: The captain.

[Planet surface]

(Vina is changed into a scarred, misshapen older woman)
VINA: You see why I can't go with you.
KEEPER: This is the female's true appearance.
VINA: They found me in the wreckage, dying, a lump of flesh. They rebuilt me. Everything works, but they had never seen a human. They had no guide for putting me back together.
KEEPER: It was necessary to convince you her desire to stay is an honest one.
PIKE: You'll give her back her illusion of beauty? 
KEEPER: And more.

[Transporter room]

PITCAIRN: Mister Spock, the system is coming on again.

[Hearing room]

COLT [on screen]: What's happened to Vina? 
NUMBER ONE [on screen]: Isn't she coming with us?
PIKE [on screen]: No. No, and I agreed with her reasons.
(scene moves to the Bridge, but we're watching the disabled Pike)
SPOCK [OC]: All decks prepare for hyperdrive.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: All decks are ready, sir.
PIKE [on screen]: Engage.
KIRK: Commodore, don't you think that (Mendez disappears)
KEEPER [on screen]: What you now seem to hear, Captain Kirk, are my thought transmissions. The Commodore was never aboard your vessel. His presence there and in the shuttlecraft was an illusion. Mister Spock had related to us your strength of will. It was thought the fiction of a court-martial would divert you from too soon regaining control of your vessel. Captain Pike is welcome to spend the rest of his life with us, unfettered by his physical body. The decision is yours and his.
KIRK: Mister Spock, even if regulations are explicit, you could have come to me and explained.
SPOCK: Ask you to face the death penalty, too? One of us was enough, Captain.
KIRK: Yes.
UHURA [OC]: Message from Starbase Eleven, sir. Received images from Talos Four. In view of historic importance of Captain Pike in space exploration, General Order Seven prohibiting contact Talos Four is suspended this occasion. No action contemplated against Spock. Proceed as you think best. Signed, Mendez, J.I., Commodore, Starbase Eleven. 
KIRK: Chris, do you want to go there? (flash) Mister Spock, would you care to take Captain Pike to the transporter room, see him off?
SPOCK: Thank you, sir, for both of us. (flash)
KIRK: Er, Mister Spock, when you're finished, please come back and see me. I want to talk to you. This regret table tendency you've been showing lately towards flagrant emotionalism
SPOCK: I see no reason to insult me, sir. I believe I've been completely logical about the whole affair.
KEEPER [OC] Captain Kirk.
(screen shows the healthy young Vina and healthy young Pike hand in hand)
KEEPER [on screen]: Captain Pike has an illusion, and you have reality. May you find your way as pleasant.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Menagerie, part 1
Stardate:3012.4 
Original Airdate: 17 Nov, 1966

[Starbase 11, outside]
PIPER: Welcome to Starbase Eleven, Captain. The Commodore's waiting to see you. He's curious why you suddenly changed course and came here.
KIRK: We received a subspace message asking us to divert here immediately.
PIPER: This base sent no message, Captain.

[Mendez' office]

MENDEZ: Oh, Jim, I just can't understand this.
KIRK: Mister Spock received a starbase transmission, a message from the former commander of the Enterprise, Fleet Captain Pike, urgently requesting that we divert here.
MENDEZ: Impossible.
KIRK: If my first officer states he received a transmission from 
MENDEZ: Jim, I'm not doubting anyone's word. I'm simply telling you it's impossible.
KIRK: Why?
MENDEZ: You don't know? You actually don't know what's happened to Captain Pike? There's been subspace chatter about it for months. I'm sorry to have to be the one to show you. He's upstairs in the medical section.

[Intensive Care Area]

MENDEZ: You ever met Chris Pike?
KIRK: When he was promoted to Fleet Captain.
MENDEZ: About your age. Big, handsome man, vital, active.
KIRK: I took over the Enterprise from him. Spock served with him for several years.
SPOCK: Eleven years, four months, five days.
MCCOY: What's his problem, Commodore?
MENDEZ: Inspection tour of a cadet vessel. Old Class J starship. One of the baffle plates ruptured.
MCCOY: The delta rays?
MENDEZ: He went in bringing out all those kids that were still alive. Just wanted you gentlemen to be prepared.

[Pike's room]

MENDEZ: Captain Pike. (a scarred head and shoulders sticking out of wheelchair device) Captain, you remember these gentlemen. They wanted to visit you. Two flashes mean no. I thought you might make an exception for them. (flash, flash) I'm sorry, gentlemen.
KIRK: Chris, if there's anything I can do for you. (flash, flash)
SPOCK: Captain Pike, may I remain for a moment? (flash, the others leave) You know why I've come, Captain. It's only six days away at maximum warp and I have it well-planned. (flash, flash) I have never disobeyed your orders before, Captain, but this time I must. (flash, flash) I know. I know it is treachery and it's mutiny. but I must do this. (flash, flash) I have no choice. (flash, flash)

[Mendez' office]

KIRK: Once more, Jose. Spock stated he received a message for us to come here. He entered same in his log. That's all the proof I require.
MENDEZ: And what do those record tapes show? No message sent from here. No message received by your vessel.
KIRK: Then I suggest the record tapes have been deliberately changed. A computer expert can change record tapes, duplicate voices, say anything, say nothing.
MENDEZ: The fact remains that your first officer's former captain is hospitalised, horribly injured, at this base, and that same first officer seems to be the only one who heard that message.
KIRK: If he had wanted to see Captain Pike he could have requested a leave. I would have granted it.
MENDEZ: Well, that's true of course.
KIRK: Who would want to divert us here? There's no trouble in the space sector we're patrolling now. No alien problems.
MENDEZ: Computer Centre.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

HUMBOLDT: Chief Humboldt here, sir.
MENDEZ [OC]: Have you rechecked all the record tapes on the date in question?
HUMBOLDT: Yes, sir.
MENDEZ [OC]: Is there any way at all a message could have been sent from here without us knowing it?
HUMBOLDT: Negative, Commodore. We've checked and double-checked everything possible.
MENDEZ [OC]: All right. Start checking the impossible. Mendez out. 
(Spock creeps up behind Humboldt and neck-pinches him, then does something to the innards of a computer bank)

[Mendez' office]

MENDEZ: Oh, have I introduced Miss Piper, Jim? This is Captain Kirk, Miss Piper.
PIPER: I recognized the Captain immediately. A mutual friend described you, sir. Lieutenant Helen Johansson.
KIRK: Helen described 
PIPER: She merely mentioned she knew you, sir.
MENDEZ: You have something to report, Miss Piper?
PIPER: Oh, yes, sir. I'm afraid our investigation turned up very little, Commodore. There is, of course, Mister Spock's years of service with Captain Pike. Indications of his extreme loyalty to this former commander.
KIRK: Miss Piper, a Vulcan can no sooner be disloyal than he can exist without breathing. That goes for his present commander as well as his past.
PIPER: We're forced to consider every possibility, sir. We can be certain Captain Pike cannot have sent a message. In his condition he's under observation every minute of every day.
MENDEZ: And totally unable to move, Jim. His wheel chair is constructed to respond to his brain waves. Oh, he can turn it, move it forwards, or backwards slightly.
PIPER: With the flashing light, he can say yes or no.
MENDEZ: But that's it, Jim. That's as much as that poor devil can do. His mind is as active as yours and mine, but it's trapped inside a useless vegetating body. He's kept alive mechanically, a battery-driven heart. 
KIRK: There's no way he could even have asked for that message to be sent?

[Starbase Computer Centre]

VOICE [OC]: (slow) Starbase Operations. (fast) Starbase Operations. (Spock adjusts it to sound normal) Starbase Operations. Starbase Operations, Enterprise. Standby to receive new orders, Enterprise.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Starbase Operation, Mister Hansen. 
VOICE [OC]: Starbase Operations to Enterprise. Standby to receive new orders. They're to be fed directly into the ship's computers. This is top secret and scrambled.
HANSEN: Enterprise standing by. Request confirmation.
UHURA: Enterprise to Starbase. Request confirmation.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

CHIEF: Sir, this is a security area. What are you doing here? 
SPOCK: I have security clearance, Chief.
CHIEF: Who gave you clearance? I haven't been notified. You're cross-circuiting the. (struggle) Whose tapes are these?
UHURA [OC]: Repeat, Enterprise to Starbase. Orders received. We need operating confirmation from the ship's Captain. (Spock pinches the Chief unconscious)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Come in, Starbase. Come in, Captain Kirk.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

(Spock inserts data chip) 
KIRK [OC]: This is Captain Kirk. You have confirmation, Miss Uhura.

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Hansen here, Captain.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

HANSEN [OC]: Our destination has been scramble-fed into ship's computers. Er, how can I handle the helm if I don't know where we're going?
KIRK [OC]: (another chip) Mister Spock is with me here. He'll answer all questions. Kirk out.
SPOCK: This is Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: The ship's computers will handle the helm on this voyage, Mister Hansen. Course will be computed and set automatically.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

SPOCK: You will not discuss this with ship's crew or starbase personnel. Do you read?

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Acknowledged, sir.

[Starbase Computer Centre]

SPOCK: Stand by. We'll warp out of orbit in one hour.

[Mendez' office]

KIRK: (watching Pike on monitor) He keeps blinking no. No to what?
MCCOY: They've tried questioning him. He's almost agitated himself into a coma.
KIRK: How long will he live?
MCCOY: As long as any of us. Blast medicine anyway. We've learned to tie into every human organ in the body except one. The brain. The brain is what life is all about. Now, that man can think any thought that we can, and love, hope, dream as much as we can, but he can't reach out, and no one can reach in.
KIRK: He keeps blinking no.
MCCOY: No to what? They could question him for days, weeks, before they stumble on the right thing.
KIRK: Bones, could this have anything to do with Spock?
MCCOY: I don't read you at all, Jim.
KIRK: What I mean is either a message was received. It was one of two things. Either someone sent a message diverting us here, or someone on board the ship lied about receiving it. Could that someone be Mister Spock?
MCCOY: Jim, forgetting how well we both know Spock, the simple fact that he's a Vulcan means he's incapable of telling a lie.
KIRK: He's also half human.
MCCOY: And that half is completely submerged. To be caught acting like us or even thinking like us would completely embarrass him.
KIRK: Someone's interfering with my command and my ship. I don't know who it is, but I mean to find out. Even you. If I thought you had the technical know-how I'd suspect you, but you don't. Spock does.
MCCOY: He would not make a false entry. 
KIRK: There's a false entry in the log right now which doesn't jibe with the established facts. How do you explain that.
MCCOY: I can't, but to question Spock of all people? Me, yes. I could run off half-cocked given a good reason. So could you, but not Spock. It's impossible.
VOICE [OC]: Doctor McCoy, report to Transporter Control. Doctor McCoy to Transporter Control.
MCCOY: McCoy here.
VOICE [OC]: You're needed aboard the Enterprise, Doctor. Medical emergency.
MCCOY: Well, what is it? Sickness? Injury? How bad is it?
VOICE [OC]: That's all we have on it, Doctor. Just needed aboard.
MCCOY: Probably somebody discovered a hangnail. I'll beam up and let you know, Jim.

KIRK: (reading) For eyes of Starfleet Command only.
MENDEZ: Oh, I'm certifying I ordered you to read it. Know anything at all about this planet?
KIRK: What every ship Captain knows. General Order 7, no vessel under any condition, emergency or otherwise, is to visit Talos Four. 
MENDEZ: And to do so is the only death penalty left on our books. Only Fleet Command knows why. Not even this file explains that. (unlocks the magnetic strip) But it does name the only Earth ship that ever visited the planet.
KIRK: The Enterprise, commanded by Captain Christopher Pike.
MENDEZ: With a half Vulcan science officer named Spock.
PIPER: Commodore! Captain Pike, he's gone!
MENDEZ: Mendez here. What is it?
VOICE [OC]: Starship Enterprise, Commodore. It's warping out of orbit. Refuses to acknowledge our signal.

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Out of orbit, Mister Spock. Seems strange with no navigator on duty.
SPOCK: The Enterprise knows where she's going, Mister Hansen.
UHURA: Someone's trying to hail us, sir.
SPOCK: Maintain radio silence, Lieutenant. This is First Officer Spock. Per Starfleet orders this date, I have been placed in temporary command of the Enterprise. While our destination is secret, our mission is relatively simple. Starbase Command has assigned Captain Kirk medical rest leave until our return. His instructions are that you will obey my orders as you would his. First Officer out.
MCCOY: What's going on around here? Who said Jim needed a medical rest leave? And this call about me being needed aboard the ship. I've checked everywhere. 
SPOCK: And no one from the ship made such a call.
MCCOY: That's right. 
SPOCK: Doctor, I regret they elected to keep certain things from you. Will you come with me, please.

[Pike's quarters]

MCCOY: What is this, Spock? Captain, are you all right? (flash, flash) I see that you're still signaling
SPOCK: Doctor, one moment, please.
KIRK [OC]: Kirk to Doctor McCoy. I'm recording you this message, Bones, so there will be no misunderstanding. I'm sorry to have to make it an order. You're not to disturb Captain Pike with any questions. Simply take good care of him. Follow Spock's instructions to the letter. Kirk out. (flash, flash)

[Bridge]

HANSEN: Sir, scanners report an object following us, about the size of a starbase shuttlecraft. Shall we reverse helm?
SPOCK: Take no action, Mister Hansen.
HANSEN: But at our speed, they'll never catch us. In case they want to reach us 
SPOCK: You have your orders, Mister Hansen. We'll make no contact.

[Shuttlecraft]

MENDEZ: Starbase Shuttlecraft one to Enterprise. Come in, please. Enterprise, Commodore Mendez and Captain Kirk. If you read me, you are ordered to reply. Repeating it on all emergency frequencies, Jim.
KIRK: Spock is headed for Talos Four, all right.
MENDEZ: Pulling ahead of us fast. Fuel is down to sixty three point three. If we turn back now, we've just got barely enough to get us back to the base.
KIRK: Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in!

[Bridge]

COMPUTER: Library computer.
SPOCK: Lock on to sensors. Measure object now following the Enterprise.
COMPUTER: Computed. Object is a Class F shuttlecraft. Duranium metal shell, ion engine power
SPOCK: Stop. How long before shuttlecraft's fuel supply forces return to starbase?
COMPUTER: Computed. Shuttlecraft is already past point of safe return.

[Shuttlecraft]

MENDEZ: We coast.
KIRK: Blast you any way. You had no right to come along.
MENDEZ: RHIP, Captain. Rank hath its privileges.
KIRK: Two hours of oxygen left.
MENDEZ: Wonderful.
KIRK: Part of me is hoping the Enterprise won't come back for us. We step on that deck, Spock is finished. Court-martialed, disgraced. 
MENDEZ: He's dead if he makes it to Talos Four. Why would he want to get Pike there? The command reports stated Talos contained absolutely no practical benefits to mankind.
KIRK: Spock would have some logical reason for going there.
MENDEZ: Maybe. Maybe he's just gone mad.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: I keep wondering who might be after us in a shuttlecraft and I keep coming up with the same answers, but I can't be right, can l, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Computer control. Lock on to shuttlecraft following us.
COMPUTER: Locked on. Tractor beam ready.
SPOCK: Go to tape Abel Seven Baker. Execute instructions.
MCCOY: Is it the captain, Mister Spock?
HANSEN: Sir, the engines are reversing. She's brought herself to a dead stop.
SPOCK: This is the First Officer speaking. Security, send an armed team to the Bridge. Transporter Room, stand by to beam Captain Kirk aboard. Effective until then, Lieutenant Hansen is in operational command.
HANSEN: Sir?
SPOCK: First Officer out. Doctor, as senior officer present, I present myself to you for arrest.
MCCOY: You what?
SPOCK: The charge is mutiny, Doctor. I never received orders to take command.
SECURITY: Security reporting, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Doctor.
MCCOY: Mister Spock is, er, under arrest. Is confinement to quarters enough?
SPOCK: Adequate, Doctor. I'll make no trouble.
MCCOY: Well, confine him.
SECURITY: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: Store our shuttlecraft on the hangar deck, Mister Scott. Beam us directly aboard.
SCOTT: All right, Captain. Locked on to you.
HANSEN: Transferring command to you, sir.
KIRK: Accepting command. Where's Mister Spock?
HANSEN: In his quarters, under arrest.
MENDEZ: His quarters, after what he's done, Lieutenant?
UHURA [OC]: Captain from Bridge. The engines are coming on.
KIRK: Reverse power. Hold this position. Tell whoever gave those orders to report
HANSEN: Sir, there's nobody up there giving orders. Mister Spock has the computers running the ship.
KIRK: Disengage computer control, Uhura.
UHURA [OC]: We can't disengage, Captain. The helm does not respond. (Scott leaves, muttering in Gaelic)
KIRK: Computer control, come in.
COMPUTER: Computer.
KIRK: Disengage from helm.
COMPUTER: Unable to comply.

[Spock's quarters]

KIRK [on monitor]: This is the Captain. On voice command, you will override all contrary instructions. Voice command, disengage from helm.
COMPUTER: Unable to comply. Any such attempt will cross-circuit vessel's life-supporting system. Computer control cannot be disengaged until vessel reaches planet Talos Four.

Captain's log, stardate 3012.4. Despite our best efforts to disengage computers, the Enterprise is still locked on a heading for the mysterious planet Talos Four. Meanwhile, as required by Starfleet General Orders, a preliminary hearing on Lieutenant Commander Spock is being convened. And in all the years of my service, this is the most painful moment I've ever faced.

[Hearing room]

KIRK: This hearing is convened. Mister Spock, you're aware of your right to counsel of your choice?
SPOCK: Sir, I waive counsel. Further, I waive rights to this hearing and request immediate court-martial.
KIRK: Request denied.
SPOCK: May I inquire on what grounds, Captain?
KIRK: A mutiny requires a trial board of no less than three command officers. Since there are only two of that rank available
SPOCK: Sir, I must point out that there are three officers of command rank available. Yourself, Commodore Mendez, and Captain Christopher Pike.
KIRK: Denied. Captain Pike is a complete invalid.
SPOCK: I believe you'll find he's still on the active duty list.
MENDEZ: We didn't have the heart to retire him, Jim. He's got you. Whatever he's up to, he's planned it well.

Captain's log, stardate 3012.6. General Court-Martial convened. Mister Spock has again waived counsel and has entered a plea of guilty.

MENDEZ: Mister Spock, are you aware in pleading guilty that a further charge involving the death penalty must be held against you should this vessel enter the Talos star group?
SPOCK: I am.
MENDEZ: Why? What does it accomplish to go there or to take Captain Pike there? I want to know why.
SPOCK: Are your comments a part of the record, sir?
MENDEZ: Yes, it's on the record.
SPOCK: Thank you. Request monitor screen be engaged.
MENDEZ: For what purpose?
SPOCK: To comply with the request you just made, sir, that I explain the importance of going to Talos Four.
KIRK: By asking why, you've opened the door to any evidence he may wish to present. Apparently what he had in mind.
MENDEZ: Present your evidence. Screen on.
SPOCK: This is thirteen years ago. The Enterprise and its commander, Captain Christopher Pike.
SPOCK [on screen]: Definitely something out there, Captain, headed this way.
KIRK: Screen off. Chris, was that really you on the screen? (flash) That's impossible. Mister Spock, no vessel makes record tapes in that detail, that perfect. What were we watching?
SPOCK: I cannot tell you at this time, sir.
MENDEZ: Captain Pike, were any record tapes of this nature made during your voyage? (flash, flash) The court is not obliged to view evidence without knowing its source.
SPOCK: Unless the court asks a prisoner why, Commodore. You did ask that question.
MENDEZ: You mean I was maneuvered into asking. Your evidence is out of order.
KIRK: I am forced to contest that, Commodore. I want to see more.
MENDEZ: You have that right, Captain, but just because the prisoner is your First Officer and your personal friend
KIRK: That has nothing to do with it.
MENDEZ: Very well, continue.
KIRK: Screen on, Mister Scott.
NUMBER ONE [on screen]: No. It's something else. There's still something out there.
SPOCK: As I stated, gentlemen, this was thirteen years ago. We were on routine patrol when the ship's sensors detected something ahead. At first we were not certain what it was.
TYLER [on screen]: It's coming at the speed of light. Collision course.

[Bridge]

TYLER: The meteorite beam has not deflected it, Captain.
NUMBER ONE: Evasive manoeuvres, sir?
PIKE: Steady as we go. 
COMM OFFICER: It's a radio wave, sir. We're passing through an old-style distress signal.
PIKE: They were keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way.
COMM OFFICER: A ship in trouble making a forced landing, sir. That's it. No other message.
TYLER: I have a fix. It comes from the Talos star group.
NUMBER ONE: We've no ships or Earth colonies that far out.
SPOCK: Their call letters check with a survey expedition. S.S. Columbia disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago.
TYLER: It would take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here.
SPOCK: Records show the Talos group has never been explored. Solar system similar to Earth, eleven planets. Number four seems to be Class M, oxygen atmosphere.
NUMBER ONE: Then they could still be alive, even after eighteen years.
PIKE: If they survived the crash.
SPOCK: We aren't going to go, to be certain?
PIKE: Not without any indication of survivors, no. Continue to the Vega Colony and take care of our own sick and injured first. You have the helm. Maintain present course.
NUMBER ONE: Yes, sir.

[Pike's quarters]

BOYCE [OC]: Boyce here.
PIKE: Drop by my cabin, Doctor. (Boyce enters with bag) What's that? I didn't say there's anything wrong with me.
BOYCE: I understand we picked up a distress signal.
PIKE: That's right. Unless we get anything more positive on it, it seems to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent. I'd like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, too.
BOYCE: Oh, I concur with yours, definitely.
PIKE: Good. I'm glad you do, because we're going to stop first at the Vega Colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also. What the devil are you putting in there, ice?
BOYCE: Who wants a warm martini?
PIKE: What makes you think I need one?
BOYCE: Sometimes a man will tell his bartender things he'll never tell his doctor. What's been on your mind, Chris, the fight on Rigel seven?
PIKE: Shouldn't it be? My only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
BOYCE: Was there anything you personally could have done to prevent it?
PIKE: Oh, I should have smelled trouble when I saw the swords and the armour. Instead of that, I let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one of their warriors.
BOYCE: Chris, you set standards for yourself no one could meet. You treat everyone on board like a human being except yourself, and now you're tired and you
PIKE: You bet I'm tired. You bet. I'm tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives. I'm tired of deciding which mission is too risky and which isn't, and who's going on the landing party and who doesn't, and who lives and who dies. Boy, I've had it, Phil.
BOYCE: To the point of finally taking my advice, a rest leave?
PIKE: To the point of considering resigning.
BOYCE: And do what?
PIKE: Well, for one thing, go home. Nice little town with fifty miles of park land around it. Remember I told you I had two horses, and we used to take some food and ride out all day.
BOYCE: Ah, that sounds exciting. Ride out with a picnic lunch every day.
PIKE: I said that's one place I might go. I might go into business on Regulus or on the Orion colony.
BOYCE: You, an Orion trader, dealing in green animal women, slaves?
PIKE: The point is this isn't the only life available. There's a whole galaxy of things to choose from.
BOYCE: Not for you. A man either lives life as it happens to him, meets it head-on, and licks it, or he turns his back on it and starts to wither away.
PIKE: Now you're beginning to talk like a doctor, bartender.
BOYCE: Take your choice. We both get the same two kinds of customers. The living and the dying.
SPOCK [on monitor]: Mister Spock here. We're intercepting a follow-up message, sir. There are crash survivors on Talos.

[Bridge]

OFFICER: (reads) Eleven survivors from crash. Gravity and oxygen within limits. Food and water obtainable, but unless. The message faded at that point, sir.
PIKE: Address intercraft.
TYLER: System open.
PIKE: This is the captain. Our destination is the Talos star group.

[Hearing room]

PIKE [on screen]: Our time warp, factor seven.
TYLER [on screen]: Course computed and on the screen.
NUMBER ONE [on screen]: All decks have acknowledged, sir.
PIKE [on screen]: Engage.
MENDEZ: Screen off. Mister Spock, I'm truly amazed at your technical prowess in somehow manufacturing all this. I congratulate you on your imagination. But this is a court of space law, not a theatre.
SPOCK: Captain, please tell the court this is not imagination, nor some clever photographic record. Are we seeing the actual events of thirteen years ago? (flash) Yes, gentlemen. On that screen as it happened, the incredible experience of Captain Christopher Pike on Talos Four. If, after witnessing this, the court wishes to turn this vessel back, I will release this ship to manual control.
MENDEZ: You're in no position to bargain. This is ridiculous. This man mutinied, stole your ship, abducted Captain Pike. Well, for me this has gone far enough.
KIRK: We still haven't heard the full story. I vote to continue.
MENDEZ: And I vote we do not. Deadlock, and since I'm 
KIRK: Not a deadlock. There's still one member of the trial board to be heard from.
MENDEZ: Very well. Captain Pike, it's up to you. Do we continue under these conditions? (flash)
KIRK: Yes.
Captain's log supplemental. Mister Spock, on trial for mutiny, has forced the court to accept unusual evidence. On our monitor screen, the voyage of Captain Pike and the Enterprise to the one forbidden world in all the galaxy.
MENDEZ: Screen on.

[Bridge]

TYLER: We've settled into orbit, sir.
GEOLOGIST: Geological lab report complete, Captain.
SPOCK: Preliminary lab survey ready, sir.
PIKE: Spectography?
GEOLOGIST: Our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, heavy with inert elements but well within safety limits.
PIKE: Gravity?
GEOLOGIST: Zero point nine of Earth.
TYLER: Captain? Reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. As I read it, they polarise out as rounded metal bits. Could be parts of a spaceship hull.
PIKE: Prep a landing party of six. You feel up to it?
SPOCK: Yes, sir.
TYLER: Yes, sir. 
PIKE: Sorry, Number One. With little information on this planet, we'll have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us.
NUMBER ONE: Of course, sir.

[Transporter room]

PIKE: There's no indication of problems down there, but let's not take chances.
PITCAIRN: Yes, sir. There's a canyon to the left. We can set you there completely unobserved.
PIKE: Right.

[Planet surface]

(the group explores until they find a rough settlement) 
CREWMAN: Sir.
OLD MAN: They're men. They're humans.
PIKE: Captain Christopher Pike, United Space Ship Enterprise.
HASKINS: Doctor Theodore Haskins, American Continent lnstitute.
SURVIVOR: Is Earth all right?
PIKE: The same old Earth, and you'll see it very soon.
TYLER: And you won't believe how fast you can get back. Well the time barrier's been broken. Our new ships can
HASKINS: This is Vina. Her parents are dead. She was born almost as we crashed.
(The reunion is being watched on another screen, by people with big bald heads) 
PIKE: (as the survivors pack up the settlement) Enterprise.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: Landing party, come in.
PIKE: We'll begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: Quarters are being prepared, sir. Have I permission to send out scouting and scientific parties now?
PIKE: Yes, affirmative on the
VINA: You appear to be healthy and intelligent, Captain. A prime specimen.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: I didn't get that last message, Captain.
PIKE: Er, affirmative on request. Landing party out.
HASKINS: You must forgive her choice of words, Captain. She's lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists.
BOYCE: If they can, er, spare you a moment, I'd like to make my medical report.
VINA: I think it's time to show the Captain our secret.
BOYCE: Their health is excellent, almost too good.
HASKINS: There's a reason for our condition, but we've had some doubt if Earth is ready to learn the secret. Let the girl show you. We'll accept your judgment.
(Pike follows Vina up a slope to a ledge by a rock face) 
VINA: You're tired, but don't worry. You'll feel much better soon. Don't you see it? Here and here.
PIKE: I, I don't understand.
VINA: You will. You're a perfect choice. 
(she vanishes, and so do all the survivors and their encampment. A door opens in the rock face, Pike is knocked out and taken inside. At the settlement -) 
TYLER: Captain! (everyone rushes over in time to see the door closing in the rock. They fire their phasers at it to no avail.

[Hearing room]

SPOCK [on screen]: Spock here.
NUMBER ONE [OC]: Landing party, come in.
SPOCK [on screen]: There is no survivors' encampment, Number One. This is all some sort of trap. We've lost the Captain. Do you read?
KIRK: What is it?
UHURA [OC]: It's for Commodore Mendez.
KIRK: Plead signal for you, sir. Go ahead, Uhura.
UHURA [OC]: Commodore Mendez, urgent. Subspace monitors show Enterprise receiving transmissions from planet Talos Four in violation of Starfleet General Orders.
KIRK: Receiving transmissions from Talos Four? Then the images we've been seeing are
SPOCK: Are coming from Talos Four, sir.
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk is here by relieved. You are ordered to assume command of the Enterprise. Disable vessel if necessary to prevent further contact. Message signed ComSol, Starfleet Command.
MENDEZ: Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty. You've not only finished yourself, Spock, but you've finished your Captain as well.
SPOCK: The Commodore must be aware that Captain Kirk knew nothing of this.
MENDEZ: And you're aware a Captain is responsible for everything that occurs on his ship. I order you to return this vessel back to manual control.
SPOCK: Sir, I respectfully decline.
MENDEZ: Very well. You've earned the consequences. This court is in recess.
(Mendez and yeoman leave, Scott and McCoy wheel Pike out after him)
KIRK: Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
SPOCK: Captain, Jim, please don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.
KIRK: Lock him up.

To be concluded next week...

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  is copyright of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Counter-Clock Incident
Stardate: 6770.3
Original Airdate: 12 Oct, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 6770.3. The Enterprise is on course for the planet Babel, where ambassadors from all Federation planets are waiting to honour the Enterprise's distinguished passenger, Commodore Robert April, first captain of the USS Enterprise, and for the past twenty years, Federation Ambassador at large. Now seventy five years old, Commodore April has reached mandatory retirement age.
[Bridge]

APRIL: No matter where I've travelled in the galaxy, Jim, this bridge is more like home than anywhere else. 
KIRK: Yes, Commodore, I know the feeling. 
APRIL: To me she was always like my child. I was there in the San Francisco Navy Yards when her unit components were built. 
(McCoy enters with Mrs. April) 
MCCOY: Jim, I didn't realise how many of the tools I use in Sickbay were designed by Sarah. 
SARAH: As the first medical officer aboard a ship equipped with warp drive, I'm afraid I had to come up with new ideas all the time. 
KIRK: Your modesty is unnecessary, Mrs. April. Your achievements as a pioneer doctor in space are well known. 
MCCOY: And it's nice to know the lady is as intelligent as she is beautiful. Much like the flower she carries. 
SARAH: Oh, Doctor, flattery will get you everywhere. But I'm afraid my flower is dying. 
KIRK: It's a native of Capella Four, isn't it? 
SARAH: Yes, but it has a life span of only a few hours. This morning it was a seedling, within a few hours it will be dead. 
SPOCK: Excuse me, Captain. You asked to be notified when we made visual contact with the Beta Niobe nova. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. Mrs. April, you're about to see another of the galaxy's most beautiful sights, the Beta Niobe's supernova. 
(A glowing ring doughnut is on the viewscreen) 
SARAH: It is beautiful, but also very deadly. 
SPOCK: We're travelling at a safe distance from the nova, Mrs. April. 
APRIL: Beta Niobe. You were present when the star first started its explosion, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, we were, Commodore. 
SPOCK: Captain, sensors are picking up an unidentified object travelling at an incredible speed, presently on collision course with the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Put the ship on Red Alert. How fast is it travelling, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: At a speed that should be impossible to achieve. Something on the order of warp thirty six. 
APRIL: No natural object has ever been recorded as travelling at that speed. 
SPOCK: I believe it is not a natural object, but a ship. 
KIRK: But who would have the technology to build a ship that could travel at such a speed? 
SPOCK: No known race, Captain. Nevertheless, it will contact us in one point four minutes. 
KIRK: Hard about, helmsman. Change course for twenty four mark seven. 
SPOCK: Correction, Captain. The ship was on a collision course only by coincidence. It is apparently heading for the heart of the Beta Niobe nova. 
KIRK: That's a course of self-destruction. Lieutenant Uhura, open hailing frequencies. I want to talk to that ship's captain. 
UHURA: Captain, that ship is not responding. 
KIRK: All right, if they won't talk, we'll slow them down. Mister Sulu, put a tractor beam on that ship. 
SULU: Tractor beam on and operating, Captain. 
AREX: We're having a small effect on other ship's speed, Captain. It has dropped to a speed of warp thirty two. 
UHURA: Captain, they are making visual contact. 
KIRK: Put it on the screen, Lieutenant. 
(A blonde woman appears. She speaks, but the sounds are unintelligible. Then the picture fades) 
KIRK: I've never heard that language before. 
APRIL: Nor I. 
KIRK: Run that message through the universal translator, Lieutenant Uhura. Perhaps it can tell us what language she is speaking in. 
UHURA: Captain, the universal translator has the answer. The woman is speaking the same universal language we speak, but she is speaking in reverse. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, let's hear that tape backward, which should sound forward to us. 
UHURA: Yes, sir, on the screen. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: I am on a priority mission. Your beam is slowing my progress. Release my ship at once or I am doomed. 
KIRK: Open hailing frequencies again, Lieutenant. Tell her she is endangering her life if she remains on her present course. 
UHURA: No use, sir. She's refusing to answer. 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty, what is it? 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain, the engines are buckling. We cannot keep up at this speed. 
KIRK: Mister Arex, what is our speed? 
AREX: Now at warp eleven, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, how long until the alien vessel makes contact with the Beta Niobe nova? 
SPOCK: Three minutes forty two point seven seconds.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Give me three and a half minutes, Scotty.

[Bridge]

AREX: Still increasing speed, Captain. Warp fourteen. Warp fifteen. 
KIRK: I have no choice. I have to release the tractor beam. I can't destroy this ship and four hundred and thirty people to save one person. Mister Sulu, release our beam. 
SULU: Sir, I can't release the tractor beam. 
KIRK: What do you mean, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Our controls are inoperative. The ship isn't responding like it should. 
KIRK: Go to manual override. 
SULU: NO responding, sir. 
KIRK: We've got to release that beam, or we're going to follow that ship into the nova! 
SPOCK: Our speed is now warp twenty, and the other ship will contact the nova in one minute fifty eight point three seconds. 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Commodore, Mrs. April. It looks as though we may not reach Babel. 
APRIL: As starship personnel, we were always prepared to give our lives, Captain. 
SARAH: We are still starship personnel, Captain. 
KIRK: There's still one chance. After that ship enters the nova, it should burn up and break contact with our tractor beam. Mister Spock, how long will we have to apply full braking power and execute course change? 
SPOCK: We are up to warp twenty two and increasing, Captain. We shall have forty two point eight five seconds to correct our course after the alien ship enters the nova. 
KIRK: You heard that, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, we're going to apply full braking power in a minute.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, Captain. Our engines are almost gone.

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: They've only lasted this long at this speed because the alien vessel is pulling us with our own tractor beam. 
SPOCK: The alien vessel will contact Beta Niobe in fifty two point three seconds, Captain. 
SPOCK: Contact in thirty nine seconds. Thirty eight, thirty seven 
SPOCK: Thirteen, twelve, eleven 
KIRK: Get ready to execute course change, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
(The little ship enters the nova) 
KIRK: Now, Mister Sulu! 
SULU: Something's wrong, Captain. We're still being pulled by the alien ship. 
KIRK: Impossible. It should have been destroyed instantly. 
AREX: Apparently it was not, Captain. Our tractor beam is still connected to her. 
SPOCK: And we are still increasing speed. Contact with the nova in thirty five point one eight seconds. 
KIRK: That other ship may have been able to survive the heat of a nova, but the Enterprise can't. Mister Scott, how about that full braking power?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: We're as badly off as before, Captain. We have no control of the ship as long as that alien lassie has us in tow.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Contact in twenty seconds. 
KIRK: Keep trying those controls, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Still no change, Captain. 
KIRK: It's got to work. 
(Kirk Fiddles with Sulu's switches) 
SPOCK: Fourteen seconds, thirteen, twelve 
KIRK: Never mind, Mister Spock, it's no use. 
(Sarah's flower shrivels in her hand. The Enterprise enters the nova and gets surrounded by sparkles) 
KIRK: We're still here. Lieutenant Uhura, can you get us a visual? 
(The viewscreen is white with black dots) 
APRIL: What? 
KIRK: Where are we? 
(The Enterprise is sailing serenely through this reverse negative universe - backwards)

Captain's log, stardate 6770.6. The Enterprise has passed into the most alien landscape I have ever seen. We are in some reverse universe where black stars shine in a white void. We are still in the tow of the alien ship, both of us having survived the extreme heat of the Beta Niobe nova.

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: This is Scott calling the Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty. How are we doing down there?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Well, we just had to learn to run the ship all over again. Every control is working in reverse.

[Bridge]

KIRK: All right. Lieutenant Uhura, we're going to contact that ship again. We need some answers. 
SARAH: Captain Kirk. The Capellan flower! 
APRIL: I'm sure Captain Kirk has other problems besides your flower, dear. 
SARAH: You don't understand. Before we entered this universe it was about to die. and now it's in full bloom again. 
KIRK: How's that possible? 
SARAH: It's as if it were growing younger again. I can almost feel it while I'm holding it. 
SPOCK: Captain, the flower is not the only thing on board that is growing younger. 
KIRK: Explain, Spock. 
SPOCK: Ship's chronometers are also running backward. The flow of time is reversed in this universe. The longer we stay here, the younger we will become. 
(Sarah's flower becomes a seed) 
UHURA: The alien ship is responding to our call, Captain. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: Your interference almost cost me my life. 
KIRK: I can understand her now, without the aid of the universal translator. 
SPOCK: Apparently our brains are also working in reverse, Captain, so we can now understand her language. That is why the ship seems to be operating in the reverse to us. 
KIRK: I'm Captain James T Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We tried to prevent you from entering the Beta Niobe nova. We assumed your ship would burn up. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: I had to return to my own universe, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Who are you? How did you come to be in our universe? 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: I am an explorer of space. I was caught unaware when Amphion, previously a dead star, went nova and came to life. I was pulled into the star. But instead of burning up, I passed into a universe where everything operates in reverse to my universe. 
KIRK: Our universe. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: Yes. My theory is that two stars going nova in the same place in both universes created a gateway which I passed through. 
APRIL: In her universe, a nova is a dead star which comes to life! And when the explosions of a nova in her universe and one in our universe occur together, it's possible to travel between the two universes. 
KIRK: Then we must return the same way, through the two novas. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: That would be impossible, Captain. Amphion is no longer nova. It has begun it's life as a star. I suggest you set a course to follow my ship. Perhaps our scientists can help solve your problem. 
KIRK: We have little choice.

Captain's log, supplemental. We are proceeding to Karla Five's planet, Arret.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Gentlemen, I'm sure none of us mind growing younger instead of older for a change. 
APRIL: It pleases me, Jim. If we stay here long enough, I'll no longer be at the mandatory retirement age. 
KIRK: Nevertheless, we must return home and I am open to suggestions. 
SPOCK: It is logical that we must reproduce the conditions that brought us here. Two novas must occupy the same space in both universes in order to create a gateway for us to travel through. One star dying in our universe, and one being born here would recreate the correct conditions. 
APRIL: That would take a remarkable coincidence, Mister Spock. 
UHURA [on monitor]: Captain, we are approaching Arret. Karla Five is asking if you are prepared to beam down to the planet. 
KIRK: Tell Karla Five that Mister Spock, Commodore April and myself will be beaming down. 
UHURA [on monitor}: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Karla Five has given us coordinates to beam down to her son's laboratory, Captain. 
KIRK: Her son? We don't have time for children's games right now, Scotty, but beam us down. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Laboratory]

(There is a baby in a playpen, and a man at a computer console) 
KARLA: May I introduce my son, Karl Four. 
KARL: (the man, of course) My honour to meet you, gentlemen. 
SPOCK: Most logical. If the flow of time is reversed, then one is born at an old age, and dies in infancy. Your descendants are born before you, and your ancestors are born after you. 
KIRK: Then the young child in the playpen 
KARLA: My father, Captain. 
KIRK: We could remain forever awed with the differences between our universes, Karla Five, but we must discover a way to return to our positive matter universe. 
KARL: Exactly the problem I have been working on since Karla informed me of your troubles, Captain Kirk. This is a map of our galaxy. Our home solar system is here. You entered our universe through the Amphion nova, here. (the opposite arm of the galaxy) 
KIRK: We need to coordinate this to our own universe. Can we do that, Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Apparently the two universes occupy the same space, but in different dimensions. 
APRIL: Assuming Beta Niobe and Amphion occupy the same space, we can determine if there are any other novas occupying the same space in both universes. 
SPOCK: Correct, Commodore. Now if you'll watch the star map, you'll see the Milky Way. Here is Beta Niobe, and here is Earth. It corresponds exactly with Arret. By superimposing both star maps, we will see where two stars occupy the same place in both universes. The red spheres indicate where two stars are in the same space. No pair are novas in both universes. 
APRIL: If stars begin as dead stars here then we could bring one of them to life prematurely. 
KIRK: Yes, we could act as a midwife giving birth to a star. Then we would have two novas in the same position and theoretically return home. 
KARLA: But I had to pass through the novas at my ship's top speed to avoid burning up. Your ship isn't capable of such a speed. 
SPOCK: That's true, Captain. 
KARLA: You are welcome to use my ship, Captain. 
KIRK: I have a crew of four hundred and thirty, Karla Five. Your ship is suitable for only a few people. 
SPOCK: We can't use her ship to transport us, Captain, but we could use it as an unmanned ship with our tractor beam attached. 
APRIL: It could work. That's how we arrived here in the first place. 
KIRK: It should work, yes. But any miscalculation anywhere along the way and we'll be plunging tail first into a supernova.

Captain's log, stardate 6770.1. Time continues to flow backward for us. We have set course for a dead star in this anti-matter universe that corresponds with the nova Minara in ours. We're being pulled by Karla Five's unmanned vessel, which is equipped with enough positive matter armament to ignite the dead star into life.

[Bridge]

KIRK: we just might get you to Babel after all, Commodore. 
APRIL: I'll be glad to get home, but not necessarily to Babel. It only means the end of my career, Jim. 
UHURA: Message coming in from Arret, Captain. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: I want to wish you luck, Captain. Whether you succeed or fail, the outcome will remain unknown to me. 
KIRK: Yes, Karla Five. We'll burn to a crisp or escape into our own universe. Either way, you'll never hear from us again. Thank you for the sacrifice of your vessel. 
KARLA [on viewscreen]: It is a small sacrifice, Captain Kirk. Success. 
SULU: Tractor beam working properly, Captain. 
AREX: We're meeting the speed of Karla Five's unmanned vessel, Captain. 
KIRK: How much time before the youngest crew member returns to the time of birth? 
SPOCK: Eighteen minutes thirty seven seconds in real time. But long before that we shall all be children. And, Captain, that also means we are losing our knowledge at an alarming rate. It is possible we will soon be unable to operate the Enterprise. 
KIRK: How is our course, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: I don't know. What am I doing here? What is all this equipment? 
SPOCK: He's too young, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Arex, take over for him. Lieutenant Uhura, report to navigation console. 
UHURA: I'm sorry, sir, I don't understand all this equipment. What do I do with these controls? 
KIRK: Never mind. Spock, can you fill in for Sulu and Uhura? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain, but who will fill in for you? 
KIRK: What do you mean? 
SPOCK: At what age did you become a starship captain? And when did you enter Starfleet Academy? 
KIRK: I see what you mean. 
SPOCK: As a Vulcan, I age the slowest. I will be capable of assuming command longer than anyone else. But even I will become too young to know what to do.

Captain's log, supplemental. We have eleven minutes of real time left to reach the dead star, but all around my crew are turning into children, unable to operate the ship.

[Bridge]

(Kirk looks like he's not old enough to shave, April is middle-aged and Uhura's feet don't reach the floor any more) 
SPOCK: Ten minutes fourteen point twenty one seconds, Captain. We shall arrive with only moments to spare. We will need to disconnect the tractor beam at the appropriate time. 
KIRK: Tractor beam? How do we do that, Spock? 
SPOCK: Captain, I must assume command. You are no longer able to command the Enterprise.
KIRK: Whatever you say. What shall I do? 
APRIL: Mister Spock, as long as I am aboard, I am senior officer. I hate to pull rank, but you will be capable of command only for a few minutes, not long enough to complete the manoeuvres necessary to take us home. 
SPOCK: You are correct, of course. Commodore April, command is yours. 
APRIL: Commodore? I'm Captain April, Mister Spock. 
SARAH: (now a vibrant red head) Robert, we're the only adults on the bridge. They're all teenagers and children. 
APRIL: Make sure no harm comes to them, Sarah. We have to ignite that dead star if we're going home. Mister Spock, you are still capable of following orders? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. 
APRIL: Very good. Assume your post at the navigation console. 
SPOCK: The dead star is directly ahead, Captain, twelve degrees south of galactic plane. 
APRIL: Arm Karla Five's vessel, Spock. 
SPOCK: Vessel armed, Captain. Nine seconds to impact. Eight, seven, 
(The two ships rush towards the star) 
SPOCK: Three, two 
APRIL: Hang on, we're going right into the heart of the nova. 
(Kaboom, sparkles, and Enterprise flies out of an expanding gas cloud, the right way around) 
APRIL: We did it! We're home again! We're all right. We're home. The reverse aging process has stopped. 
SARAH: But the Enterprise crew, they're all children. 
APRIL: They can enter the transporter. It retains a memory of their original molecular structure. 
SARAH: But what about us? We don't have to use the transporter. We can remain young, live our lives over again. You could command a starship once more. 
APRIL: What a blessing to be able to live one's life over again, if the life you've led has left you unfulfilled. No Sarah, I don't want to live it all over again. I couldn't improve one bit on what we've had together. 
SARAH: Oh, Robert. 
(They embrace and kiss) 
(Later, everyone is back to how they were at the start of the show) 
KIRK: We've received a message from the Federation that might bring you some cheer. Lieutenant Uhura, would you relay it to Commodore April and his wife? 
UHURA: In view of Commodore April's heroic actions aboard the USS Enterprise this stardate, we are reviewing his mandatory retirement, and will consider his appeal to remain Federation Ambassador at large. 
APRIL: Well, good. Just because someone is seventy five years old doesn't mean they're ready to stop giving service to the galaxy! 
SULU: Arriving at Babel in one hour fifteen minutes, Captain. 
KIRK: I see your flower has blossomed again. 
SARAH: Yes, our trip into the negative universe gave it a second life. It gave all of us a second life.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


Albatross
Stardate: 5275.6
Original Airdate: 28 Sep, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 5275.6. Preparing to beam aboard the Enterprise, following the successful completion of delivery of medical supplies to the planet Dramia, in the remote Dramian star system.
[Dramia]

(Dramians are light orange, have massive torsos and feet, minute waists and hips, and elongated four fingered hands) 
DRAMIAN: We of Dramia wish to thank you and the others of your Federation for your invaluable assistance, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: We hope through our medical assistance programs. to develop and strengthen relations with star systems such as yours, Supreme Prefect. Well, shall we? Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us aboard, Scotty. 
DRAMIAN: If you would be so kind, Captain. 
KIRK: Belay that, Mister Scott. Yes, sir? 
DRAMIAN: Commander Demos? 
DEMOS: I have here a warrant for the arrest and trial of one of your party, Captain. 
KIRK: Warrant? Who? 
DRAMIAN: Read it, Captain. 
KIRK: (reading scroll) You are hereby directed to surrender for trial by the people of Dramia, Doctor Leonard McCoy, Medical Officer, USS Enterprise. Is this some kind of joke? 
DEMOS: The wanton slaughter of hundreds of people is not a joke, Captain. 
MCCOY: Slaughter? Hundreds of people? 
SPOCK: According to this, Doctor McCoy was responsible for a plague which ravaged the planet Dramia Two some nineteen years ago, Captain. 
KIRK: Let me see that. 
DRAMIAN: As you will note, Captain, the warrant is perfectly in order, approved by your own Federation.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Doctor McCoy arrested? For murder, Captain? Sir, if you want me and some of the men to beam down, just in case 
KIRK [OC]: No, Mister Scott. The warrant's legal. Mister Spock and I are at the Hall of Justice. We'll keep you informed.

[Hall of Justice]

DEMOS: Your Doctor McCoy headed a mass inoculation programme on Dramia Two, nineteen years ago. When his force left, a massive plague struck the planet, killing most of its people. 
KIRK: That doesn't mean he was responsible for it. 
DEMOS: His trial will tell, Captain. 
KIRK: Trial? You mean kangaroo court. I've heard about Dramian justice. 
SPOCK: Captain, you're becoming emotional. 
KIRK: Of course I am. Bones harming other beings. You know better, Spock. I know better. Not Bones.

[Detention cell]

MCCOY: I wish I could be as sure, Jim. I, I just don't know. Is it possible that I really did? 
KIRK: Nonsense. 
SPOCK: The termination of your inoculation programme and the subsequent outbreak of plague could have been coincidence, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Or a tragic mistake on my part. 
KIRK: I don't buy that, Bones. Guard! 
SPOCK: What now, Captain? 
KIRK: Some pre-trial investigation, Mister Spock. On Dramia Two. 
GUARD: Do not be assured by your friend's plans. Dramian justice is swift. Too swift for them to save you, perhaps.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Anything yet, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: No, Captain. The historical records of this solar system are spotty, at best, going back nineteen years. Mostly they're technical data, meteor showers, auroras, radiation reports. 
KIRK: There it is. 
SPOCK: Plague, Dramia Two. Of unknown origin, characterised by pigmentation changes in skin of victim, debilitation, death. Certain species known to have natural immunity, notably Vulcan. Hmm. Interesting. 
KIRK: Go on, Mister Spock.

[Hall of Justice]

DEMOS: You are sure? 
GUARD: Yes, Commander. The Earth captain is planning to visit Dramia Two to investigate the case. 
DEMOS: Ready a patrol ship.

Captain's log, stardate 5275.8. Underway for planet Dramia Two for investigation of McCoy case. We are beyond subspace communications with Starfleet. Am proceeding under my own authority.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Estimated time of arrival, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Approximately four hours, Captain. 
KIRK: Increase to warp six, Mister Scott. We may be racing against time.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: If I know Dramian justice methods. 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, Captain!

[Bridge]

SULU: Ship in pursuit, Captain. 
KIRK: Origin? 
SULU: I'd say Dramia, sir. It appears to be a one-man craft. 
UHURA: Shall I make contact, sir? 
KIRK: Yes. Belay that, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: You're planning something, Captain? 
KIRK: Unless I miss my guess, that's friend Demos. 
SULU: What if he attacks, sir? 
KIRK: Why should he? We haven't contacted him, so we must not have detected him. He'd have to explain an attack. Besides, he'll probably prefer to sneak aboard, seeing that we carelessly left the hangar doors open. 
UHURA: But the hangar doors aren't open, Captain. 
KIRK: Ah, yes. Take care of that oversight, will you, Mister Sulu? 
(Demos sees the hangar doors open, and flies straight in)

[Corridor outside hangar deck]

(Kirk and Spock arrive. Demos goes for a weapon) 
KIRK: Now, now, Demos. You're hardly in a position to take on an entire crew. 
DEMOS: And you are not in authority to conduct an investigation in our star system. 
KIRK: You will remind me to report my conduct to the Federation, won't you Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Of course, Captain. 
DEMOS: I demand that you report to the Federation now! 
KIRK: I would, but unfortunately we're out of communications range. 
DEMOS: Then I will proceed to your starbase and report your act. 
KIRK: Sorry, Commander. Your ship is, er, impounded. 
SPOCK: You are a stowaway, Commander. 
DEMOS: I have been tricked.

Captain's log, stardate 5275.9. We are approaching Dramia Two, where we hope to find the answers concerning the question of Doctor McCoy's guilt or innocence. Situation normal. Aurora reported in the sector, however.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Radiation level, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Intense, Captain. 
SPOCK: Decidedly non-lethal, however. 
KIRK: Good. Then it's safe for us to beam down to Dramia Two. Shall we, gentlemen?

[Transporter room]

(Kirk, Spock and Demos are on the pads) 
SCOTT: You're sure it's safe, Captain? 
KIRK: Absolutely. 
SPOCK: Decidedly. There's a difference, Captain. 
KIRK: Now, now, Mister Spock, you're not trying to scare our Dramian friend, are you? Of course, you can back out if you'd like, Commander. 
DEMOS: I go. 
KIRK: You heard the man, Mister Scott.

[Planet surface]

(It is a scene of devastation. Barren ground and ruined buildings) 
KIRK: Not the most enchanting place I've ever been to. 
DEMOS: Plagues seldom leave behind fields of flowers, Captain. 
(They see a figure amongst the ruins) 
KIRK: Trouble? 
DEMOS: They do not like outsiders. 
SPOCK: Surely you're not an outsider, Commander. You're Dramian. 
DEMOS: The distinction here is between the world of the living and the world of the walking dead. 
KIRK: Inhospitable or not, he mustn't get away. 
(They pursue a figure) 
KIRK: Wait! 
(The figure jumps off a cliff) 
KIRK: He's disappeared. It's almost as if he dematerialised. 
SPOCK: Not likely, Captain. 
(Speck points to an opening in the cliff face)

[Cave entrance]

DEMOS: I would advise against that, Captain. 
KIRK: I'm sure you won't mind if I ignore your advice. 
SPOCK: Caution would seem to be advisable, Captain. 
KIRK: Bones' life is on the line, Mister Spock.

[Cave]

KIRK: Cave dwellers? In the midst of your civilisation? 
DEMOS: A result of your Doctor McCoy and his inhumane methods. 
KIRK: You say it, Demos, but that doesn't 
(Then he is pounced upon by the Dramian they have been chasing. Spock and Demos pull him off) 
DEMOS: He attacked you because you are an Earthling, Captain, even as was McCoy. 
KIRK: But how did he survive the plague? 
DEMOS: He, like the others who remain here, was away at the time. They returned to their planet to find that their families had succumbed to the plague. He and a few others, senseless in their grief, chose to live here in desolation. You see, Captain, there were no actual survivors. 
KOL-TAI: You are wrong. There was a survivor. I, Kol-Tai, survived. By what miracle, I do not know. 
KIRK: Then you can tell us. Do you remember? 
KOL-TAI: I remember people all about me, becoming blue in colour, then green and finally red. 
SPOCK: The pigmentation changes associated with the disease in our computer records, Captain. 
KIRK: Kol-Tai. Doctor McCoy, do you remember him? 
KOL-TAI: The Earth doctor. He saved my life. He treated me for Saurian virus. A man who saves does not also kill, Commander.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Beam us aboard, Mister Scott. Quickly. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Let's get underway for Dramia. 
SCOTT: Sir, who is that? 
KIRK: Meet Kol-Tai, Mister Scott. A friend of Doctor McCoy's.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Warp six, Scotty.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: I'll pour on the coal, Captain. 
(As in an old blooper reel....)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Spock? 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes, Captain?

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: How's our number one passenger doing? 
SPOCK: Clean, fed, in good health, and resting. 
KIRK [OC]: Good. We want him to be a sterling witness.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise's course takes it through the yellow, green, blue and red aurora) 
SULU: Approaching Dramia, Captain. 
KIRK: Let's hope the trial hasn't started. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. What is it? 
SPOCK [OC]: The trial may be academic. 
KIRK: Academic.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Kol-Tai is turning blue.

[Bridge]

KIRK: The plague!

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Set up an immediate quarantine, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: He's hardly fit to testify at the trial, Captain. 
KIRK: We've got to save him. 
DEMOS: For McCoy's sake. 
KIRK: Yes, for McCoy's sake. And for Kol-Tai's sake too. You see, Commander, we do place a value on life. All life. Does that shock you, Commander? 
DEMOS: It is not that. It is 
SPOCK: Captain, you're blue. 
(So are all the bridge crew, and Scott, and Demos. As they start to collapse) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, take command.

SPOCK: Captain's log, stardate 5276.4. We are in orbit around the planet Dramia, under the conditions of general quarantine. As Commanding Office, I have ordered the activation of General Order Six.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: General Order Six has been activated? 
SULU: Yes, sir. If everyone on board has perished at the end of twenty four hours, the ship will self-destruct in order to protect other beings from the disease on board. 
SPOCK: Good. Report to Sickbay, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: But sir, who will monitor? 
SPOCK: I assure you I am capable, Mister Sulu. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
(He collapses against the wall) 
SPOCK: Captain, your condition. 
KIRK: We have to get McCoy. Must find an antidote. 
(Uhura passes out) 
SPOCK: This is the Enterprise. I must speak with the Supreme Prefect. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: Why do you speak, and not your Captain? 
SPOCK: The Captain and all of the crew members are incapacitated. The plague is aboard the Enterprise. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: Demos? 
SPOCK: The same. You must release Doctor McCoy temporarily. He is needed to find an antidote. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: No. 
SPOCK: We have a witness in McCoy's behalf. You must trust me. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: Let the witness speak. 
SPOCK: Impossible. He too is stricken. 
DRAMIAN [on viewscreen]: Demos cannot speak, the witness cannot speak. Yet you wish us to release the prisoner, McCoy. Your treachery is transparent, Vulcan. 
(end of transmission) 
KIRK: Got to get McCoy. 
SPOCK: If you'll permit me, Captain, I might be able to get McCoy. 
KIRK: Spock, (he turns green) you're sure? 
SPOCK: I can't infect the planet, Captain. And I can get McCoy.

[Detention cell]

(Spock neck-pinches the guard) 
MCCOY: Spock! What in the world? 
SPOCK: Later, Doctor. 
(He uses the guard's device to nullify the forcefield holding McCoy) 
MCCOY: Spock, have you and Jim gone out of your minds? Why, this is a jailbreak! 
SPOCK: Doctor, just come with me, please. 
MCCOY: No, Spock. It's illegal, that's what it is. Besides, I must stand trial. I have to find out. 
SPOCK: Doctor, you will stand trial, you will find out, after you've found and antidote for the plague which is about to kill everyone aboard the Enterprise. 
MCCOY: Plague? Why didn't you tell me? 
SPOCK: You wouldn't give me a chance. You realise, Doctor, if you go, and fail to find an antidote, you too will die. 
MCCOY: I'm a doctor, Spock, a doctor. Get us beamed aboard. 
SPOCK: Beam us aboard, Captain.

[Transporter room]

(Kirk has operated the controls, then collapsed again) 
MCCOY: Jim!

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Anything, Spock?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Negative, Doctor. The file on all known diseases doesn't recognise these symptoms of pigmentation changes.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Blast it, Spock, work harder. They're in the terminal stage. 
(Kirk is yellow) 
MCCOY: My readings keep shifting. It must be the activity of that blasted aurora. 
KIRK: Bones, that's it. Aurora, changing colour. 
MCCOY: Jim? Aurora? What

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: Spock, feed in the data without mentioning the colour change symptoms.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK [OC]: That's it, Doctor. The colour change symptoms were misleading the computer. 
MCCOY: Because they were caused by the aurora. Spock, there was an aurora nineteen years ago. I remember 
SPOCK [OC]: Which brought on the particular plague just as this aurora has brought it on. 
MCCOY: I didn't do it! Spock, the disease, what is it? What's the antidote?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: That's the problem, Doctor. There is no known antidote. However, Doctor, do you remember a certain Kol-Tai? A man you treated for Saurian virus?

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Yes, I think I do. But what has that got to do with anything?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Possibly nothing. However, Kol-Tai did survive the first plague.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Spock, I see what you mean. Saurian virus antibodies in his blood, that's what made him immune.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: I presume, Doctor, that you have a supply of live Saurian virus antibodies in your laboratory?

[Sickbay]

(McCoy gives the patients an injection, and their skin colour returns to normal. They are soon up and about again) 
KIRK: Bones, you did it! 
KOL-TAI: Again. 
DEMOS: Thank you, Doctor.

Captain's log, stardate 5276.8. Preparing to beam aboard the Enterprise, following the Dramian ceremonies honouring Doctor Leonard McCoy for his significant achievements in the field of interstellar medicine.

[Dramia]

DRAMIAN: We of Dramia wish to thank you, Doctor, for your discovery of the antidote which frees us from future attacks of the auroral plague.
MCCOY: Thank Mister Spock too. And Captain Kirk. 
DRAMIAN: We will even forget about the unorthodox manner of your release, Doctor. 
KIRK: And we'll forget about a certain stowaway. 
DEMOS: We must apologise. 
MCCOY: I think it's time we got aboard ship, isn't it, Jim? 
KIRK: Beam us aboard, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, Captain.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Gentlemen, I don't know about you, but I'm ready to get back to Starbase. 
SCOTT: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: And I'm ready to get back to some of that monotonous, old, routine Sickbay work. 
SPOCK: Including, I would hope, some of that monotonous, old dispensing of the regular vitamin rations to the crew. 
MCCOY: What is that supposed to mean? 
SPOCK: Well, you have been derelict in your duties of late, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Spock, you know as well as I do what we've all just been through. 
SPOCK: Hippocrates would not have approved of lame excuses, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Why, that, that. Jim, if I'm ever in jail again, don't send that Vulcan to release me. Just let me rot.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Practical Joker
Stardate: 3183.3
Original Airdate: 21 Sep, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 3183.3. Our present mission, a routine geological survey of type four asteroids, is nearing completion. The cruise has been uneventful and we are now approaching the final asteroid in our assigned sector, a full seventy two hours ahead of schedule.
[Bridge]

(As they approach the asteroid, three Romulan warships become visible, and Enterprise is attacked) 
KIRK: Scotty, give us maximum shielding. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, bring us about to a new heading of nine oh two mark six. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. Mister Spock, who the devil's attacking us? 
SPOCK: Romulans, Captain. They were apparently lying in wait on the far side of that asteroid.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: A cold-blooded ambush. Let's give the heathens a fight they won't soon forget.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Negative. We've suffered damage and we're outnumbered three to one. I think this is an instance where discretion is the better part of valour. 
UHURA: Captain, I've established contact with the Romulan commander. 
KIRK: I demand an explanation for this unprovoked attack. 
COMMANDER [on viewscreen]: Unprovoked? My dear Captain, your ship trespassed into Romulan territory, in defiance of your own treaty. We had no choice but to defend ourselves. 
KIRK: We came nowhere near Romulan territory. I deny all charges and plan to file a detailed complaint with the Federation. 
COMMANDER [on viewscreen]: You seem to forget that invasion of Romulan territory is punishable by death. 
(More weapons hits) 
SPOCK: Captain, the Romulan ships are overtaking us. At close range our deflectors will be unable to repel their attack. 
SULU: Captain Kirk! An unidentified energy field is drifting into our path. 
SPOCK: Strange. It's not on the charts. 
KIRK: But it may be just what we need to shake the Romulans. Batten down, we're going through. 
(Enterprise sails into a foggy area with electrical discharges) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, what are our chances? 
SPOCK: The field is composed of highly charged subatomic particles. If the density grows no worse we should be able to ride it out.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Hold together, little darling, hold together.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise emerges from the other side) 
SULU: It worked. The Romulans turned back rather than risk the energy field. 
KIRK: Reduce speed to sub warp cruise. We'll lay by here for repairs. 
UHURA: After that ride, I could use some repairs.

[Officer's mess]

(A sumptuous feast with platters of fruit and dessert still on the table, and drinking glasses that look like some vases I've got) 
KIRK: How are the repairs progressing, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Just fine, Captain. We should be in tip-top shape in another twenty four hours, no thanks to those Romulan vultures. 
MCCOY: Nevertheless, we're still in business and I propose a toast to a narrow escape. 
UHURA: Cheers! 
KIRK: Salud! 
UHURA: To us. 
SULU: He, this glass just leaked all over me. 
UHURA: How do you like that? So did mine. 
SCOTT: And mine. 
SPOCK: It appears we're all victims of a rather bizarre coincidence. The odds against something like this happening are astronomical. 
MCCOY: What coincidence? We used to pull stunts like this in medical school with trick glasses. Don't look now, but we've got a practical joker in our midst. 
KIRK: Now let's not jump to conclusions, Bones. Yes, we all got wet, so what's the joke? 
SCOTT: Twas probably a minor slip-up of the food synthesisers. I'll check it out after lunch. 
KIRK: Fine. Right now why don't we all eat up before our food gets cold. 
(But before the fork reaches his lips, it bends and the food slides off) 
MCCOY: Another coincidence, Jim? 
KIRK: I'm beginning to wonder, Bones, I am beginning to wonder.

Captain's log, supplemental. Unusual incidents have continued to plague our crew. Even the perceptive Mister Spock has fallen victim to these simple-minded pranks.

[Bridge]

(Spock has his eyes pressed against a binocular device) 
SPOCK: Curious, very curious. 
KIRK: What have you got there, Spock? 
SPOCK: Captain, I found this device on my console. It seems to serve no useful function, and 
(When he lifts his face from the eye pieces, of course there are rings around his eyes and laughter from the crew) 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Spock, it's your

As these little surprises have grown more and more frequent, our crew members have found them less and less amusing.

[Mess hall]

AREX: Officer Scott, won't you join us for lunch? 
SCOTT: No thanks, Arex. I'm just going to grab a sandwich and get me back to work. 
AREX: Very good. 
SCOTT: One grilled cheese on rye. What the blazes? Hold it just a doggone minute! 
(All sorts of foods are being thrown from the dispenser and piling up around his feet) 
SCOTT: I said one sandwich, that's all. Someone turn off this infernal food factory. 
M'RESS: Excuse me for laughing, but 
SCOTT: Go ahead and laugh. Big joke. I'll bet you two are responsible for this, ay? 
AREX: Hey, wait a minute. We didn't cause this to happen. 
SCOTT: Tell that to the Captain. I'm reporting both of you just as soon as I 
(Then he gets a custard pie in the face)

The situation has reached the point where friends are accusing friends. The entire crew is on edge, myself included.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Okay, this whole thing has gone far enough! 
AREX: Sir? 
KIRK: I've just picked up my clean uniforms from the service chute and when I put this one on, I discovered this. 
(In big bold letters on his back - Kirk is a Jerk. The comm. system bursts into laughter) 
KIRK: When you all finish laughing, I'd appreciate an explanation. 
SPOCK: Captain, I never laugh. 
KIRK: Well somebody certainly did. 
M'RESS: Captain Kirk, look behind you. 
KIRK: Really, M'Ress, you're going to have to be a little more clever than that. 
AREX: This is no joke, sir. 
KIRK: Now what? 
(Vapour is coming from under the bridge doors)

[Corridor]

(Kirk and Spock exit the turbolift) 
SPOCK: It appears to be a legitimate fog. Perhaps the humidification system is 
KIRK: Here, Spock. Whoops! 
SPOCK: Amazing. This deck is covered with ice. 
KIRK: And it was almost covered with us. I don't know what's going on here, but it's going to stop before someone's hurt. 
(laughter from the comm. system)
KIRK: There's that laugh again. Something awfully familiar about it. What do you make of all this, Spock? 
SPOCK: The evidence all points to one guilty party, Captain. 
KIRK: You mean you know who's behind these stunts? 
SPOCK: Not who, what. I believe our practical joker is the Enterprise itself. 
KIRK: Of course. That laugh, it's the voice of our main computer. 
SPOCK: Precisely. 
KIRK: Spock, I want all hands at their stations. We're going to run a complete systems check from bow to stern and get to the bottom of this.

[Outside Rec Room]

(A light by the door sign says unoccupied) 
UHURA: Good, the Rec Room is unoccupied. At least we can enjoy our off-hour without worrying about practical jokes. 
MCCOY: Just what the doctor ordered. 
(They go inside and the doors close just as) 
SPOCK [OC]: All hands to your stations. This is a general alert. Repeat, all hands to your

[Rec room]

(In the big, empty room, oblivious to the announcement) 
SULU: Well, what'll it be, a swim at the beach? 
(It's a holodeck. They get a beach with waves and seagulls) 
MCCOY: It is lovely, but I'm more in the mood for a nice quiet walk in the woods. 
UHURA: Doctor, that sounds perfect. 
SULU: Then woods it is. 
(He works the panel, and they get their grass and trees. 
MCCOY: Ah, now that's more like it. Shall we?

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Captain, crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura are still in the Recreation room and do not answer the call to stations. 
KIRK: That's strange. Repeat the call. 
M'RESS: Doctor McCoy, Lieutenant Uhura and Helmsman Sulu, report to the Bridge immediately. Doctor McCoy, Lieutenant Uhura and

[Rec room - forest]

SULU: It's so peaceful. So relaxing. 
MCCOY: And best of all, no practical jokes. 
(laughter) 
UHURA: What was that? 
SULU: I'm not sure. It almost sounded like someone chuckling. 
MCCOY: It was probably just one of the audio tapes rewinding. Come on, there's lots more to see. 
(Out of their sight, a pit in the ground gets covered by fallen branches, then leaves. Laughter as the three walk towards it) 
MCCOY: Lieutenant Uhura, I have to hand it to you. This is just what the doctor would have ordered. 
(Then they fall into the pit) 
SULU: There it is again. Someone is definitely laughing at us. 
MCCOY: I'm going to get to the bottom of this right now. 
COMPUTER: Get to the bottom of this (laughs) 
MCCOY: Okay, whoever you are, so we fell for your juvenile joke. Now get us out. 
COMPUTER: Fell for my joke. (laughs)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock, quiz the central computer about McCoy and the others. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Question. Why are we unable to communicate with crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura? 
COMPUTER: Answer. That is for me to know and for you to find out. 
KIRK: Did I hear that right? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. The dysfunction is more severe than I thought. Question. Are you deliberately holding our missing crewmembers prisoner? 
COMPUTER: I'll never tell. 
KIRK: Let me try. This is Captain James T Kirk speaking. You are programmed to obey any direct order I may give, correct? 
COMPUTER: Correct. 
KIRK: Very well. I order you to release crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura immediately. 
COMPUTER: Say please. 
KIRK: Well, I'll be 
SPOCK: I suggest compliance, Captain. 
KIRK: Pu-leese. 
COMPUTER: Say pretty please with sugar on. 
(Instead, he calls up Scott on the main viewer) 
KIRK: Scotty. 
SCOTT [on viewscreen]: Aye, Captain. 
KIRK: We've got serious trouble with the main computer. We have reason to believe it's kidnapped three of our crew. 
SCOTT [on viewscreen]: Kidnapped? Blue blazes. 
KIRK: To prevent any further trouble, I want you to shut down all logic functions until we can get a handle on the problem. 
SCOTT [on viewscreen]: Aye, aye, sir.

[Rec room - forest]

(Uhura and Sulu help McCoy climb from the pit) 
UHURA: There. 
MCCOY: When I get my hands on the clown who's behind all this, I'll put him in Sickbay for a week. 
COMPUTER: Temper, temper. Perhaps this will cool you off. 
(And now they are in the middle of a blizzard and up to their knees in snow) 
SULU: We've got a whiteout condition here. How will we ever find the exit?

[Computer room]

SCOTT: Time for a nap, old girl. Captain's orders. 
(Then the gravity goes off) 
SCOTT: (into communicator) Engineering to Bridge. Emergency.

[Bridge]

KIRK: (into communicator) Scotty, what the devil's going on?

[Computer room]

SCOTT: Beats me, sir. Our gravity just reversed polarity all by itself.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: An obvious defensive manoeuvre by the computer. 
KIRK: This is crazy. Our own computer's declared war on us and I haven't the slightest idea why. 
SPOCK: I have a theory, Captain, but first I suggest that if Officer Scott moves away from the computer, it might feel less threatened. 
KIRK: Scotty, vacate the computer room.

[Computer room]

SCOTT: Vacate sir? But

[Bridge]

KIRK: On the double, Officer Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye sir.

[Corridor]

(Scott crawls along the ceiling into the corridor, where he promptly falls to the floor) 
SCOTT: You bloody big scatterbrain. Make up your monumental mind.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Congratulations, Spock. Your strategy worked. Now would you tell me what's happening to my ship? 
SPOCK: You recall that energy field we passed through? 
KIRK: Certainly. 
SPOCK: Apparently, subatomic particles from that field have invaded our computer's circuits, much like bacteria infect living matter. As a result, the Enterprise is suffering the electronic equivalent of a nervous breakdown. 
KIRK: What can we do to stop it? 
SPOCK: I'm afraid I don't know, Captain. Its illogical behaviour precludes a logical solution.

[Rec room - arctic]

SULU: The temperature must be twenty below and its still dropping. 
UHURA: Look, this is still a room, no matter how it appears. If we can travel long enough in one direction, we're bound to reach a wall. Then we can feel our way to an exit. 
MCCOY: Then let's move before we all turn into icicles.

[Bridge]

CREWMAN [OC]: Search party seven to Bridge. 
KIRK: Bridge here. Report. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Captain, our sensors show the missing crewmembers are in the Rec Room all right, but the door's jammed. 
KIRK: Okay, stand by. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering. 
KIRK: Scotty, we need a work crew with power tools to open a frozen door. Have them report to, report to 
(Kirk starts giggling) 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain, what is it? Are you all (laughs) Are you 
(As everyone else starts laughing, Spock raises an eyebrow) 
KIRK: Come on, Spock. Where's that Vulcan sense of humour? 
SPOCK: Hmm. Just as I thought. 
AREX: Spock, what, what are you mumbling about? 
SPOCK: Our air is being pumped full of nitrous oxide. Better known as laughing gas. But it's no laughing matter, especially for Vulcans.

[Rec room - arctic]

(The three trapped people also have the giggles) 
UHURA: This blizzard keeps getting worse. 
SULU: I know. If we don't, if we don't keep moving we're going to freeze.

Captain's log, supplemental. Somehow Spock managed to switch on our emergency air before collapsing from the effects of the gas. The fresh air quickly revived us, although it'll be exhausted in another six hours.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We must cure the computer by then or there's no telling what we'll be forced to breathe next. Scotty, how's the door coming? 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain, none of our power tools work.

[Corridor]

SCOTT: Some kind of energy drain set up by the ship. We're giving it a mighty go with the crowbars, though. 
KIRK [OC]: Keep at it. We've got three people in there whose lives may depend on it.

[Rec room - arctic]

MCCOY: You two better go on without me. My old legs have given out. 
UHURA: But Doctor, we can't. 
(And the computer takes pity on them, They are in a formal garden) 
SULU: Well, what do you know? Come on, Doctor, we're finally getting out of here. 
MCCOY: I hate to be a pessimist, but that may not be as easy as you think. 
(Correction, not a garden, a maze. But the doors are pried open) 
MCCOY: Then again

[Bridge]

KIRK: You don't know how good it is to have you back on the Bridge, alive and well. 
MCCOY: We're as happy about it as you are, Jim. I'd just like to make one request. 
KIRK: Sure, Bones, what? 
MCCOY: Could you turn up the heat? 
KIRK: I'll see what I can 
SPOCK: Captain, we're underway. 
UHURA: Engine room reports all engines shut down, yet they're firing. 
SULU: Captain, the helm no longer responds. We're coming about to a new heading. 
KIRK: As soon as our course stabilizes, give me a reading. 
SULU: Course stabilizing at one one four mark twelve. 
SPOCK: We're heading back to the Neutral Zone. 
KIRK: And you can bet those Romulan ships will be gunning for us. 
(After a while) 
SPOCK: Sensors are picking up three ships, Captain. Magnification shows them to be Romulan warships. 
SULU: We're decelerating, sir. 
UHURA: Main cargo hatches are opening. I'll put them on the viewing screen. 
MCCOY: Jim, what in heaven's name is going on? 
KIRK: You know as much as I do, Bones. 
(Something floats out of the hatch, then expands to become a huge version of the Enterprise) 
SPOCK: The Romulan ships have halted their attack. Apparently the sight of a spacecraft twenty times their size has given them second thoughts. 
MCCOY: Okay, I admit it's an effective bluff, but so what? As soon as they figure it out, they'll destroy the balloon and us. 
KIRK: Wait a minute. There is a method to this madness. 
SPOCK: Please elaborate, Captain. 
KIRK: The Enterprise is pulling her biggest practical joke of all, and this time the joke's on the Romulans, the same Romulan ships that damaged the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: Are you suggesting that the Enterprise is seeking revenge? 
KIRK: What else? She's going to make fools of the Romulans by having them attack a balloon, and Romulans fear disgrace more than death.

[Romulan Bridge]

CENTURION: Commander, there's no radio response from the large ship. 
ROMULAN: Very well, it has refused surrender. Advance at attack speed. 
(They shoot, and it deflates amid computer laughter) 
ROMULAN: We've been tricked. After them. I want that Federation ship blasted into space dust.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: The Romulans are giving chase. 
MCCOY: They must be furious to follow us this deep into Federation territory. 
KIRK: (panic stricken) I don't care about the Romulans, I just want to avoid that energy field we passed through before. Helmsman, do you have a fix on it? 
SULU: Yes, Captain. Our course will take us nowhere near it. 
KIRK: Good! I couldn't face going through there again. 
COMPUTER: The energy field frightens you? 
KIRK: It petrifies me. 
COMPUTER: How interesting. 
SULU: We're changing course, to a direct bearing on the energy field. 
KIRK: No! We can't! 
(They do, and so do the Romulans)

[Romulan Bridge]

CENTURION: Commander, our instruments are useless in this field. We've lost contact with the Federation ship. 
ROMULAN: We've got to clear this field before our ships break up. Bring us about on a heading for home.

[Bridge]

(The computer is laughing, then) 
COMPUTER: My circuits! You tricked me, Kirk. How could you? 
MCCOY: What the devil is going on? 
KIRK: Bones, the worst thing you can do to a practical joker is to play a practical joke on them. 
COMPUTER: It's not fair. 
(Enterprise leaves the energy field) 
SULU: The controls are responding now. 
SPOCK: And I'm getting normal function in all computer modes. That last pass through the energy field apparently reversed all effects. 
MCCOY: Well done, Jim. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm picking up strange transmissions from the Romulan warships. Listen. 
ROMULAN [OC]: Turn off those food synthesisers! We're knee deep in desserts and they're still pouring out! 
MCCOY: Shall we tell them how they can reverse the effects of the field, Jim? 
KIRK: Yes, but later. Let's not spoil their fun just yet.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Bem
Stardate: 7403.6 
Original Airdate: Sep 14, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 7403.6. The Enterprise is on a series of exploratory and contact missions. Travelling with us as an independent observer is a member of a recently contacted alien species, Honorary Commander Ari bn Bem. He's from the planet Pandro in the Garo Seven system. We have taken up orbit around Delta Theta Three, a newly discovered class M planet. A previous scouting mission has reported possible aboriginal life forms here, and the Enterprise is to investigate and report.
[Briefing room]

(Enterprise is orbiting a very green planet) 
KIRK: Sensors report several groupings of aborigines. They may be dangerous. So I want all of us to avoid any unnecessary risks. But these monitoring devices have to be planted. Lieutenant Uhura will be tracking us throughout. Now, if there's any trouble of any kind, beam up immediately. Don't try to be a hero. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

(Bem is a green upright biped in a jumpsuit, with a red crest and slit irises to his eyes. Not quite the Bug Eyed Monster his name implies!) 
BEM: Kirk Captain, settings are almost complete. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, what are you doing here? 
BEM: This one has decided to accompany contact team for observation of same. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, you were assigned to this ship as an independent observer, yet you have spent the past six missions in your quarters. You haven't done any observing at all until now, when we're dealing with possibly a very dangerous planet. 
BEM: Patience. Every planet is dangerous to the ignorant. This one has decided that the nexus is now. Must observe workings of starship and crew. 
KIRK: This mission is not for casual observers. It could be hazardous. 
BEM: Am prepared. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, this is not a joyride, a pleasure excursion. I cannot let you beam down to the planet without adequate protection. I'm sure you understand the diplomatic consequences if anything were to happen to you while you are under my protection. 
BEM: Understanding it is, Captain, but this one remains adamant. Am prepared to accompany. 
KIRK: This is an odd time to remain adamant. All right, let's go. There's a planet waiting for us. 
BEM: This one has already set controls, Mister Scotty. 
SCOTT: Everything appears to be all right, sir. Co-ordinates are locked on the landing site. 
KIRK: Energise.

[Planet surface]

(Three of the party materialise at the edge of a lake, but Kirk and Spock materialise over the water and fall in. Bem jumps in after them) 
BEM: Assistance is offered. 
(Underwater, Bem's lower half walks around the back of Kirk and Spock, and two sinuous arms take their phasers and communicators, replacing them with fakes?) 
KIRK: We're all right. 
(Back on dry land) 
KIRK: In the future, Commander Bem, you will leave the operation of the transporter to Mister Scott, or one of the regular transporter crew. 
SCOTT: Captain, Lieutenant Uhura reports some peculiar activity here on the planet. 
KIRK: (taking Scott's communicator) What is it, Lieutenant?

[Bridge]

UHURA: Lieutenant Arex has been tracking a non-network sensory stasis. It's hardly more than a flicker, and it's several thousand kilometres west of your position. 
KIRK [OC]: Say again. 
UHURA: An anomaly, sir. It resembles a sensor field, but without a scanning grid or other point of reference. 
KIRK [OC]: Is it moving? 
AREX: Brownian movement only, Captain. No discernible direction.

[Planet surface]

SPOCK: The implication is that there is something else on this planet. Perhaps something intelligent. 
KIRK: It might be just an atmospheric effect. Some kind of electrical storm. We've seen unidentified planetary phenomena before that have resembled intelligent activity.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Keep watching it, Lieutenant Uhura, and put the ship on Yellow Alert. We'll continue the contact mission for now, but notify us immediately if there's any change in the situation. Kirk out.

[Planet surface]

(The landing party is walking along) 
SPOCK: The rain forest is especially thick in his district. Life on this planet appears to be geologically younger than one would expect, given the age of this star. 
(Something is watching them) 
BEM: This one is picking up readings of a large group of life forms directly ahead. 
KIRK: All right. We must take care not to be seen. Hey, Bem. Bem, come back! Scotty, Sulu, stay here with the monitoring devices. Come on, Spock. 
(They give chase) 
SPOCK: He won't get far in there. 
KIRK: Let's go. 
(But Bem divides into several smaller pieces and floats through the tangle of stems and trunks with ease before rejoining into one) 
KIRK: He's gone. 
SPOCK: He would have had to go through here to escape. 
KIRK: There he is. I don't know how he did it, but he got through. Come on, we'll have to go around. That Pandronian's actions just don't make sense. 
SPOCK: They might to another Pandronian, Captain. I believe he went that way, Captain. On the other hand 
KIRK: I think we've lost him. That way. 
(Bem is surrounded by Lizard people with spears) 
SPOCK: It appears to be a native food-gathering party. 
KIRK: Yes, and the food they have gathered is Bem.

[Bridge]

AREX: Lieutenant Uhura, I'm reading increased activity on the surface of the planet. The sensory anomaly appears to be expanding. 
UHURA: Contact the landing party.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT: Commander Scott here. 
UHURA [OC]: Mister Scott, where's the Captain?

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: He's been separated from us. Commander Bem ran off for some reason. They're in the forest. 
UHURA: The Captain is not answering his communicator and it does not show up on the scanning grid. It's as if its responder has been disconnected. We're picking up increased activity from that anomaly. Is Mister Spock with the Captain?

[Planet surface]

SCOTT: Aye. They both went after Commander Bem.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Lieutenant Arex, start a sensor scan for Captain Kirk and Mister Spock. Landing party, prepare to beam up. 
SCOTT [OC]: Lieutenant Uhura, we could track the Captain down. 
UHURA: I'm sorry, Mister Scott, that's not procedure. We can't take chances.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT: We're talking about the Captain.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I know it, but we have to follow his orders. Stand by to beam up. 
SCOTT: Standing by.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk and Spock are still hiding in foliage) 
KIRK: Maybe we can beam him out of there. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. This isn't my communicator. 
SPOCK: These are not Enterprise communicators, Captain. They are fakes. Excellent, but non-working forgeries. 
KIRK: This communicator's been on my belt since we beamed down. 
SPOCK: Our phasers don't work either. 
KIRK: Our phasers and communicators have been switched for phonies and Commander Bem has run off. We've been separated from the rest of the landing party. Mister Spock, something funny is going on. 
SPOCK: An alternate course of action would appear to be advisable. 
KIRK: But Commander Bem's difficulty appears to be genuine. Phasers or not, we have to rescue him. We're going to have to follow them. 
(Bem is being marched away by the lizard people) 
SPOCK: One of us could go back to contact Mister Scott. 
KIRK: We can't risk it, not while they're moving. We may never be able to find them again. 
(Later, they are lying on a hill overlooking a wicker and thatched hut village) 
SPOCK: These aborigines appear to be in a late primitive state. Obviously intelligent, they seem to have a basic language and social structure. I would assume fairly well developed mores and traditions as well. 
KIRK: Commander Bem seems to be a model prisoner. 
(Bem is in a small wooden cage, just big enough to stand up and turn around in) 
KIRK: We'll have to wait until nightfall.

[Village - night]

BEM: Kirk Captain? 
KIRK: Shut up. We're rescuing you. 
BEM: You are interfering with observations. 
SPOCK: This is how you observe, by being captured? 
BEM: As logical a way as any, Spock Commander. 
KIRK: (opening the door) I don't think Starfleet would approve. Come on. 
(But the lizard people have caught them) 
KIRK: Uh oh.

[Village - day]

(Kirk and Spock have their own personal cages) 
KIRK: How come we always end up like this? 
SPOCK: I assume that's a rhetorical question, Captain, not requiring an answer. 
KIRK: I was just expressing my curiosity at our ability to get into these kind of situations. 
SPOCK: Fate, Captain. Fate. 
KIRK: Fate, Spock? 
SPOCK: I believe that is the correct Earth term. 
KIRK: Why don't you try your Vulcan nerve pinch. 
SPOCK: Captain, I am only a Vulcan. There are limits. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, I'm afraid that we're not going to be able to rescue you. 
BEM: Good intentions, Kirk Captain, are not enough. Planet Pandro will be much displeased. Starfleet told us you are best captain in fleet. Actions to date belie this. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, you are responsible for the situation we are in. You disobeyed orders by running off. Your attitude has been extremely abrasive and, I don't know how you did it. You replaced our phasers and communicators with phonies. 
BEM: You place too much dependence, Kirk Captain, on phasers and communicators. 
KIRK: Either one could solve our problems right now. 
BEM: If that is all. (taking the items out of his pockets) 
KIRK: Commander Bem, if you had those two phasers and those communicators all this time, why didn't you use them to escape? 
BEM: Sir, this one does not demean oneself by the use of casual violence to accomplish goals. But you may demean yourself if you wish. 
KIRK: I want those phasers and communicators now. 
BEM: Compliance with orders is. This one must disassemble. 
(and while his top half hangs in mid air, Bem's lower half runs over to Kirk and small arms hand over the phasers and communicators) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
(Spock is given his equipment) 
SPOCK: Remarkable. Commander Bem is a colony creature. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, if you could split yourself into separate parts, why didn't you escape on your own earlier? 
BEM: And deny you the opportunity to prove your value to planet Pandro by rescuing this one from possibly dangerous situation? 
KIRK: This is not a laboratory, Commander Bem. This is a hostile planet, and representatives of Starfleet are not experimental animals for you to test! Consider yourself under arrest. Protective custody, to keep you from any more escapades. Mister Spock, keep watch.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Lieutenant Arex, have you found them yet? 
AREX: No, sir. It is a big planet. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, that sensory anomaly, it's expanded to cover the whole northern continent. 
SCOTT: What's that? 
UHURA: We can't get any readings at all now. 
SCOTT: Aye, that tears it. The Loch Ness monster couldn't get through that.

[Village]

{Kirk, Spock and Bem are hiding behind a hut) 
KIRK: There's some kind of interference on all channels. We're going to have to get out of this village on our own. 
SPOCK: I doubt we'll be able to do so without being seen, Captain. 
KIRK: I concur, Mister Spock. Set phasers to stun, just in case. 
(They are spotted) 
KIRK: Fire. 
(But a dark red glow envelopes them) 
ENTITY: No, do not use your weapons. 
KIRK: I'm paralysed. 
SPOCK: We're held in stasis, Captain. 
ENTITY: Put away your weapons. These are my children. Do not harm them. 
KIRK: Who are you? 
ENTITY: Who are you? 
KIRK: I am Captain James Tiberius Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock and honorary Commander Ari bn Bem of the planet Pandro. 
ENTITY: Why are you here? Why do you disturb this place? 
KIRK: It is our mission. We must classify this planet. We have to test it. 
ENTITY: Classify? What gives you the right to intrude here? This planet is not for your use. My children are not for your tests. Your weapons will be nullified. 
(The phasers disappear and the glow stops) 
KIRK: There are times, Mister Spock, when I think I should have been a librarian. 
SPOCK: The job of librarian would be no less challenging, Captain, but it would undoubtedly be a lot less dangerous.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Have you found the Captain yet? 
AREX: I have located emanations that could be Captain Kirk's and another set that could be Mister Spock's, but the sensory anomaly has interfered with our detection devices so that positive identification remains impossible. 
UHURA: Which means? 
SCOTT: I think he said 'maybe'. Well, that convinces me. Ready a security squad. We're going down there. Issue phaser rifles.

[Village]

(Kirk, Spock and Bem are back in their cages) 
BEM: You have mishandled situation again, Kirk Captain. This one judges you not an intelligent commander. 
KIRK: Commander Bem, Mister Spock and I are here because we thought that you were worth rescuing. It was more to preserve the diplomatic relations between the Federation and planet Pandro than from any great affection for yourself. 
BEM: Planet Pandro is unconcerned as to fate of this one. Pandro will not have dealings with inefficient and inferior species. You have failed everything you have attempted. You have not rescued this one and you have not been able to handle local aborigines. 
(Bem splits himself up and walks over to Kirk's cage) 
BEM: This one wishes you, what is the Earth word? Luck. You will require it. 
(And he or they walk away) 
KIRK: Wait! Unlock us. Set us free! 
SPOCK: Captain, perhaps we can attract the attention of the alien intelligence and reason with it. 
KIRK: It's worth a try. (into communicator) Kirk to alien intelligence. This is Captain James Tiberius Kirk calling the ruling intelligence of this planet. Answer me, please. 
SPOCK: Perhaps an offering of some sort, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, whatever we're dealing with, I don't think we can bribe it. We must be honest. Kirk to alien intelligence. I don't think it's strong enough to be noticeable. 
SPOCK: Hmm. If we connect our two communicators in series, we can give off a high energy burst which might work, but it will also render the communicators powerless in a very short time. 
KIRK: Do it. 
(Kirk throws his communicator to Spock, and gets it back with the other stuck to it, very quickly) 
KIRK: This is Captain James Tiberius Kirk calling the ruling intelligence of this planet. Do you hear me? Kirk to entity. Kirk to entity. 
ENTITY: I am here. 
KIRK: We apologise for intruding. We did not realise the situation. We will leave. We will tell others of our kind not to bother you here. 
ENTITY: This is good. Go. Go now and do not return. 
KIRK: Just one thing. There is a third member of our group. 
ENTITY: I detect no third intelligence. 
KIRK: He has fled. 
ENTITY: You must go. You must not interfere with my children. I will allow you to contact your ship. Go now! 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise. Uhura here. Captain, are you all right? 
KIRK: Stand by. We're not leaving without Bem. He is our responsibility. We can't leave him here. Beam down a security squad with heavy duty tricorders set for Pandronian scanning. 
UHURA [OC]: Aye, aye, Captain. 
(Four figures materialise) 
SCOTT: Captain, are you all right? 
(Scott phasers the cage open) 
KIRK: Thanks, Scotty. Spread out. Find Commander Bem. He's split into three individual parts. 
SCOTT: Beg pardon, sir? 
KIRK: He's some kind of colony creature. And take care not to injure any of the natives here. Phasers on lightest possible stun setting. And don't fire unless absolutely necessary. 
(No sooner do they spread out to search, than the Lizard people attack. They have captured Bem. The Starfleet people use their phasers and the Lizard people drop their spears and flee) 
KIRK: Let's get out of here before we make any more trouble. 
BEM: Embarrassment results. This one is shamed. This one has failed in its judgement. 
KIRK: You have endangered all of us by your actions, and you have forced us to interfere with the natives of a planet that deserves prime directive protection. 
BEM: This one exists by its own standards. 
KIRK: Not on my ship you don't. 
ENTITY: You are still here? You are still interfering? I am angered. 
KIRK: We could not leave one of our own behind. It is our responsibility to take care of our own, just as it is your responsibility to take care of yours. We could not leave him here where he might further interfere with your, your children. 
ENTITY: Yes, you have some wisdom, James Tiberius Kirk. The lost one is found, then? 
KIRK: He is found, and we will leave. 
BEM: This one has greatly erred. The mission was to judge, and right of judgement was not conferred. This one must disassemble unity. 
KIRK: Disassemble? 
BEM: Never to exist again as a co-operation. This unity is defective. This unity must cease to exist. 
ENTITY: No, do not destroy yourself. 
BEM: But this one has erred. This one has tried to judge Kirk and Spock and been found wanting himself. This one has acted badly. 
ENTITY: Yes. You have erred, but if you disassemble, you cannot learn from your error. Errors demand recognition so that they will not be repeated. 
BEM: You do not demand punishment? 
ENTITY: Punishment? What is punishment? Revenge? Intelligent beings need no revenge. Punishment is necessary only where learning cannot occur without it. You are behind that. My children here are not. That is why you must leave, so as not to corrupt their development with concepts that they are not yet ready for. 
BEM: I am humbled. 
KIRK: We will go now. 
ENTITY: Yes. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us up.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Stand by to break orbit. Mister Spock, classify this planet as being strictly quarantined. Under no circumstances may any Federation vessel approach. 
BEM: Pandro will respect that also. 
SPOCK: Captain, I compliment you on a wise decision. 
KIRK: It is necessary. Not only for them, but for us as well. 
SPOCK: Fascinating, Captain. A highly advanced alien entity using this particular system as a laboratory for guiding another race to intelligence. Almost a god, you might say. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, the difference is meaningless. In comparison, we're all still children. 
BEM: In this one's case, Kirk Captain, this one is still an eggling. 
KIRK: Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Let's go home. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm picking up a message. 
KIRK: Put it on audio, Lieutenant Uhura. 
ENTITY: Go in peace. Yes. Go in peace. You have learned much. Be proud.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Pirates of Orion
Stardate: 6334.1
Original Airdate: 7 Sep, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 6334.1. The outbreak of choriocytosis aboard the Enterprise seems to be under control. Doctor McCoy says the disease is no longer even as serious as pneumonia, and there should be no problem completing our present mission, representing the Federation at the dedication ceremonies for the new Academy of Science on Deneb Five.
[Bridge]

KIRK: Status, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: All systems affirmative, Captain. The Enterprise is on course and on schedule. 
KIRK: It'll be nice to play diplomat for a change, eh, Spock? 
(Spock grimaces in pain and falls to the floor, unconscious. 
KIRK: Kirk to Sickbay. Emergency!

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Jim, choriocytosis is a strange disease. In races with iron-based blood, it's practically nothing, but in others 
KIRK: Get to the point, Bones. 
MCCOY: Spock has contracted the disease. It's fatal to Vulcans. 
KIRK: Are you sure? 
MCCOY: I've triple-checked, Jim. I wish to God I was wrong. Spock's blood is copper-based. The infection enters the blood stream, and encases the cells so they can't carry oxygen. 
KIRK: The result is suffocation. 
MCCOY: Yes, Jim. 
KIRK: Is there any cure? 
MCCOY: One. A naturally occurring drug called strobolin. But it's only found on a few planets in the galaxy. 
KIRK: Library computer. 
COMPUTER: Working. 
KIRK: What is the nearest strobolin supply planet to our present position? 
COMPUTER: Beta Canopus. Four solar days away at maximum warp. 
KIRK: How long can Spock last without the drug? 
MCCOY: I can give him injections of a synthesised drug that would slow the disease. But after two days the body builds up an immunity. It loses its effectiveness. By the end of the third day, the disease will be irreversible. 
KIRK: It'll take four days to get the drug, but Spock will die in three. There's got to be a way. 
MCCOY: What about a rendezvous? 
KIRK: Of course. If we cant go out of our way to get the drug in time, there must be another ship closer to Beta Canopus. Kirk to Bridge. Get me Starfleet, Lieutenant.

Captain's log, supplemental. We've arranged to get the strobolin needed to save Mister Spock's life. The starship Potemkin has already picked up the drug and will transfer it to a freighter, the SS Huron, for delivery to the Enterprise.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: What will the symptoms be, Bones? 
MCCOY: Increasing tiredness, steadily decreasing efficiency, all the symptoms of working in an oxygen-deficient atmosphere. Kind of like the test you had to pass back at the Academy. 
(A knock at the door) 
KIRK: Come. 
SPOCK: You wished to see me, sir? 
KIRK: Yes, Spock. Sit down. We've arranged a rendezvous to pick up the drug you need. 
SPOCK: I trust it will not affect our scheduled arrival at Deneb Five. 
KIRK: No, it won't. 
SPOCK: Will that be all, Captain? 
KIRK: One other thing. I've cut your duty time in half. 
SPOCK: Captain, that won't be necessary. I'm quite able 
MCCOY: No arguments, Spock. Doctor's orders. 
SPOCK: Anything else, sir? 
KIRK: That's all, Spock. Dismissed. 
(Spock leaves) 
KIRK: It'll hurt seeing him like that. 
MCCOY: I know. As much as it might seem at times that I can't stand that pointy-eared encyclopaedia, I don't want to see that happen to him.

[Huron Bridge]

(The crew are in starfleet uniforms) 
NUMBER ONE: (its a woman) ETA at rendezvous point, two hours and seven minutes, Captain. 
O'SHEA: Good. That's a pretty important drug we've got for the Enterprise. I'd just as soon get rid of it and get back to shipping just dilithium. 
HELMSMAN: Sir, our sensors are picking up a ship ahead. 
O'SHEA: Could the Enterprise be that early? 
HELMSMAN: I'm not sure it's the Enterprise, sir. It's too far away to tell. 
O'SHEA: Where's it headed? 
HELMSMAN: Toward us, sir. 
O'SHEA: Keep an eye on it, Lieutenant.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Time to rendezvous, Mister Arex? 
AREX: One hour forty three minutes, sir. 
KIRK: I hate to ask, but 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. We'll squeeze a wee bit more speed out of her. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy to Bridge. 
KIRK: What is it, Bones? 
MCCOY [OC]: Tell Spock it's time for another shot. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. Spock. 
SPOCK: I was conserving energy, Captain. 
KIRK: McCoy wants you in Sickbay.

[Huron Bridge]

HELMSMAN: Sensor readout, Captain. It's not the Enterprise closing on us, sir. 
O'SHEA: Another starship? 
HELMSMAN: No, sir. It's an alien ship, a design I've never seen before. 
O'SHEA: Put it on the screen. 
(A wicked-looking bat-like design in red appears) 
O'SHEA: You're sure it's following us? 
NUMBER ONE: It's on an intercept course now, Captain. And at this speed, they'll get us before we get to the Enterprise.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: This won't hurt a bit, Spock. 
SPOCK: An unnecessary assurance, Doctor, in addition to being untrue. 
MCCOY: That's the last time I waste my bedside manner on a Vulcan. 
SPOCK: Such restraint would be welcome. 
MCCOY: Not so fast, Spock. Lie there quietly. 
(The monitor buzzes then goes quiet) 
MCCOY: Well, that's not too bad. Back to work, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Doctor. 
(Spock leaves) 
CHAPEL: The drug isn't working any more. 
MCCOY: I know, Christine. I know. Don't worry, we'll have the strobolin soon.

[Huron Bridge]

HELMSMAN: They've increased speed, sir, closing fast. 
O'SHEA: Open hailing frequencies again. 
NUMBER ONE: Open, sir. 
O'SHEA: To unidentified alien vessel. This is Captain O'Shea of the SS Huron. Please state your registry and purpose. Repeat. Please identify yourself and your purpose. 
NUMBER ONE: It's no use, sir. They're receiving but they're not answering. 
O'SHEA: Well, we've got a hold full of dilithium and that drug to protect. Evasive manoeuvres. 
(But the alien stays with them) 
HELMSMAN: No good, Captain. Send out an emergency signal to the Enterprise. 
NUMBER ONE: Yes, sir. Message from the alien, sir. 
O'SHEA: Let's hear it. 
ORION [OC]: Prepare to surrender your cargo or be destroyed.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, I'm getting a signal from the Huron. It's an emergency beacon, automated. 
KIRK: Try ship to ship. 
UHURA: I did, sir. No response. 
KIRK: Sensor report, Mister Spock. Are they at the rendezvous point? 
SPOCK: No, sir. They hadn't reached it. 
KIRK: Compute new course, Mister Arex. Let's see what's going on. 
(They arrive at the Huron) 
SPOCK: The Huron's power levels are at bare minimum for life support, Captain. I'm picking up metallic debris. 
KIRK: Was the Huron attacked? 
SPOCK: Based on present data, I would say yes. 
KIRK: Spock, are you all right? 
SPOCK: Captain, I (collapses) 
UHURA: Bridge to Sickbay. Emergency.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: We've got to have that drug, Jim. The synthetic is useless now. 
KIRK: Do what you can, Bones. 
MCCOY: Blasted Vulcan. Why couldn't you have red blood like any normal human?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Status? 
AREX: (at Spock's station) The Huron's engines are dead. Emergency battery power is operating life support systems at a low but acceptable level. 
UHURA: Still unable to make contact, sir. 
KIRK: Is anyone on that ship alive? 
AREX: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, Lieutenant Uhura, come with me. Mister Sulu, you have the conn. We're beaming over.

[Huron Bridge]

(The officers are slumped over their consoles) 
KIRK: Scotty, check the cargo hold. See if the drug is there. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. (leaves) 
KIRK: Uhura, see if you can get a playback of the log. I want to know what happened here. Nurse, attend to the wounded.

[Huron Cargo hold]

(It's many stories high - and empty) 
SCOTT: Scott to Captain Kirk.

[Huron Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk here. Report, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: There's nothing down here, Captain. 
KIRK: No drug?

[Huron Cargo hold]

SCOTT: No drug and no dilithium shipment. The hold is completely empty.

[Huron Bridge]

KIRK: All right. Report back up here. 
UHURA: This screen is out, sir. But we can take the tapes and play them back on the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Good. Nurse, how is he? 
CHAPEL: He needs surgery, Captain, but he'll live. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Ready to beam over. Have the medical team standing by.

[Sickbay]

(The beds are full now) 
KIRK: How's O'Shea, Bones? 
MCCOY: He'll pull through. Jim, what about Spock? If we don't have that drug in twenty hours, he'll die.

Captain's log, stardate 6335.6. The Huron has been left as space junk, its engines sabotaged. Captain O'Shea has no idea who attacked his ship, but the intruder must be found and the precious cargo retrieved.

[Bridge]

AREX: I've run the Huron's sensor tapes through the computer, sir. The intruder ship is a new design, never before encountered by Federation shipping. 
KIRK: Can we track it? 
AREX: Yes, sir. The intruder ship produces a unique trail of radioactive waste, now bearing two one two degrees mark one seven five. 
KIRK: Lay in that course, Sulu. Ahead warp factor seven.

[McCoy's office]

KIRK: How is he, Bones? 
MCCOY: Not good, Jim. I'll have to put a respirator on him to help him breathe soon. 
KIRK: We're following the intruder ship's trail. 
MCCOY: We don't even know it it's the right one. 
KIRK: It's got to be. 
MCCOY: What's the use of being a doctor, anyway? We're only as good as our drugs and technology make us. Underneath all the tricks, I might as well be practising in the Middle Ages. 
KIRK: If you really believed that, Bones, you wouldn't still be a doctor after twenty five years.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Report. 
SULU: Radioactive residue still bearing two one two degrees mark one seven five. 
KIRK: Increase speed to warp eight. 
SULU: The trail goes through the asteroid belt, Captain. 
KIRK: A good place for an intruder to hide, wouldn't you say, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Perfect. And a long range sensor can show that the radioactive residue stops in the middle of the belt. 
KIRK: Deflectors up. Yellow Alert. Cut speed to warp one. 
(There's an explosion outside) 
KIRK: What was that? 
AREX: These asteroids are composed of a highly unstable mineral combination, sir. They explode upon impact with each other. 
KIRK: Or anything else. Keep those deflectors up, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Captain, if the power of those rocks could be harnessed, they'd make a fantastic source of energy. 
KIRK: Also make quite a weapon. Steady as she goes, Sulu. 
(Sailing through the asteroids, a beam hits the shields) 
SCOTT: Deflectors holding, sir. 
KIRK: Hard to port, Sulu. Let's face them head on. 
(The red bat-ship comes on the viewscreen) 
KIRK: Hold position. Analysis, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Standard phasers, sir. Weak, though. A diffused, low quality beam. Our deflectors can stop them. 
AREX: I recognise the ship's markings, Captain. It's an Orion. 
KIRK: Orion. 
UHURA: They're hailing us, Captain. 
KIRK: Put it on visual, Lieutenant. 
(These Orions are blue-skinned, wearing green suits and half-helmets) 
ORION [on viewscreen]: Enterprise, we demand that you cease your pursuit immediately. I must protest, as a representative of a neutral planet. 
KIRK: This is Captain Kirk. For a neutral, you were pretty quick to fire your phasers. 
ORION [on viewscreen]: We couldn't be sure you were non-hostile. 
KIRK: Orion's neutrality has been in dispute ever since the affair regarding the Coridan planets and the Babel Conference of stardate 3850.3. Yesterday, a Federation freighter was attacked in this quadrant, its cargo hijacked. As the first alien ship encountered, we require you to submit to search, as per Babel Resolution A12. Reply. 
ORION [on viewscreen]: We have no Federation cargo aboard. Orions are not thieves. If you don't cease this harassment, we will lodge a formal protest with your government. 
KIRK: Hold on that, Uhura. Tell them to stand by. 
SULU: Sensors picking up the dilithium in their hold, sir. 
KIRK: What about the drug? 
SULU: If they have it, it's too small an amount to detect. 
KIRK: Uhura, open the channel. 
UHURA: Channel open, sir. 
KIRK: Enterprise to Orion vessel. I have a proposal to make. If you do have the Huron's cargo, there were some perishable drugs in it that we desperately need.

[Orion Bridge]

ORION: What would these drugs be worth to you if we had them? 
KIRK [on viewscreen]: You keep the dilithium shipment, no mention of the whole incident to Starfleet or in my log, plus and additional galactic standard weight container of dilithium as payment for the drug. 
ORION: We get what we want, plus our neutrality remains intact? We will consider your offer. 
KIRK [on viewscreen]: Very well. Kirk out.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk to Sickbay. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy here. 
KIRK: Bones, how much time? 
MCCOY [OC]: Less than an hour, Jim. His body functions are slipping fast now. 
KIRK: Just hold out a little longer. 
UHURA: The Orions are hailing us, sir. 
KIRK: Put it on the screen, Lieutenant. 
ORION [on viewscreen]: Your proposal requires us to trust you. It's obvious we can't. 
KIRK: Do you have a counterproposal? 
ORION [on viewscreen]: Yes. A face to face exchange between you and me. 
KIRK: Face to face? Where?

[Orion Bridge]

ORION: On the large asteroid near our ships. We could beam down simultaneously, and I would hand you the drug myself. You wouldn't even have to give us the extra dilithium crystals. Now it's your turn to consider.

[Briefing room]

MCCOY: It's got to be a trap, Jim. 
SCOTT: No doubt of it, sir. 
KIRK: It could be a trap, but it's the only way to get the drug. And Spock will die if we don't. 
MCCOY: You've already made up your mind, haven't you, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, but not without precautions. I'll keep my communicator channel open so you can hear what goes on. Keep the transporter locked on me, and if anything goes wrong, Scotty, I'm trusting you. 
MCCOY: If this doesn't work, we could lose you and Spock. 
KIRK: If we don't try, Spock doesn't have a chance.

[Orion Bridge]

ORION: Status, Lieutenant? 
LIEUTENANT: We can't outshoot the Enterprise and we can't outrun it, sir. 
ORION: You're saying we can't escape? 
LIEUTENANT: No, sir, we can't. 
ORION: Orion's official neutrality comes before this ship or its crew. We can't take Kirk's word that he won't report this incident to Starfleet. 
LIEUTENANT: The only way to do that is to destroy the Enterprise, and the only way to do that is to destroy ourselves, too. 
ORION: Do you have a plan, Lieutenant? 
LIEUTENANT: Yes, sir. These asteroids are made of highly explosive minerals. 
ORION: Can we convert the asteroid we're orbiting into a doomsday bomb that will destroy both ships? 
LIEUTENANT: Yes, sir, but 
ORION: But what? 
LIEUTENANT: Analysis of the asteroid shows that it can't be detonated by our phasers. 
ORION: What will it take? 
LIEUTENANT: A powerful explosive right on the asteroid's surface. I could rig a remote control device. 
ORION: No. I'll take it with me when I beam down to meet Captain Kirk. I want the satisfaction of seeing his face when I tell him he and his crew are going to die with us. And I'm sure they don't trust us. If Kirk and I are on the asteroid, the Enterprise will stay close by. 
LIEUTENANT: Very well, sir. I'll get to work.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Enterprise to Orion vessel. 
ORION [OC]: What is your answer, Captain? 
KIRK: I accept your terms. 
ORION [OC]: Very well. We will synchronise co-ordinates and beam down in fifteen minutes. 
MCCOY: Jim, we don't have a lot of time. Spock 
ORION [on viewscreen]: Fifteen minutes or not at all, Captain. 
KIRK: All right. Kirk out.

[Asteroid surface]

(The two Captains beam down with full life support fields on) 
ORION: The drug, as promised, Captain. Scan it if you wish.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Pure strobolin. I'll take that now and we can both beam up.

[Asteroid surface]

ORION: No, Captain. I can't trust that you won't report this incident to Starfleet. If you do, my planet will lose its neutrality and be subject to Federation retaliation. 
KIRK: You can't escape the Enterprise. 
ORION: But we can destroy it.

[Bridge]

AREX: Picking up unusual sensor readings, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: What is it? 
AREX: There's dilithium down there with them, sir.

[Asteroid surface]

ORION: I have an explosive device in my backpack that will start a molecular chain reaction and detonate this asteroid. Your ship will be destroyed. 
KIRK: But so will yours. 
ORION: All unsuccessful Orion missions end in suicide. 
(Kirk grapples with him, to stop him pressing the button on his belt)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The dilithium. Transporter room, pinpoint those crystals down there and beam them up!

[Transporter room]

CHIEF: Pinpointed, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: Beam them up now, lad.

[Asteroid surface]

(The Orion finally breaks free of Kirk and presses the button. Nothing happens) 
KIRK: Scotty, energise. 
(Kirk grabs the Orion again and they are beamed up)

[Transporter room]

(Scott and two security guards are there) 
SCOTT: Captain, it was close. 
KIRK: Let's get up to the Bridge.

[Orion Bridge]

ENSIGN: They're gone, sir. 
LIEUTENANT: Gone? 
ENSIGN: I was scanning as you ordered, and they just disappeared off the asteroid. Both the Earther and the Captain. 
LIEUTENANT: He's been captured, no doubt. Arm our self-destruct system, Ensign.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Open hailing frequencies, Uhura. 
(The Orion goes to put a capsule in his mouth) 
KIRK: Grab him! Poison. I'm sure your ship is ready to self-destruct, Captain, but if it does, your crew will die for nothing. We're not going to let you commit suicide. Whether they die or not, you'll still stand trial, and Orion's little game of neutrality and piracy is over. 
UHURA: I have the Orion vessel, sir. 
KIRK: This is Captain Kirk. We have your captain as prisoner. Your choice, sir. 
ORION: Disarm the self-destruct system. Prepare to surrender to the Enterprise.

Captain's log, stardate 6336.2. The Orion crew is in our brig, their ship in tow, and the Enterprise is back on course for Deneb Five.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Spock, there's no way you can deny it. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy, I 
MCCOY: I've waited a long time for this, and you're not going to cheat me. 
KIRK: Am I interrupting something? 
SPOCK: Nothing but Doctor McCoy's gloating. 
MCCOY: Spock, that green blood of yours may have saved you before, but this time it almost did you in. You can't deny it. 
SPOCK: I still prefer my physiological structure to yours. 
KIRK: Yes, gentlemen, things are back to normal. 
MCCOY: He's as stubborn as ever. (laughs)

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.



The Jihad
Stardate: 5683.1
Original Airdate: 12 Jan, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 5683.1. We're making a rendezvous with the Vedala asteroid on a unique mission. The Vedala are the oldest space faring race we know. They say something incredibly dangerous to the safety of our galaxy is developing and they have sent for selected specialists, including Spock and myself.
[Transporter room]

KIRK: Maintain the Enterprise in this position, Sulu. If Spock and I survive, we'll return here. If not, Mister Scott, you have your orders. Energise.

[Forest glade]

(Five other people are already there. A tall golden bird man, a light green insectoid, a feline, a humanoid female and a Lizard. The forest is purple-barked trees, giant fungi and red shrubs. The ground is blue) 
VEDALA: (feline) Welcome, Captain James Kirk and Commander Spock. I will introduce you. First, Tchar. (Gold bird) Hereditary prince of the Skorr, master of the eerie. Sord. (Reptile) 
EM3GREEN: (insectoid) I was sentenced to this mad expedition. My people are cautious, what you would call cowards. 
VEDALA: As an expert lockpick and thief, you are welcome. Em3green. Lara (the female) is a hunter. She has a flawless directional sense, a necessary skill where you are going. Mister Spock was chosen for his analytical mind and scientific expertise. Captain Kirk for his leadership and adaptability. Tchar will explain your mission. 
TCHAR: Two centuries past, my people, the Skorr, were great warriors. We had advanced military technology and we could breed vast armies rapidly. But today we are a civilised people because of Alar. (makes a gesture) 
KIRK: A religious leader, was he not? 
TCHAR: Our salvation and our teacher. He brought us peace. He made us great. He died, and we made him immortal. 
VEDALA: Alar's brain patterns were recorded before his death, in a piece of indurite sculpture. 
TCHAR: Our Soul, the Soul of the Skorr, was stolen. 
VEDALA: The theft triggered a racial fury in the Skorr. They are preparing for war. 
KIRK: Against whom? 
TCHAR: The known galaxy. 
SPOCK: It is a very real threat. In two standard years, the existing Skorr could breed an army of two hundred billion warriors. 
TCHAR: My government fears this, so the theft of the Soul of Alar has been kept secret. But we must recover it before my people discover it gone and go mad, launch a jihad, a holy war on the galaxy. 
KIRK: Who took the Soul? 
VEDALA: Unknown. The motive, as Tchar has said, to provoke a holy war. 
SPOCK: Is there any clue to its location? 
VEDALA: A mad planet, Geologically unstable. Constant earthquakes, gravitic shifts, tidal waves. The temperature varies from twenty Kelvin to two hundred and four above. Somewhere on that planet, the Soul of Alar is hidden. Three expeditions have tried to recover it. Three expeditions have been lost. You are the next, if you agree. 
KIRK: The Vedala are a powerful race. Why haven't your people retrieved the Soul? 
VEDALA: My people could not survive on that planet. You have a chance. 
KIRK: We agree. 
VEDALA: Then it is done. 
(She vanishes)

[Barren planet]

(The adventurers are gathered around an open vehicle. The ground is flat with occasional faceted crystal rocks) 
TCHAR: I cannot feel the Soul. We are nowhere near it. 
SPOCK: That is to be expected. The surface of this planet shifts constantly. Even the Vedala are not certain where the Soul is. 
KIRK: It has directional equipment that keys on indurite. 
SORD: I like this place, it's got variety. 
EM3GREEN: I can handle the machine. 
SPOCK: Our direction is indicated. 
EM3GREEN: It's phasing, unfocusing. 
(The directional indicator blows up) 
KIRK: Why did the Vedala call this the Mad planet? 
LARA: Means nothing. I can tell the way. That way. 
TCHAR: Are you certain, human? 
LARA: For sure, birdman. I can't get lost. I can't be fooled about directions. That's why I'm here. 
SPOCK: The Vedala would not have chosen Lara if her abilities were less than perfect. 
KIRK: Agreed, but we're forced to travel on the ground. I want an overview. 
TCHAR: I will scout overhead. 
(Tchar flies off) 
SPOCK: The Vedala will have been efficient in equipping us. I will acquaint myself with our supplies. 
LARA: Vulcans. Never liked them much myself. Cold-blooded critters, all of them. 
KIRK: I wouldn't say that. Mister Spock is a unique personality. 
LARA: But not human like you and me. Maybe you got different customs. My world there's a lot of females, not so many men. Come we find a man attractive, we say so. I'm saying so. How do you find me? 
KIRK: Fascinating. But we're not here on a pleasure trip, Lara. 
LARA: All the more reason to take what pleasure there might be in it. 
SPOCK: I have checked the supplies, Captain. As expected, they are adequate and there are weapons. 
KIRK: Against what? There's no life on this planet. 
SPOCK: But there is, Captain. Ourselves. And there may be other things guarding the Soul of Alar.

(They are driving through a rain storm) 
LARA: Real weather. 
KIRK: And a half. 
(Then suddenly the rain stops, the sun comes out and a volcano erupts in the distance) 
EM3GREEN: We'll all die here. 
SPOCK: A statistical probability. 
LARA: You ever quote anything besides statistics, Vulcan? 
SPOCK: Yes. But philosophy and poetry are not appropriate here. 
TCHAR: I can see something. (lands on a cliff) I can sense it, the Soul of Alar is there. 
(There is a golden glow from an obvious construction) 
LARA: Something's coming. 
SPOCK: A lava flow. Volcanic action is to be expected. 
LARA: Never mind that. You got to get us out of here. 
KIRK: We might be able to divert the lava flow with a barricade. Tchar, get us a visual estimate! 
SPOCK: Such a diversion would be of short duration, Captain. And I must point out, the vehicle lacks sufficient speed to escape. 
KIRK: Not if we used all of the power pack's energy for one high speed run. 
SPOCK: It is possible, but the rewiring of the power leads is complex and time-consuming. 
EM3GREEN: I could do it, if you can diagram the schematics, sir. 
SPOCK: Yes, quickly then. Terminal M3 red, lead to diode shunt A37. Cross connect to A14. 
TCHAR: Kirk. There is a ravine sixty metres to your left. If it can be blocked, the lava will flow past those rocks to one side. 
KIRK: Got it. Sord. 
SORD: I heard him. 
SPOCK: Carefully, Em. One missed connection could destroy us. 
EM3GREEN: I know. I'm trying to be careful. 
(Kirk, Sord and Lara push boulders off the cliff and create a rock fall to block the ravine. 
LARA: I figure we've bought ourselves a little time. Few minutes. 
SPOCK: It's re-rigged. Hurry. 
(They rush back to the transport as the lava comes over the top of the barrier) 
SORD: Come on, insect, move it. 
LARA: Twenty one degrees east. Fifty metres to get out of the flow path. 
TCHAR: Hurry. 
KIRK: Go. 
(They race ahead of the red hot molten rock until they hit an obstruction and Spock is thrown from the vehicle) 
SPOCK: Leave, all of you. 
(Kirk runs back for him) 
KIRK: Not without you. 
SPOCK: Captain, you must get the others away. 
KIRK: We're all getting away. 
(The vehicle stalls on a shale slope, and they get out and up to safety) 
LARA: Close. 
SPOCK: Far too close, Captain. I appreciate your action on my behalf, but your first duty is to the group and the mission. 
KIRK: Quite right, Spock. And that responsibility includes not losing the best science officer in Starfleet. 
SORD: You two going to argue honours, or are we going to get on with it? 
(A snowstorm starts up) 
LARA: Oh! And I was just going to ask, what next? 
KIRK: We move on. 
EM3GREEN: The power pack is burned out. 
KIRK: We'll have to carry the equipment. 
(Once again, Tchar flies off to scout ahead) 
KIRK: Anything? 
TCHAR: Wait. Yes, yes! 
(He sees the building. Then the ground opens under Em3Green and he nearly falls into a ravine. Tchar lifts him back on land) 
EM3GREEN: I can't go any farther. I'm not even afraid anymore. Just very tired. 
LARA: Come on, Em, a bit more. 
EM3GREEN: No. I'm finished. 
KIRK: Sorry, Em. We'll be needing you. Sord. 
EM3GREEN: Let me go. 
SORD: Hang on. (Picks him up and carries him) 
TCHAR: I'll go ahead. 
(Further on) 
KIRK: What is it? 
SORD: Not sure. Thought I saw something move in the brush. 
SPOCK: There is no life on this planet. 
SORD: Guess you're right. This planet just gets on your nerves. 
TCHAR: I can sense the Soul. I will fly ahead, examine the building, and meet you on the way. 
KIRK: Tchar, be careful. We need you, too. 
(Tchar flies off) 
KIRK: We're tired, sore, hurt and angry, but we're also just about there. I'll scout ahead. Everybody else stay together, keep moving. 
LARA: I'll go with you. Remember, scouting's my job. By rights, I should be doing it alone. 
(Kirk and Lara run off) 
SPOCK: Sord, what did you think you saw back there? 
SORD: Don't know, Vulcan. A shape, couldn't really make it out. Probably seeing things, like Kirk figures. 
SPOCK: There should be no life on this planet. 
EM3GREEN: You keep saying that. 
SPOCK: Yes. The Vedala would have informed us if there were any live beings here we should know of. 
SORD: Maybe the Vedala didn't know about it. 
SPOCK: That is an impossibility. 
SORD: Think so? I'm not so sure.

[Near the building]

(There is no snow here) 
KIRK: That's it. End of a long, hard journey. 
LARA: We still have to go back, James. I tell you true, I find you an attractive man. If we were together, the trip would be easier. And if anything happened, why, we'd have some green memories. 
KIRK: I already have a lot of green memories. 
LARA: Oh. 
KIRK: Maybe some other time, Lara. We still have our work cut out for us here. 
(The rest of the group have arrived) 
SPOCK: Is this not the shape of your people's primitive temples? 
TCHAR: Yes. The entrance should be (he points). Can you open it? 
EM3GREEN: There is no lock I can't pick. 
(He gets to work with all six arms) 
KIRK: What is it? 
EM3GREEN: I'm opening the locks. 
LARA: Wonderful. 
EM3GREEN: No. They're on a timed trigger. If I don't get all the locks open quickly enough, it explodes. 
(A group of purple flying dragons attack) 
SORD: Keep working. I'll cover you. 
(Kirk and Lara shoot the dragons, and they explode) 
KIRK: They're mechanical. 
SPOCK: The Vedala were right. There are no living creatures here, only the mechanised sentinels. 
SORD: Hurry, small one. 
(Kirk stops Spock from firing at the dragon attacking Tchar) 
KIRK: We'll hit Tchar. 
LARA: What happened to Tchar? 
KIRK: There's no way to tell from here. The mechanical exploded. We can't reach the roof from the outside. We'll have to try to get to him from the interior. 
EM3GREEN: Done. 
(The doors open) 
KIRK: We could rest awhile. Lara? 
LARA: No. We've come this far. 
SORD: Let's finish it. Or give this deadfall a chance to finish us. 
SPOCK: I too would prefer to press on, Captain. The mechanicals on guard may be what Sord saw tracking us earlier. Or there may be others. In either case, it would be more advantageous to avoid another encounter.

[Temple]

(An object is hanging in mid-air, glowing) 
SORD: Pretty. How do we reach it? 
SPOCK: The walls are not climbable. 
KIRK: Not without special equipment, which we don't have. Either we find a way to reach it from here, or we fail. 
(The door closes behind them) 
EM3GREEN: No lock on the inside. We are prisoners. 
KIRK: That's right. 
LARA: You're not exactly surprised. 
KIRK: Three previous expeditions tried and were lost. The planet is a natural trap, but that's not enough. 
SPOCK: You suggest sabotage, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes, from inside each expedition. Remember Spock, you were the one who said there are no life forms here except ourselves. 
EM3GREEN: One of us? 
KIRK: It's likely. 
SPOCK: Approximately eighty two point five percent in favour of the possibility. 
KIRK: But it doesn't matter if we reach the Soul. Apparently the others didn't get this far. 
(He spots a ledge around the inside of the building, and jumps up to it. The others join him, except) 
SORD: I'm not built for that sort of thing. I'll wait for you down here. 
(As they inch along the foot-deep ledge, there is a quake) 
SPOCK: The planet is geologically unstable. This structure is inherently flexible, enabling it to withstand earthquakes. 
EM3GREEN: It can, but what about us? 
KIRK: Look. 
EM3GREEN: We can almost reach it. 
LARA: Maybe I can get a line on it. 
SPOCK: It is locked in a force field. Your rope would merely bounce off it. 
KIRK: Spock, will our combined phasers disrupt the field? 
SPOCK: I cannot define the field's energy base, Captain, but 
(An energy weapon blasts a hole in the wall near them) 
KIRK: The last piece of sabotage. I know who you are. A thousand feet up, no method of reaching the Soul, except by air, by flight. Tchar. 
(The golden birdman comes down and hovers) 
LARA: Tchar. In the name of the Seven Gods, why? 
KIRK: You stole this. You'll start a bloody crusade across the galaxy. Tell us why, Tchar. 
TCHAR: The Skorr were a warrior race. Now what are we? Slaves to the illusion of peace. Cowards, soft in our comfort. This sick dream has stolen our souls. I am Tchar, hereditary prince of the Skorr, leader of battles. I will lead my people into glory, to avenge our history. 
SPOCK: Most of them will be killed. The warrior races of the Federation will rise up to battle the Skorr. 
TCHAR: Yes. A noble death to win a great dream. We will live no longer like worms crawling in the dirt. We will conquer. You will die. But you have my respect. You fought well. You die in grace. 
(They all start to float upwards) 
EM3GREEN: He's turned on a gravity neutraliser in the building. 
TCHAR: Now you can fly and fight as a Skorr. 
SORD: No offence, little ones, but let me tackle him. 
KIRK: Not in free fall. 
EM3GREEN: Use your phaser on him. 
KIRK: Too risky. He controls the fortress phaser bank, and they're set on kill. No, it has to be on his terms. Spock, how long since you've worked out in null-gravity combat exercises? 
SPOCK: Last week with you, Captain. 
KIRK: Let's go. 
(They push off from the walls and manage to grab Tchar by his wings. Then Kirk hooks his into the Soul) 
KIRK: Call for retrieval, now. 
(Lara presses a button) 
TCHAR: Let me die. 
KIRK: You're going back with us. 
(They all vanish in a golden haze)

[Forest glade]

(The Soul is in the middle of the group. Tchar is in a transparent box) 
VEDALA: We give you thanks. The Soul of Alar is returned to his people. 
KIRK: What about Tchar? How are you going to punish him? 
VEDALA: He will be healed of his madness. He is proud, brave. That he will remain, but he will also be sane and whole again. (Tchar vanishes) We cannot reward you. For the good of the Skorr, this must be forever secret. You have only our thanks. 
SORD: Got nowhere to keep a medal, anyway. But there'll be questions. 
VEDALA: No. You will return and you will see, there will be no questions, no medals, only our thanks. And in time, even the memory will be gone from you. 
LARA: Goodbye, James Kirk. Too bad.

[Transporter room]

SULU: Captain. Mister Spock, what happened? 
KIRK: What do you mean? 
SULU: You transported over and came right back. Did they call it off? 
SPOCK: How long were we gone? 
SULU: Long? About two minutes, I guess. I don't understand. 
KIRK: The Vedala changed their minds. The danger is past. Back to your stations. We have a lot of other places to go.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Eye of the Beholder
Stardate: 5501.2
Original Airdate: 5 Jan, 1974

Captain's log, stardate 5501.2. We are orbiting the planet Lactra Seven. Our mission is to discover the whereabouts or fate of a six member science crew. Voice contact having yielded nothing, a landing party beamed aboard to see if the deserted ship's log and computers could give us any information.
[Briefing room]

MARKEL [on monitor]: It is now thirty two minutes since our last contact with the three members of our crew on the planet surface. As the senior officer aboard, I, Lieutenant Commander Markel, have made the following decision. The three remaining crew members, myself included, will beam down to effect a rescue. If, for any reason, we do not return, be it known that 
KIRK: It was against all orders. 
MCCOY: The need was apparently desperate. 
KIRK: The Captain of a ship, no matter his rank, must follow the book. 
SPOCK: A capability, I'm afraid, out of the reach of most humans. 
MCCOY: You Vulcans are the most impossible, unimaginative 
KIRK: Bones, that's not helping the situation. 
MCCOY: Sorry, Jim. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, what can we expect to find on Lactra Seven? 
SPOCK: It's a class M planet, gravity Earth normal, atmosphere Earth normal. There is no previous information available except that which the survey ship logged before her crew left her. 
KIRK: According to their lot, they beamed down six weeks ago. 
SPOCK: Five weeks, three days, two hours and four minutes to be exact, Captain. 
KIRK: Careless of me, Mister Spock. Planetary life forms? 
SPOCK: It certainly can support life forms. But I cannot speculate on what type without further data. Mister Arex is conducting a sensor scan now. 
KIRK: It will take too long to do a comprehensive scan. I want a landing party to at least beam down to the last known co-ordinates the other crew used. 
MCCOY: Jim, if the others are lost, why take the risk? 
KIRK: Because they may not be dead. We have to find out. 
MCCOY: It's still a risk. 
KIRK: That's why we're here, Bones. Gentlemen, we'll travel light. Phasers, tricorders, communicators and medical kit.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: You have the co-ordinates from the other ship, Scotty. Put us down in the same place. 
SCOTT: Sir, Mister Arex has located a variety of life forms on the planet. No large groups or city clusters yet. 
KIRK: Then we'll beam back up. 
SPOCK: Logical, Captain. 
KIRK: Energise, Mister Scott.

[Planet surface]

(It looks like marsh land. Green, with steam rising from pools of water) 
KIRK: Everyone all right? 
MCCOY: Ten yards the other way and we'd be boiled alive. 
SPOCK: Unusual that such a lake would exist under these planetary conditions. 
KIRK: Er, Spock. 
(A large red one-eyed monster has risen from the main body of water. It has Big Teeth) 
SPOCK: Most remarkable. 
KIRK: It may be able to navigate on land. 
MCCOY: I know it can. 
(Big Red rushes them) 
KIRK: Phasers on stun! 
(The three beams hit it, it roars a few times then dives back underwater) 
KIRK: Let's get out of here. 
(On an elegant rock 'bridge' formation) 
MCCOY: Not a very welcome sight, is it? 
KIRK: I'll see if I can pick up anything on my communicator. This is Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise, calling the crew of the Ariel. Come in please. Come in. 
MCCOY: They're answering. (static) Did you get a fix on that, Jim? 
KIRK: Yes. That way. 
MCCOY: Strange you didn't get a voice reply. 
SPOCK: There could be many reasons why we did not. 
MCCOY: Never mind counting them. 
(They cross a desert area and meet another creature, with three toes and a blue face, which roars at them) 
KIRK: Phasers on stun! 
SPOCK: It seems to gather strength from our phasers. In my opinion. 
KIRK: Concentrate on the underside of the neck. 
(They run away, and it eventually falls over) 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: Right here. You all right? 
SPOCK: I am undamaged. Where is Doctor McCoy? 
KIRK: It came from back there. 
(McCoy is trapped under the creature's body) 
KIRK: We'll get you out, Bones. 
(Brute force is no use) 
SPOCK: It would appear a more logical solution is in order, Captain. We don't lift the tail off, we dig the Doctor out. 
(They do) 
MCCOY: Thanks. The air was running out under there. 
KIRK: Were you hurt? 
MCCOY: No, just surprised. It isn't every day a dinosaur falls on you. This is a pretty strange place. 
KIRK: Agreed. How much desert do we have to cross, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: One point one kilometres, sir. 
KIRK: We'd better pick up our pace. There's no place for cover if we meet any other creatures. The bearing on the signal we heard is that way. 
(As they walk on) 
SPOCK: Captain, the beast, did it seem familiar to you? 
KIRK: I've seen something very like it on Canopus Three, but that's light years from here. Still, this desert area is the same as on Canopus. 
SPOCK: You propose the same environment necessarily prompts the same evolution? 
MCCOY: My shoes are full of sand. 
SPOCK: Doctor, your lack of scientific interest is amazing. 
MCCOY: I'll be happy to discuss that with you, Mister Spock, next time you drop in to my medical lab. 
(At the waterside. gazing at their reflections in the still water) 
MCCOY: Oh, this seems a lot more friendly than the desert. 
SPOCK: Captain, doesn't it strike you strange that two such different ecologies could co-exist so closely? 
KIRK: I've seen stranger things, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Merely an observation, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Enterprise. Scott here. 
KIRK: Any new information, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: There is a large concentration of life forms ninety eight point five kilometres north east of you. Apparently a city, or a central gathering place. Nothing else yet. 
KIRK: North east. That's where we got the signal from. All right, Scotty, keep scanning. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: I don't like it, Jim. Why only one short signal and no more? 
KIRK: I don't know. But at least they're alive. 
SPOCK: Apparently alive. We cannot be sure. 
KIRK: I choose to believe they are. 
SPOCK: Allow me to test the water first, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Go ahead, but it looks clear enough. 
SPOCK: Captain, the water is too pure. 
MCCOY: It tastes just fine. 
SPOCK: Nonetheless, it is too pure. 
KIRK: In other words, it's too good to be true. 
SPOCK: Correct, Captain. And a rain forest this close to a desert is also illogical. It is my theory that what we have seen since we landed was manufactured, not created. 
MCCOY: Terraforming isn't new. It implies intelligent life forms. 
KIRK: Yes, but terraforming usually follows a pattern. This seems like random choice. 
SPOCK: Unless, of course, the random choice is the pattern. 
MCCOY: Spock, do you ever say anything straight out? 
SPOCK: I thought I just did, Doctor. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, please. We have work to do. 
SPOCK: The desperation of the science ship's first landing party is now obvious. 
KIRK: We're still alive, aren't we? 
MCCOY: That's true. 
SPOCK: However, not exactly safe. 
(Flying creatures are approaching) 
KIRK: Phasers on full stun. 
MCCOY: They're useless. 
KIRK: No. They're like the dragons on Maravel. The stun charge should get them. 
(They fly off) 
MCCOY: That's strange. 
SPOCK: By observation alone, it appears they hit an invisible force field. 
KIRK: If that's true, Spock, then 
(The landing party are grabbed by the tentacles of three giant slug-like creatures) 
MCCOY: We've been travelling for hours. Where are they taking us? 
KIRK: Towards the north-west, toward the city Scotty reported. 
SPOCK: Captain, there it is. 
(A garish lump of candy pink, red and purple surrounded by conifers) 
KIRK: That must be five square kilometres. 
SPOCK: If these are the builders, it is an admirable feat.

[City]

(Spock, Kirk and McCoy are deposited under a curved purple roof, onto a blue tiled floor) 
MCCOY: They don't seem very interested in communicating with us. If they can communicate at all. 
SPOCK: Perhaps not in a way we understand. I keep receiving impressions. 
KIRK: Any ideas, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Well, I've got one and I definitely don't like it. I'd guess they're doing exactly what we would do. 
KIRK: Which is? 
MCCOY: Well, if we came upon an alien creature we'd never seen before, the first thing we'd do is to make sure it was free of harmful bacteria. Then we'd see if it was intelligent. 
SPOCK: Congratulations, Doctor. A most logical assumption. 
KIRK: A more important question, gentlemen, is whether or not there's a way out of here. A force field. It seems harmless enough. 
MCCOY: So do the bars of a jail, unless you're on the inside. 
KIRK: And we are definitely on the inside. 
MCCOY: Hey! Somebody! Anybody! 
SPOCK: A wasteful use of energy, Doctor. I believe they can hear you without your shouting. 
KIRK: You said you were picking up impressions. Are the aliens telepathic? 
SPOCK: I've come to the conclusion they are, Captain. But the speed at which the thoughts flow is too great for me to comprehend except for the most fleeting image. 
KIRK: Surely we can communicate with them some way. 
SPOCK: They appear to be as advanced beyond Earth civilisation as you are from a colony of ants. 
MCCOY: Then what were all those other creatures where we beamed down? 
SPOCK: You will recall we recognised at least two species from vastly different planets. The environment did not appear natural to this planet. A technology this advanced could easily travel to other star systems to collect specimens. 
MCCOY: You mean it's some kind of a zoo? 
SPOCK: Exactly. 
KIRK: They took our phasers, communicators and other equipment so they must have some idea we're intelligent. 
SPOCK: Not necessarily, Captain. They could have taken them for the same reason you would take a sharp object away from a child. 
MCCOY: Or maybe they want to see how our toys work. 
SPOCK: That too is a possibility. 
(The slugs return, and drag them out of the holding cell) 
MCCOY: Now wait a minute, you, you. Hey! 
KIRK: We've got to communicate with them. 
(As they are carried along past other creatures in cells) 
MCCOY: Well, so much for mythology. 
SPOCK: I find them strangely attractive. 
KIRK: Look ahead. 
(They are deposited into their own zoo compound) 
KIRK: Better do what they want for now, anyway. They activated another force field. 
MCCOY: This is real grass. 
SPOCK: Yes, Doctor. This area has been carefully prepared for human types. The aliens are safe now. 
MCCOY: How's that? 
SPOCK: They are safe because we are now exhibits in a zoo. 
MCCOY: A zoo? I'm no animal. 
KIRK: On this planet, Bones, they seem to be the people and we are the animals. 
MARKEL: Hello, I'm Lieutenant Commander Tom Markel. This is our biologist, Randi Bryce. 
KIRK: James Kirk, Captain of the Enterprise. First Officer Spock. Our physician, Doctor McCoy. 
MARKEL: We've been expecting you. 
KIRK: You've what? 
BRYCE: We heard your communicator signal. 
MCCOY: Then why didn't you warn us? 
BRYCE: We couldn't warn you. They're constantly picking up our equipment and fooling with it. 
SPOCK: Where do they keep the equipment? I could use my tricorder. 
MARKEL: No use, sir. They're on an exhibit table. Beyond the force field. 
KIRK: There were six of you on the mission. 
MARKEL: We didn't beam down in time to save the original three. 
BRYCE: Lieutenant Randolph is in the house. She's running a high fever, but we can't seem to do anything about it. 
MCCOY: I'll check her out. Maybe I can help. 
KIRK: What have you learned about the aliens? 
MARKEL: There's not much, sir. This is a zoo. So tremendous as to be almost unbelievable. 
KIRK: Have you tried an escape? 
MARKEL: A dozen different ways. Tunnels, a weakness in the force field, nothing worked. 
SPOCK: Have you tried to communicate? 
MARKEL: Yes, sir. But all we've been able to arouse in them is a sort of quivering motion. 
KIRK: We seem to have company. 
(Two of the aliens are watching the new exhibits) 
MARKEL: They built this for us. We've concluded they're telepathic. I guess they read our minds and came as close as they could to make it like home. 
KIRK: Spock, try and make contact. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. I can't seem to get through, Captain. They appear too involved with each other. 
(The aliens quiver) 
KIRK: You seem to be getting a response. 
SPOCK: My impression is that they are laughing at me. 
MARKEL: So far, Mister Spock, we haven't found anything funny in this. 
SPOCK: Animals in a zoo rarely do. 
KIRK: Let's find the others. I feel a need for human companionship.

[House]

(It is sparsely furnished and open plan. A woman is lying on a mattress on the floor) 
BRYCE: Captain Kirk, Mister Spock, this is Nancy Randolph, our navigator. 
KIRK: How is she? 
MCCOY: Without my instruments, it's difficult to make an exact diagnosis. Rough guess is a malarial type infection caused by an insect bite. I can't do anything without my medikit. 
KIRK: The Lactrans outside, what do they do? 
MARKEL: They appear to be guards, sir. Making sure we don't harm each other. 
KIRK: Do they feed us or do we shift for ourselves. 
MARKEL: They bring supplies once a week. 
KIRK: Always to the same place? 
BRYCE: Yes, always, near the display case. 
KIRK: What display case? 
BRYCE: Behind this house, outside the force field. All our toys, phasers, communicators, medical supplies. 
MCCOY: Then my equipment should be there. 
KIRK: Maybe we can get them to give them back to us. 
SPOCK: Captain, they are highly intelligent. I'm sure they are quite aware of the purpose of each piece of equipment now. 
MCCOY: The medical kit wouldn't be harmful. It would help her, one of their specimens. 
SPOCK: Then think about it that way, Doctor.

[Compound]

MARKEL: Food. But it's not feeding time. 
KIRK: They must have sensed a need and interpreted it as food. 
SPOCK: I suggest we all concentrate on the medical kit. 
(It works. An alien delicately picks up the tiny object in its tentacle and hands it to McCoy) 
MCCOY: It's all here. They haven't damaged it. 
KIRK: What's your evaluation of the situation, Markel? 
MARKEL: They treat us quite well, sir. They seem to want us alive and well. And they don't want to let us go. 
SPOCK: A natural reaction for the curators of a zoo. 
MARKEL: Sir, do you think there is any chance of getting out? 
KIRK: As long as we're alive, there's a chance. Tonight, I'll try and find a weak link in the force field. 
SPOCK: Begging your pardon, Captain, I think we should face the situation realistically. We are specimen animals in a zoo. And they have taken every precaution to prevent our escape. To them we are caged for life. We seem to be drawing quite a crowd. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, since they are learning from us, why don't we learn something from them? 
MARKEL: How? We can't get through to them? 
KIRK: They communicate telepathically. 
BRYCE: Between themselves, yes, but, Mister Spock, aren't Vulcans telepathic? 
SPOCK: To a degree, with our own species and with some others, but the Lactran intelligence is eons beyond mine. 
KIRK: How much have you learned? 
SPOCK: About as much as a mother learns from a six month old infant. 
MCCOY: What's their impression of us? 
SPOCK: We seem to frighten the smaller ones. Some, the females, I believe, find us quite ugly. 
MCCOY: What about the Enterprise, Jim. Scotty could get worried. He could beam down a fighting force. 
KIRK: My orders were not to attempt a rescue under any condition. 
SPOCK: A wise move, Captain. From what I can gather, even the Enterprise is no match for their force field. 
MCCOY: How about coming up with another move, then? 
SPOCK: If I may suggest, sir? 
KIRK: Go ahead. 
SPOCK: It is obvious they can pick up specific thought transmissions from us if they care to go to the trouble. I suggest that one of our number appear to be ill. The rest will put strong thoughts in our minds that a communicator is needed for recovery. 
KIRK: Let's try it, and let's be close to the communicator when we do. I'll pretend I'm sick. All of you concentrate. 
MARKEL: It's a little one. Could be a child. 
KIRK: Once I get my hands on a communicator, I can have Scotty beam us all aboard the Enterprise. Ready now. 
(Kirk falls to the ground) 
SPOCK: The communicator, concentrate on the communicator. 
(It works. Baby Lactran places the communicator next to Kirk on the ground) 
KIRK: Enterprise, this is Captain Kirk. Beam us aboard. 
(The communicator is snatched back again)

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: What in the cosmos? 
(The baby fills the transporter bay)

[Compound]

SPOCK: I'm receiving an impression they are worried about their child, Captain. 
KIRK: I'm worried about the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: They seem to think you made the child disappear. They did not know we were a deadly species, capable of injuring one of them. 
MCCOY: Well, let's not stand here. Let's do something. 
KIRK: The best thing we can do is Argh! 
MCCOY: What is it? 
KIRK: (in pain) They're in my head. What happened to the baby? What happened? 
SPOCK: Captain, fight it. Fight it as hard as you can. They think too fast in too complex a manner. If he gives up for even one moment, he may go mad.

[Bridge]

(Baby carries Scott out of the turbolift) 
SCOTT: Everyone clear out. 
M'RESS: What's going on? 
SCOTT: I think it's harmless, but I'm not sure. 
M'RESS: What do you want us to do? 
SCOTT: Whatever it wants me to. 
(Baby puts him down) 
SCOTT: Now, supposing you and I talk this over. You can talk, can't you? You can't talk. Well, what can you do? Oh, no! Listen, you'll send us off into space if you

[Compound]

MCCOY: Jim, are you all right? 
KIRK: Yes. I think so. 
SPOCK: Captain, they have concluded they cannot break through your mind on a one to one basis. They are now gathering the mental strength of all five of them to break through. 
KIRK: I can't hold out against that many. 
SPOCK: Everybody, concentrate on Captain Kirk. Form a thought screen. 
KIRK: No. No! Let me alone! Please! They're destroying me! Tearing my mind to, to 
(Scott and Baby beam back down. Mum and Dad rush to them) 
KIRK: I'm all right. Scotty, what are you doing here? 
SCOTT: My young friend brought me. 
SPOCK: You made contact? 
SCOTT: It made contact with me. 
KIRK: What did you learn? 
SCOTT: It's only six years old but it has an IQ in the thousands. It picked my brain, all the knowledge in the Enterprise computers, and sent us flying off out of orbit. 
KIRK: Then how did you get here? 
SCOTT: I convinced it I wasn't a pet, and that it should bring the ship back into orbit. Then I got it into the transporter to return here. 
SPOCK: They're trying to contact us directly. I can make out something. It's, it's difficult, they think so fast. But the child has learned and told its parents all about the Federation and the races it encompasses. 
MCCOY: That fast? 
KIRK: What else do they know about us? 
SPOCK: We are considered simplistic, but in the process of evolving into a higher order. 
MCCOY: Even Vulcans? 
SPOCK: Yes, even Vulcans? 
SCOTT: But the little one didn't tell or think that to me. 
KIRK: Backward child, but growing. 
SPOCK: Exactly, sir. It seems they were where we are some tens of thousands of centuries ago. Their centuries, not ours. 
KIRK: Do we get out of here? 
SPOCK: It appears so. They do not feel we belong in their zoo. 
(A crowd has gathered to watch them leave) 
KIRK: Everyone ready to transport? 
SCOTT: So long, lad. Nice meeting you. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Prepare to beam aboard two parties, all human.

[Bridge]

MARKEL: Captain, we are a scientific contact team, and we learned practically nothing. 
KIRK: Offhand, I'd say we learned to keep our hands off. 
MARKEL: But there was so much more. 
SPOCK: There will be other opportunities, Mister Markel. I have just received their final telepathic message. 
KIRK: Which is? 
SPOCK: We'll be welcome back, in twenty or thirty centuries. 
KIRK: Our time, or theirs. 
SPOCK: Theirs. And it will take me some time to figure out how long that is. 
KIRK: Either way, Mister Spock, it will hardly be our problem.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Slaver Weapon
Stardate: 4187.3
Original Airdate: 15 Dec, 1973

First Officer's log, stardate 4187.3. The Enterprise shuttlecraft Copernicus is en route to Starbase Two Five with an important cargo. A Slaver stasis box discovered by archaeologists on the planet Kzin.
[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: These stasis boxes are the most remarkable thing the Slavers ever produced. Time stands still inside a stasis box. A billion years means nothing in there. What is it, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: I've studied the history of the Slaver Empire, but it's sketchy. We know they were masters of all the intelligent beings in this galaxy a billion years ago, until one race revolted. Are the stasis boxes the only source of information we have? 
SPOCK: The Slavers and all their subjects were exterminated in the war that followed. Intelligent life had to evolve all over again. The stasis boxes are the only remnant of those lost civilisations. 
UHURA: Why is it glowing like that? 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, what is our position? 
SULU: Passing Beta Lyrae, sir. One forty two degrees north east of galactic plane. 
SPOCK: Most peculiar. This indicates there is another stasis box circling Beta Lyrae. 
UHURA: Another one? 
SPOCK: It would be most illogical that a stasis box would remain here undiscovered for so long. Beta Lyrae is one of the rare spectacles of the galaxy. Almost every ship that passes stops to see it. 
UHURA: Maybe no one else was carrying a stasis box detector. 
SPOCK: Possible. The only known stasis box detector is another stasis box. Still. Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Bring us about. We'll investigate the Beta Lyrae system. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir.

SPOCK [OC]: Stasis boxes and their contents are the only remnant of a species which ruled most of this galaxy a billion years ago. Their effect on science has been incalculable. In one was found a flying belt which was the key to the artificial gravity field used by starships. Another box contained a disrupter bomb with the pin pulled. As a result, all stasis boxes are now under the jurisdiction of Starfleet, and only certain key specialists handle them. The boxes are rare, potentially dangerous, and we seem to have found a second one.

[Planet surface]

(Spock, Sulu and Uhura are wearing life-support belts. Spock carries the box) 
UHURA: I never did like these little ice-bound worlds. 
SPOCK: We are not tourists here, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Mister Spock, if it takes a stasis box to find another stasis box, how did anyone ever find the first one? 
SPOCK: As with a number of discoveries, purely by accident, Lieutenant. The other box seems to be almost under us, perhaps thirty metres below the ice. 
SULU: We won't have any trouble digging for it. In this low pressure, the ice should boil as soon as the phasers melt it. 
(But they are not alone. Sulu gets shot, then Uhura, then Spock)

SPOCK [OC]: I must take full responsibility for this event. Instead of being warned by the highly unlikely coincidence of a second stasis box, I allowed it's possible value to influence my judgement. The Kzinti now possess our stasis box. Its contents will determine how much damage my error has done the Federation and its people.

[Kzinti Ship]

UHURA: Where are we? 
SPOCK: A Kzinti spacecraft. 
SULU: That isn't good. Kzinti aren't supposed to have phasers, are they? 
SPOCK: The Treaty of Sirius does not permit them any weapons at all, beyond police vessels. Obviously, the treaty has been broken. 
SULU: A police web. We won't be able to move unless we can turn it off somehow. 
(A group of cats in spacesuits enter) 
SPOCK: The lean, be-draggles one is a reader of minds. 
UHURA: I've heard all Kzinti telepaths are unhappy neurotics. He fits the description. 
SPOCK: There is no sure way to guard our thoughts from him. Mister Sulu, he is not likely to deal with me or Lieutenant Uhura. She and I are inferior beings to them. But the Kzinti are meat eaters. If you sense him reading your mind, think of eating a raw vegetable. 
SULU: Yes, sir. Maybe I can goad them into revealing their purpose. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant Uhura. This may be crucial. In the presence of the Kzinti, do not say anything, do not do anything startling. Try to look harmless. 
UHURA: Any special reason? 
SPOCK: Are you forgetting Kzinti females are dumb animals? In an emergency the Kzinti may forget a human female is an intelligent creature. 
UHURA: Thanks. Thanks a lot. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant, I value your intelligence, but we may be able to seize an opportunity to escape if the Kzinti believe you have none. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Identify yourself. 
SULU: Lieutenant Sulu of the Starfleet vessel Enterprise. This is First Officer Spock. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: You're a Vulcan. I feel no pressing need to talk to an eater of roots and leaves. Humans at least are omnivorous. I am Chuft-Captain. You are prisoners aboard the privateer Traitor's Claw, a stolen police vessel. 
SULU: Stealing must be a habit with you. This ship, two stasis boxes. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Kzinti archaeologists found both boxes, but the one we managed to keep was empty. It served us well as bait to draw you here, but the Slavers had weapons that could devastate a galaxy. There could be one in that box. 
SULU: The Kzinti fought four wars with humankind and lost all of them. The last one was two hundred years ago, and you haven't learned a thing since. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Guard your speech. None of my crew has yet tasted human meat as our ancestors did. We would welcome the opportunity. Always you have had superior equipment. We seek a weapon that will defeat you at last. 
SULU: Then you're really working for the Kzinti government. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: The records will show the Traitor's Claw is a stolen police ship. If we are captured, the Highest of Kzin will repudiate us. But if we succeed, you are meat for our tables. 
(They fire a beam at the stasis box, then open it. Chuft removes a picture of a one-eyed green crocodile standing on it's hind legs) 
SULU: Could that be a picture of a Slaver? 
SPOCK: If so, it is the first ever discovered. An important historical find. 
(There are other things in the box) 
UHURA: It looks like fresh meat. Over a billion years in that box, and it looks fresh. 
(Then, a green pistol-shaped thing) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Nothing like this has ever been found. We are the only ones who have it. Look at it, human. This weapon may well mean the end of mankind.

First Officer's log, supplemental. The Kzinti now possess a weapon potentially deadly to the entire galaxy. The extent of its power remains to be seen.

[Kzinti ship]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Have the humans moved to the surface and be sure they're secured in the police web. We will use them to test the weapon. 
FLYER: Yes, Chuft-Captain. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: You have observed the aliens. Can you read their minds? 
TELEPATH: I can read Sulu with difficulty, Chuft-Captain. The other human is only a female. The third is a pacifistic herbivore. Surely you would not force me to delve such minds? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: If it is necessary. I realise the time you need to recover from each effort.

[Planet surface]

KZIN 5 [OC]: Chuft-Captain, we have finished testing the meat that was in the stasis box. It is protoplasmic and poisonous. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: What of the picture? 
TELEPATH: The human, Sulu, believes it to be a Slaver. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: So do I. It would have made a worthy enemy. 
(He tries the weapon, but nothing happens) 
FLYER: Perhaps the toggle. 
(The weapon glows, then changes to a more pointed shape. Chuft-Captain tries it again. Still nothing) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Telepath! Am I not affecting him at all? Is it the life support belt interfering? 
TELEPATH: No, Chuft-Captain. He hears a faint whine, but he feels no ill effects. There is a vibration in the metal of his belt. Chuft-Captain, he is too alien. He makes me taste yellow root munched between flat teeth. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Be glad if you need not read the Vulcan's mind. It may be a communications device, or a sonic stunner designed to affect members of a race now dead. 
(He changes its shape again) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: A good serviceable telescope. They built well, these Slavers. 
FLYER: It is of no use to us. We already have small telescopes. 
(Another shape change, and this time it does fire a beam) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: I give you credit, human. You are not afraid to die. 
SULU: Merely a laser. The Federation has had a more effective model for over one hundred years. 
(Another shape change, and the device becomes a hand-held rocket, pulling Chuft-Captain along with it. He knocks Uhura off the web, and she tiptoes away. Meanwhile, Chuft hits the telepath) 
KZIN 4: Telepath's suit has ruptured. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Never mind that. The female is escaping! 
KZIN 4: What of it? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Fool! Human females are intelligent. 
(So Uhura gets shot and put back on the web)
FLYER: Telepath's suit lost considerable pressure. We reached the ship in time to save him. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Good. We will need him later. What is this? 
FLYER: Perhaps a personal rocket motor. One could place one's foot on the pedals and balance. It appears to be transportation, not a weapon. 
SULU: Nice try. 
UHURA: I'm slowing down. I used to run the hundred in record time. How long was I out? Did I miss much? 
SULU: Not much. A lot of good they'll get out of that rocket setting. 
SPOCK: We are fortunate none of the settings so far have been superior to the technology now available to the Federation. 
UHURA: Uh oh. 
(Now the weapon is a ball with loops sticking out on either side) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: No gun sight. No obvious was to aim it. 
(So he holds it at arms length. Behind him, the lights go out in the cavern where their ship is parked) 
UHURA: Mister Spock, I can move. 
SULU: So can I. The police web is off. 
SPOCK: The fifth setting seems to be an energy absorber. Fascinating. I had no idea the Slavers had such things. 
SULU: Mister Spock, we 
SPOCK: Yes. When I give the word, make for the shuttle. Remember to zigzag. Ready? Go. 
(Sulu and Uhura run, while Spock jumps the Kzinti and grabs the weapon before following. Uhura gets shot again) 
FLYER: Chuft-Captain, what happened? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: I would rather not discuss it. Help me into the ship. 
SULU: (hiding) Mister Spock! I thought it was one of the aliens. 
SPOCK: I have the weapon. 
SULU: They've got Uhura, and subspace radio. They can call for help from the Kzin planet if they think the weapon's worth it. 
SPOCK: No, they cannot. Or rather, will not. 
SULU: Why? 
SPOCK: Because I kicked Chuft-Captain. Consider. Chuft-Captain has been attacked by an herbivorous pacifist, an eater of leaves and roots. One who traditionally does not fight. And the ultimate insult, I left him alive. Chuft-Captain's honour is at stake. He must seek personal revenge before he can call for help. 
SULU: That gives us some time. You did plan it that way? 
SPOCK: Of course. 
SULU: As long as you stay free, the Kzinti can't or won't do anything. But they could use Lieutenant Uhura as a bribe. 
SPOCK: Agreed. However, to this point, we have not seen anything more powerful than equipment Starfleet already has. 
SULU: Yes. But I have a feeling, Mister Spock. This weapon must have belonged to a spy, an espionage agent. 
SPOCK: I acknowledge your expertise in the field of weapons, Mister Sulu, but I do not see how you can determine probable ownership. 
SULU: Well, here, look at it. All these settings. We don't know a common Slaver soldier couldn't handle them, but as a weapon, only the laser is effective. The others aren't necessary for the line soldier's one purpose, to destroy the enemy. 
SPOCK: Assuming it's a spy weapon then, the Slavers would have wanted to keep it a secret weapon. If so, it is logical to assume it has a self-destruct setting too. 
SULU: But we've seen all the phases. 
SPOCK: Perhaps not. There is the null setting. It seems to do nothing. But why should it be there? It does not correspond to a safety lock. 
(He pushes the toggle back up to the top, and it turns into a globe with a handle) 
SULU: It may be the key to another setting. 
(The Kzinti ship takes off through the ice)

[Kzinti ship]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: This is the Traitor's Claw calling Mister Sulu.

[Planet surface]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN [OC]: We have the female prisoner. Will you bargain, or must we take harsh action? It will not be pleasant for her. I repeat. We have the female prisoner as hostage. You have something we want. We will trade her life for the Slaver weapon. 
SPOCK: Answer him, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Lieutenant Sulu here. What about Mister Spock? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN [OC]: He must surrender. I will offer him single combat. 
SULU: Not interested.

[Kzinti ship]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: I am as the Vulcan left me, with two ribs broken. I have not set them nor bandaged myself. He may conceivably kill me.

[Planet surface]

SPOCK: Kzinti ribs have some vertical bracing. But I kicked him over one heart. I compute the odds of my defeating Chuft-Captain in combat at sixteen to one against. 
SULU: Offer refused.

[Kzinti ship]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: They think very little of you. 
UHURA: Wrong. They don't think much of you.

[Planet surface]

(Sulu turns the globe, and it becomes more weapon-like) 
SPOCK: A self-destruct mechanism would not have a gun sight. 
SULU: No. Let's see what this does do. 
(He points it at the horizon, and there is a massive explosion) 
SULU: We can't give them that! 
SPOCK: Fascinating. No world in the Federation has produced anything so powerful. Almost beyond theoretical limits. Total conversion of matter to energy at a distance. 
SULU: If the Kzinti had that, the whole galaxy would be their dinner table. 
(The eruption caused by his firing of the weapon is continuing) 
SULU: Hit the dirt! 
(The wind from the blast hits them, knocking them over. Sulu drops the weapon, and it turns back into a globe)

[Kzinti ship]

(Spock, Sulu and Uhura are on the police web while Chuft-Captain plays with the globe. It forms another new shape) 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: What would this be? 
FLYER: I have no idea. It is generating power. 
SPOCK: There is a grid. It may be another communications device. But that seems redundant. 
(The device starts beeping) 
SULU: It has the Kzinti frightened. 
SPOCK: The Kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their owners. 
UHURA: Could it be a voice-activated mechanism? 
SPOCK: No, it appears to be conversing with them. A reasoning computer that small? 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: How long has it been since you were turned off? 
WEAPON: I do not know. When I am off, I have no sense of passing time. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: What is the last thing you remember? 
WEAPON: We were on a mission. I may not tell you of it unless you know certain code words. 
FLYER: If you could describe the positions of the stars in your sector, we would know how much time has passed since then. 
WEAPON: Without certain code words, I may not describe our location. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: One of the settings on this weapon was a total conversion beam. We saw it. Tell us how to find it. 
WEAPON: Twist me widdershins until you reach the null position. Then 
SULU: They've got it. 
UHURA: There must be something we can do. 
SPOCK: Most peculiar. 
(The weapon is a different shape entirely, with two large prongs. The Kzinti leave with it) 
SPOCK: That was not the total conversion beam setting.

[Planet surface]

CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Like others, this form seems to possess no gun sight. 
FLYER: It may be a broad-beam weapon, for use only from orbit. We saw its power. I suggest you fire at a very distant target. 
CHUFT-CAPTAIN: Very well.

[Kzinti ship]

UHURA: We can't let them have that weapon. 
SPOCK: They are not about to get it, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Why not? 
SPOCK: Assume you are a Slaver war computer. You've been turned off. You do not know for how long, but when you were turned off, there was a war on. Now you are awakened by aliens you never saw before. They do not know any of the military passwords. They ask you so many questions it is obvious they know little about you. Your owner is nowhere about. What would you think? 
UHURA: I'd think I'd been captured by the enemy. Or an enemy, at least. 
SULU: And when they asked you how to find your most powerful weapon setting, what would you give them? 
(Outside, Chuft-Captain pulls the trigger. KaBOOM! There is a crater where he was standing and part of the ship's hull has been blown away) 
SPOCK: Activate life support belts. 
UHURA: A disrupter field. 
SPOCK: Yes. Another conventional weapon. It appears the total conversion beam was the only thing the Slavers had that we do not.

[Planet surface]

SULU: No sign of the weapon, of course. It would have looked nice in some museum. 
SPOCK: It never would have reached the museum, Lieutenant. There was too much power in that one setting. If not the Kzinti, the Klingons or some other species would have tried to possess it.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Strange, how the past sometimes breaks through into the present. That ancient war could have sparked a new war between man and Kzinti. 
UHURA: Didn't you say the Kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their dead owners? 
SPOCK: Yes, an ancient superstition. 
UHURA: At this rate, they'll never get over those old superstitions.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Ambergris Element
Stardate: 5499.9
Original Airdate: 1 Dec, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5499.9. We are orbiting the planet Argo. Argo was once a land planet, but it's surface is now almost completely covered by water. The change was caused by violent seismic disturbances. Our mission is to study the effects which the quakes and other phenomena had on its surface. This knowledge may save millions of lives on a Federation planet identical to Argo which will soon be undergoing similar transformation.
[Shuttlecraft]

(A special shuttlecraft modeled on a catamaran has been launched from Enterprise and landed on the ocean) 
KIRK: This is the largest land mass on the planet, isn't it, Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. The others are mere outcroppings. They suggest the peaks of submerged mountains. 
MCCOY: I suggest that we get these seawater and algae specimens. They're the least of the lot. 
SPOCK: For once I agree with you, Doctor. The more informative specimens will come from the sea bottom. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Clayton, open the hatch and let our two scientists here get on with their business. 
CLAYTON: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: What's that? 
(Something with huge tentacles picks up the shuttlecraft and throws it away) 
KIRK: Phasers on stun, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Firing, Captain. 
(The creature retreats below the surface) 
MCCOY: What the devil was that thing? 
SPOCK: Apparently a life form which previous surveys have not recorded. 
KIRK: Let's get a closer look at it before the phaser stun wears off. Submerge, Lieutenant. 
CLAYTON: Aye, sir. 
(They descend through the green water to the sea bed) 
MCCOY: Dual respiratory system. Lungs and gills. 
SPOCK: Its skeleton is similar to that of a Denebian whale, Captain. 
(The shuttlecraft gets slapped across the sea bed) 
KIRK: It's regaining consciousness. Surface, Mister Clayton. 
CLAYTON: Aye, sir. 
(The shuttlecraft is chased along the surface) 
KIRK: Spock, prepare to fire phasers. 
SPOCK: Phasers do not respond, Captain. We must have sustained damage to the power pack when the creature struck us. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Emergency. 
SCOTT [OC]: Enterprise. What is it, sir. 
KIRK: We're under attack. Beam us aboard, Scotty. 
(But the sea monster bites the shuttlecraft then throws it against rocks. McCoy falls into the water, followed by Clayton. Spock and Kirk are unconscious in the craft) 
SCOTT [OC]: We've lost contact, Captain.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Repeat, we've lost contact. Come in, Captain. Come in. 
(The monster grabs the shuttlecraft and takes it underwater)

Ship's log, stardate 5504.2. Lieutenant Commander Scott in command. Captain Kirk and First Officer Spock have been missing for almost five days. Search parties can find no trace of them or the aqua-shuttle. Doctor McCoy and I are continuing the search at a greater distance from the attack point.

[Boat]

MCCOY: There's nothing. There's just nothing. 
CLAYTON: I see some rocks. They're just above sea level, about two miles away. There's something on them.

[Rocks]

(It's the aqua-shuttle, mangled and smashed. Nearby, Kirk and Spock are lying face down in the water) 
MCCOY: Maybe they're still alive. 
(They pull them out of the water) 
MCCOY: Their bodies are functioning. Metabolism, heart. Everything but the lungs. 
KIRK: Can't breathe. Suffocating. Help. Can't breathe. 
(He lifts a webbed hand to his throat) 
SCOTT: What happened to them, Doctor? What is it? 
MCCOY: Something's changed their whole lung structure. They can't live in the air anymore.

Medical log, stardate 5506.2. Captain Kirk and First Office Spock were rescued forty eight hours ago. They have no recollection of what happened to them after they were attacked, but medical examinations show and unidentified substance in the bloodstream has affected their entire metabolism and changed them into water-breathers. Their internal structure is completely transformed, and even their eyes are covered with a transparent film like the second eyelid of a fish. So far all efforts to return them to normal have failed.

[Aquarium]

(Kirk and Spock are in water, Scott and McCoy the other side of the glass) 
MCCOY: We're stumped, Jim. The hormone seems to be the major factor in your mutation, but we just can't identify it. 
KIRK: Are you sure the mutation wasn't somehow accomplished naturally? 
MCCOY: It was infused into your bodies at key structural points. It had to be done by injection. 
KIRK: But can't you duplicate it, Bones? Your medical computers have information on every procedure in the Federation's hospitals. 
MCCOY: It's highly sophisticated and completely unknown to us. 
SPOCK: That implies there are intelligent life forms on Argo. 
MCCOY: The sensors don't indicate any life forms down there, aside from fish. 
SPOCK: They did fail to indicate the large marine creature that attacked us. Perhaps the readings are incomplete, blocked by underwater pressure forces. Oceans are less turbulent at greater depth. Such conditions would be more suitable to intelligent forms. 
MCCOY: Well, we can't do much underwater exploration without the aqua-shuttle. Our equipment is too limited. 
KIRK: We aren't limited. We can go wherever we want in that ocean. 
MCCOY: It's too risky, Jim. Argo's almost totally unexplored. You'd be out of contact range, unarmed. 
KIRK: I have to, Bones. Look at this place. A tank. I can't command a ship from inside an aquarium. I can't live in here. 
MCCOY: I know what you're saying, Jim, but if you go down on that planet and you die there 
KIRK: Right now we have only two choices. Live in an aquarium somewhere for the rest of our lives or stay on Argo. I won't accept either one of them. 
MCCOY: What about you, Spock? What does your logic tell you? 
SPOCK: The Captain states the case emotionally, of course, but correctly. I would be of little value to this ship if I am confined to a tank in Sickbay. I must accompany the Captain. 
KIRK: An intelligence that can produce this kind of mutation can change us back. We've got to find it, Bones. It must be there.

[Boat]

KIRK: We'll make contact as soon as possible, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(Kirk and Spock remove their aqua-lungs and dive into the ocean)

[Sea bed]

(A group of Aquans are gathering food when they see the uniformed and booted humans swimming towards them. Aquans are green, with gills and dark green fins across their heads, the sides of their necks and chests) 
MALE: Go away, air breathers. You're not wanted here. 
KIRK: We won't harm you. We're friends. 
FEMALE: Leave us. It is enough our young saved your lives once. If you go on, nothing will save you again. 
KIRK: Wait. Listen. 
MALE: Go away. 
(The Aquans leave) 
KIRK: I don't understand. They said they'd saved us once. 
SPOCK: I believe the phrase was, 'our young saved your lives once.' 
KIRK: Yes, and they didn't seem to approve. The answer appears to be in that direction, Spock. 
SPOCK: I would say so, Captain. The instinctive reaction of all frightened creatures is to retreat to a place of safety. 
(They descend into the rift in the seabed, and follow a tunnel to) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. And beautiful. 
KIRK: An undersea civilisation capable of fantastic architecture. Medical triumphs unheard of in our galaxy. Why should they be afraid of us, Spock? 
SPOCK: It is quite possible, Captain, that they find us grotesque and ugly. And many people fear beings different from themselves. 
KIRK: Well, speculation isn't much help. We have to get in there. 
SPOCK: Perhaps there is a way open on the far side. There is much less activity there. 
(On the other side of the city) 
KIRK: That building in the centre. It seems to be important. 
(Then they are caught in a net)

[Chamber]

These are the spies, Tribune. Air-breathers. 
DOMAR: You stand before the Ruling Tribunal of the Aquans. I am Domar, the High Tribune. 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock. 
DOMAR: You are air-breather enemies from the surface. We have expected spies for a long time. 
SPOCK: We came here in peace, Tribune. 
CADMAR: The ancient records warn that air-breathers never come in peace. 
RILA: They came without weapons. 
MALE: Can we do nothing without consulting the ancient records? 
CADMAR: Why do the Junior Tribunes wish always to change the records? 
DOMAR: Let the mesh be removed, but stand ready. 
MALE: The surgo-op was excellent. They have mutated perfectly. 
KIRK: Your scientists induced these mutations? 
DOMAR: We do not wish to kill, even air-breathers. Your memory was eradicated so you could not return here. 
CADMAR: It would seem their ancient records are as well preserved as ours. They found us again to come among us as spies. 
RILA: You do not give them a chance to defend themselves, Cadmar. 
DOMAR: Rila is correct. You may speak. 
KIRK: We are visitors to your planet. We come from another world. 
RILA: You do not live on the surface places? 
SPOCK: Not on this world. 
CADMAR: Enough! Clearly, this is a lie. The air-breathers have come again to destroy us. 
SPOCK: You are mistaken, sir. Our only purpose here is to find the means of reversing our mutations. 
DOMAR: That is impossible. Only Aquan mutation is designated by the surgo-records.

[Boat]

MCCOY [OC]: Enterprise to Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Scott here. What is it, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Sensors just gave us an update reading, Scotty. There's a seaquake due in that area, a bad one. Complete topography changes. 
SCOTT: How soon?

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Within four hours. When are Jim and Spock due to make contact? 
SCOTT [OC]: About the same time. 
MCCOY: Can you contact them sooner? 
SCOTT [OC]: We can try like blue blazes. Scott out.

[Boat]

SCOTT: Their directional marker indicates they descended toward that fern bed.

[Underwater]

(As the hull of the boat passes overhead) 
FEMALE: Air-breathers. We must inform the Tribunes.

[Chamber]

KIRK: The name of our starship is on the aqua-shuttle. If you want proof, examine the wreckage. 
RILA: Yes. Let us examine the wreckage before we make judgement. 
FEMALE: We have news, High Tribune. 
DOMAR: Speak it. 
FEMALE: Three air-breathers have invaded the sea foliage. We saw them as we gathered edibles. 
DOMAR: Do you still believe these creatures came in peace? 
RILA: We do not know what to believe. 
DOMAR: Take these spies to the surface boulders and leave them there. It is justice enough for our enemies.

{Rocks]

(Spock and Kirk are pinned under a net, near the aqua-shuttle remains) 
RILA: Conserve your strength. I will free you. The mesh is too strong. 
KIRK: Go to the big island. Bring assistance party.

[Boat]

(Scott has been diving) 
CLAYTON: Did you see anything? 
SCOTT: Not a sign of them. Wait a minute. Who are 
RILA: Follow me. Your friends need help.

[Rocks]

RILA: There. 
SCOTT: Quick, lads. 
(Spock and Kirk are freed and back in the water) 
SCOTT: Stand by in the scouter-gig, Lieutenant.

[Underwater]

(Scott is protected by a personal force field) 
KIRK: Rila, this is my engineering officer, Mister Scott. Tribune Rila is an Aquan. Their city is a short distance away. 
SCOTT: We're obliged for your help. Captain, we've been trying to contact you for two hours. There's a sea bottom quake due. It'll destroy this whole area. 
RILA: There are legends of such a happening. It destroyed the ancient knowledge and caused the great surface places to sink into the sea. 
SPOCK: That suggests your race evolved from its ancient enemies. 
RILA: We did not evolve, Mister Spock. When the surface places began to sink, many air-breathers were mutated through surgo-op, just as you were. As the centuries passed, the mutations became hereditary. 
KIRK: Strange that such a highly developed race would be violent. 
SPOCK: Apparently they were exposed to a frightening geological disaster. Such hardship induces savagery and violence. 
RILA: They hunted and killed us. We feared they would contaminate us with their violence. That is also why it is forbidden to mutate back to surface forms. 
KIRK: Then reverse mutation is possible. 
RILA: There are legends of sealed places in the sunken ruins where many knowledge records of it are kept. 
(The seabed shakes) 
SCOTT: There's not much time, Captain. The quake's due in less than two hours. 
KIRK: How far are the ruins, Rila? 
RILA: Only a short distance. 
KIRK: Those old records may hold the key to reversing our mutations. We've got to find them before it's too late. 
RILA: I cannot take you to the ruins. It is against ordainments. 
KIRK: It's important, Rila. Not just for us. The population of another planet is threatened by surface changes, too. Argo's ancient knowledge can help save them. 
RILA: Yes. I will take you as far as the reef barrier.

[Barrier]

RILA: The ruins lie that way. Now, take care. The tides are strong. 
(She leaves. Kirk and Spock are pulled along by the current)

[Ruins]

SPOCK: Fascinating. Obviously, an entire portion of the continental shelf sank within a few minutes. This may be the sealed place Rila mentioned. I believe this is an entrance panel, Captain. 
(They swim down a staircase) 
KIRK: There's another chamber.

[Chamber]

(A room in the Roman style, with canisters and equipment including a caduceus) 
SPOCK: This resembles ancient medical symbols, Captain. The torso indicates mutation. 
KIRK: That's it, Spock. The key to the survival of the race. 
(They grab a couple of canisters each and swim for it. But they encounter Mister Tentacles, the sea monster. Fortunately another quake hits, and it gets buried under a collapsed building)

[Aquarium]

(McCoy has got the scrolls out of the canisters) 
MCCOY: If the universal translator is right, the substance in your bloodstream is similar to the ambergris of Earth whales. Reverse mutation is induced by infusion of an antitoxin, concentrated doses of it. 
KIRK: What's the composition of the antitoxin, Bones? 
MCCOY: It's made from the venom of the Argo sur-snake.

[Underwater]

KIRK: To capture a sur-snake, we need your help. Our people can't descend to that depth. 
NEPHRO: Domar has warned that if we break more ordainments, we will be exiled to the open seas. 
SPOCK: We cannot reverse our mutations without the serum, nor can the Aquans benefit from the knowledge of their ancestors. 
NEPHRO: But the ordainments state clearly that capturing sur-snakes is forbidden. 
MALE: Ordainments are useless in times of turbulence. Only knowledge will help us. 
RILA: Nephro, we must break the ordainments.

[Ruins]

(They net the monster that was caught by the falling ruins) 
RILA: Quickly, Captain. 
(They milk it's venom while another quake strikes) 
RILA: Quickly, we must leave. 
KIRK: We need more venom. 
RILA: No, no, there is no time. 
(This time the monster is totally squashed by falling masonry)

[Aquarium]

(McCoy and Chapel are in the water too) 
MCCOY: We have prepared an antitoxin from the venom of the sur-snake, but a part of the old records is missing, so the exact dosage is unknown. Experiments on fish show that if the antitoxin is too strong, it causes over-mutation, which cannot be reversed by any means. We're running out of venom, so conclusive experiments are impossible. I decreased the strength by three quarters, Jim, but we can't be sure it's right. 
KIRK: How many infusions, Bones? 
MCCOY: Two small, one large. 
KIRK: Well, let's get started. 
(McCoy injects Kirk, who turns red then white) 
MCCOY: His pulse is fading. (turns pink again) Pulse and heart normal. Something's happening to his metabolism. It's at least ten times normal speed. (the webbing between his fingers disappears) Metabolism normal. Heartbeat normal. The lungs are beginning to revert. This is the last dose, the largest infusion. (he grows scales) The antitoxin was too strong. (The scales vanish) He's starting to breathe. Quick, get him out of the tank! 
(Outside) 
MCCOY: How do you feel, Jim? 
KIRK: A little dizzy. Otherwise normal. 
MCCOY: Well, better get into some dry clothes. I wouldn't want you to catch cold. Your turn, Spock.

[Bridge]

(Domar and Rila are wearing aqualungs) 
KIRK: We'll bombard the unpopulated pressure areas with phaser beams and change the epicentre of the quake so it won't endanger your people or your city. 
DOMAR: I did not believe such knowledge was possible. 
SCOTT: Major tremors will start in three minutes, Captain. 
DOMAR: It is incredible. All of it. 
KIRK: Confirm co-ordinates, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Confirmed, sir. 
KIRK: Fire phasers as directed, gentlemen. 
AREX: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate the epicentre of the quake was in the north polar seas, Captain, a totally uninhabited area. 
DOMAR: Then our people are safe. 
KIRK: When can we beam down, Spock? 
SPOCK: The seabed should stabilize within a few hours.

[Shoreline]

SPOCK: Argo appears to have a new city, Captain, or rather, one reborn. 
RILA: Our people survived the seaquakes with little damage, thanks to your help. 
DOMAR: We owe you and your friends much gratitude, Captain Kirk. We will try to repay by making the ancient records available for your studies. 
SPOCK: Our experience here has shown us the means of diverting quakes. That will mean much to the endangered Federation planet. 
RILA: The light is warm and the air is soft. I shall be glad when the surface places can be inhabited. 
DOMAR: The young Aquans have decided to rebuild the great shelters of the air-breathers. 
KIRK: Only the young Aquans? 
DOMAR: Senior Aquans cannot adjust to the thought of becoming air-breathers. We will remain at the Aqua City. 
KIRK: Don't lose contact with each other like your ancestors. 
DOMAR: We will pass ordainments to forbid it. 
RILA: And we, this time, will not ignore them.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Time Trap
Stardate: 5267.6
Original Airdate: 24 Nov, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 52.2. We have just entered the Delta Triangle, a vast, uninhabited sector of our galaxy in which a high number of mysterious disappearances of starships have been recorded since ancient times. The Enterprise has been assigned the mission of surveying this area, and if possible, determining the cause of these disappearances.
[Bridge]

(There is a continual fireworks display on the viewscreen. The ship is at Red Alert) 
KIRK: Situation, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Our sensors are in a state of chaos, Captain. They became unreliable when we entered the Triangle. 
KIRK: Magnification ten on forward scanners, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Magnification ten, sir. 
KIRK: Klingon battle cruiser. Deflector shields up, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Deflectors up, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, open a hailing frequency. 
(The Klingon ship fires two shots, which harmlessly hit the shields) 
KIRK: Ready phasers. 
SULU: Phasers locked on target, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
SULU: Firing phasers.
(A hit. The Klingon ship vanishes) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, did you see what I think I just saw? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Explanation? 
SPOCK: I can offer none at this time. However, the Klingon ship was not destroyed by our phaser fire. Its shields clearly deflected the phasers. Nor was its disappearance the type that would have been affected if it were using its cloaking device. 
KIRK: Any sensor analysis on that wavering effect just before the ship disappeared? 
SPOCK: The sensors are still not registering normally, sir. But I would venture the theory it has something to do with the many ship disappearances in this area. 
KIRK: A natural phenomenon. But what? Duty personnel on Yellow Alert. Visual scan three hundred and sixty degrees, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Scanning three hundred and sixty degrees, sir. 
(There are other ships surrounding them) 
KIRK: Mousetrapped. If the first ship doesn't succeed in blasting us out of existence, they have two backup ships to do the job. 
SPOCK: Tactically well planned. When the Federation investigates, we'll be recorded as just another mysterious starship disappearance. 
UHURA: Captain, we are receiving a class two signal from the lead Klingon vessel. 
KIRK: One moment, Lieutenant. Mister Sulu, on my command, I want you to turn the Enterprise and head for the exact co-ordinates where the Klingon ship disappeared. Warp eight. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Put the signal on the main viewing screen, Lieutenant, and pipe the entire exchange back to Starfleet Command. 
UHURA: It will take three weeks to reach the nearest starbase, sir. 
KIRK: Nonetheless, let's have it on the record. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. Signal in. 
KURI [on viewscreen]: You have been identified as the starship Enterprise. Captain James T Kirk last known to be in command. 
KIRK: Your information is correct. This is Captain Kirk. 
KURI [on viewscreen]: I am Commander Kuri of the Klingon Imperial Fleet. We have witnessed the destruction of our sister ship, the Klothos, and hold you responsible. Surrender immediately or we will destroy you. 
KIRK: We did not destroy the Klothos, and you are well aware of it, Commander. 
KURI [on viewscreen]: Surely you don't expect me to believe she just vanished? 
KIRK: You may believe what you like, Commander. We were fired upon first and returned fire. The Klothos deflectors turned aside our phaser fire and then disappeared. I don't know why. But we are in the Delta Triangle. 
KURI [on viewscreen]: I do not accept this. 
KIRK: Frankly, Commander, what you accept is of little importance to me. Enterprise out. Now, Mister Sulu.

[Klingon ship]

KURI: What fools! Thinking they can escape. Accelerate to maximum and prepare to open fire.

[Bridge]

(Weapons fire hits the Enterprise) 
SCOTT: Sir, aren't we going to defend ourselves? 
KIRK: Your deflector shields are doing that for us, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: But to just turn and run, sir. 
KIRK: We'll fight if we have to. Sulu, are we headed for the exact co-ordinates where the Klothos disappeared? 
SULU: Dead on, sir. We'll be there in ten seconds. 
SCOTT: Captain, our deflector shields have just gone out. 
SULU: Sir, the instruments. They've gone haywire. I can't orient myself. Everything is 
UHURA: Subspace radio channels are dead, sir. 
(Red Alert sounds, and the Enterprise disappears)

[Klingon ship]

KURI: Where did they go?

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, I've lost all co-ordination. Dizzy. 
SPOCK: Sir, we seem to be suffering from some form of vertigo. 
KIRK: Sulu, are we still on the same co-ordinates? 
SULU: I can't tell, sir. Vision won't focus. 
(He collapses, then the Enterprise reappears) 
SPOCK: Captain, on the viewscreen. 
(A starship graveyard as far as they can see) 
KIRK: It's like a vast Sargasso Sea. A graveyard of ships from every civilisation imaginable. 
UHURA: Where are we, sir? 
KIRK: At another place in time, I think. If we check closely, I believe we'll find many of those ships are the ones designated as lost in the Delta Triangle. 
UHURA: An alternate universe? 
KIRK: Something corresponding to that. The records say every ship lost here vanished without a trace. Most logged communication loss and disorientation just before disappearance. My guess was they entered a window to some other continuum. Comments, Spock? 
SPOCK: Your logic is excellent, Captain. There is a random factor to the ship disappearances. Perhaps the touching of the two time continuums is erratic. In any event, the window stayed open long enough for us to follow the Klothos in. 
SCOTT: Aye, and where is that tricky devil? 
SULU: I've been scanning for her, but there are so many ships here it's hard to pick up a specific trace. 
KIRK: Stay on it, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
SCOTT: There are ships here I've only seen crude drawings of, pictures in museums. 
SPOCK: Sensor scans give a rough approximation of the age of the metal in the hulls, Captain. Some of them have been here for centuries. 
SCOTT: Captain, there's the old Bonaventure. She was the first ship to have warp drive installed. She vanished without a trace on her third voyage. 
(Bonaventure looks very like a fat Enterprise, with 0201NCC on the nacelle)
SPOCK: The crew's descendants may still be living, Captain. 
KIRK: Their descendants? 
SPOCK: Yes. I am picking up life and energy readings from the cluster of ships ahead of us.

[Klothos Bridge]

KAZ: Scanners indicate the Enterprise shields are totally depleted, sir. 
KOR: Good. All hands to battle stations. Prepare to open fire on the Enterprise immediately.

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, the Klothos, dead ahead. 
KIRK: Sound Red Alert. Phasers lock on target. 
SULU: Aye, sir. Phasers locked on.

[Klothos Bridge]

KOR: Fire! 
KAZ: Sir, our weaponry is frozen.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Fire. 
SULU: Firing phasers. 
KIRK: Report, sir. 
SULU: No response, sir. There's no indication of damage. All instruments register normal. 
(Then Kirk disappears)

Captain's log, supplemental. First Officer Spock recording. We appear to be in an alternate universe. Position, undetermined. Captain Kirk has been transported from the ship by an unknown power. His present location also is undetermined.

[Council chamber]

(Kor appears in front of a giant horseshoe-shaped table. There are people of all different races sitting behind it, including a Gorn, Tellarite, Klingon, Andorian, Orion, Phylosian. He reaches for his weapon but is unable to take hold of it)  
XERIUS: (a Vulcan or Romulan) That will not be needed here, Commander Kor. 
(Then Kirk is beamed in) 
XERIUS: Welcome to Elysia. Devna, Interpreter of Laws. 
DEVNA (an Orion woman) Gentlemen, you now stand before the Ruling Council. Elysia is comprised of representatives of a hundred and twenty three races. Our existence dates back over one thousand years. During this time, these diverse races, many of whom were enemies on the outside, have learned to live together because they must. As a result, any act of violence is strictly forbidden, and will be dealt with swiftly and with utmost severity. Questions? 
KIRK: Are we in an alternate universe? 
DEVNA: It is more aptly described as a pocket in the garment of time. 
KOR: How did you freeze my weaponry? 
DEVNA: We have among us many individuals gifted with psionic powers, peace being our single goal. You were attempting to break that peace. 
XERIUS: Pronounce the law. 
DEVNA: Under our law, you as ship captains are responsible for the behaviour of your crews. Should a crew member, with or without your knowledge, engage in any form of violence whatsoever, you will suffer the ultimate penalty. Total immobilisation of your ship for a century. 
KOR: A century? We'd all be dead by the end of it. 
XERIUS: No, Commander Kor. This small universe of ours is a curios trap. Time passes here, but very slowly. A century means nothing to us. Our Council appears young. Yet all are centuries old. 
KIRK: Your life here must be almost perfect, if you haven't wanted to leave. 
XERIUS: All of us have wanted to leave at some time, Captain Kirk. But we have made the best possible world here, because we have found there is no escape from it.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We are getting out. 
SCOTT: Then we'd better do it pretty quick, Captain. 
SPOCK: If we find an answer, it will still take time. 
SCOTT: That's just what we haven't got. 
KIRK: What's wrong, Scotty? 
SCOTT: It's our dilithium crystals, sir. They're deteriorating rapidly. 
KIRK: But how? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. Maybe because of the time warp we went through. But we've only four days at the most before power goes. 
KIRK: Got any miracles in your computer, Spock? 
SPOCK: Impossible to predict, Captain. 
KIRK: I don't want a prediction. You will start work immediately, around the clock, nonstop, until you arrive at a formula that gets us out of here.

[Klothos Bridge]

KOR: These computations are useless. Get out of here and don't come back until you have a plan that works. 
KAZ: Yes, sir.

[Council chamber]

DEVNA: What do you see beyond your eyes, Magen? 
MAGEN: (red-head with yellow cat's eyes) Two new ships. In each, beings labour to solve the riddle. The riddle of the time trap escape. Escape. 
DEVNA: Gently, good Magen. Return to us now. 
XERIUS: It is impossible. 
DEVNA: They must try, Xerius. They all must try before they accept.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: This is the best you could come up with, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Have you covered every possibility? Every factor? 
SPOCK: Several times, Captain. I do not wish to surrender hope, but the facts remain unchangeable. 
KIRK: He isn't giving up. If they can do it, why can't we? 
SPOCK: I do not believe they can, sir. High rank probability. Their S2 graf unit, which is roughly the equivalent of our warp drive, began giving off depleted energy readings. Kor decided to try to bluff it through. 
KIRK: Jeopardising his crew and his ship unnecessarily?

[Klothos Bridge]

KAZ: All power has been diverted to the engines, sir. We're picking up speed. 
(The Klothos heads into a vortex, vanishes, and gets thrown back into the graveyard where she started)

[Bridge]

KIRK: You were right, Spock. But I almost wish they'd made it. 
SPOCK: Their attempt has given me an idea as to how we may be able to break through the time barrier.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Mister Spock has come up with a formula which may just get us out of here. 
SCOTT: But this involves combining our ship with the Klothos. 
KIRK: That is correct. 
MCCOY: You mean you want us to co-operate with those 
KIRK: If we want to get out of here, it's our only choice. 
SULU: It's a complicated navigation problem, trying to guide two such disparate ships. 
SCOTT: Considering we only have two days left before our supply of dilithium crystals is exhausted, I say we go with this plan. 
SULU: I agree, sir. 
KIRK: Good. I'll contact Kor right away.

[Council chamber]

XERIUS: What is it? 
DEVNA: These new ones. Now they plan to combine the two ships and try again. Can you not stop them, Xerius? 
XERIUS: It is not against our laws to try to escape. 
DEVNA: But they may kill themselves in these mad attempts. 
XERIUS: So long as they do not break our laws, we must not impede them. 
DEVNA: Even if they die? 
XERIUS: It is their choice.

[Klothos briefing room]

KIRK: Then it's settled. Our science teams will get to work right away conjoining our warp and navigation systems so we will function as a single ship. Exchange of personnel and computer hookup to start as soon as we are beamed back to our ship. 
KOR: Agreed. 
KIRK: Mister Spock? 
(Spock gets up and puts his hands on the two Klingon's shoulders) 
SPOCK: I cannot tell you how impressed I am by your splendid spirit of co-operation. 
KOR: Mister Spock! 
SPOCK: Forgive me, Commander. I was overcome by the moment. Goodbye. 
KOR: Goodbye, Mister Spock. Captain Kirk. 
(Kirk and Spock leave) 
KAZ: The stories of his being half human must be true. 
KOR: Perhaps the time continuum affected his mind. 
KAZ: I wonder if we all haven't become affected. 
KOR: Explain yourself. 
KAZ: Your willingness to work with your old enemy, Kirk. It is not like you, Commander. What do you really have in mind? 
KOR: You do know me, Kaz. Very well, what would you think if the Enterprise suddenly disintegrated after our dual ship had pierced the time continuum? 
KAZ: I would think my commander had manoeuvred brilliantly. 
KOR: And it can be arranged, practically speaking? 
KAZ: It implies a rather high risk factor, given the time involved and Kirk's highly suspicious nature. But I believe it can be arranged. 
KOR: Very good, Kaz. I will leave it to you to attend to the details of the Enterprise's destruction.

Captain's log, stardate 5267.6. We are in the final stages preparatory to making our escape from Elysia.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We must make our escape by tomorrow or our dilithium crystals will be too depleted, and we will be trapped here forever. 
GABLER: Beg your pardon, sir. 
KIRK: What is it, Gabler. 
GABLER: Bell and I are the relief guard for the dilithium vault. We arrived a few minutes late and found them poking around. 
KLINGON: We were lost. 
GABLER: Lost, my foot. It's clearly posted as a restricted area. You knew you weren't supposed to be there. 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, I'm sure there has been a mistake. (hands on shoulders) Where are you supposed to be working? 
KLINGON: Engineering, deck five. 
SPOCK: Captain, allow me to escort this young man to his work area. 
KIRK: Very well, Mister Spock. 
(Spock and the Klingons leave) 
KIRK: Return to your post and don't leave it until you've been relieved. 
GABLER: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: Jim, I'm worried about Spock. He's just not acting normal. 
KIRK: He's under a lot of pressure, Bones. 
MCCOY: I know that. But I've never known Spock to act like a pal under any circumstances, least of all toward Klingons. 
KIRK: That's true. 
MCCOY: And if he's coming apart, Jim, we're in serious trouble. Getting out of here hinges on his computations. 
KIRK: I'll talk to him, Bones. It's all I can do.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Everything seems to be in order. But then you're the only person who can really be sure. Isn't that right, Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Why do you ask? 
KIRK: Your recent behaviour. Is something wrong? 
SPOCK: I believe there is, Captain. But not within me. I sensed something strange about the Klingons when we were aboard the Klothos. They were too agreeable, too willing to co-operate. 
KIRK: Why is that unusual? They want to get out of here as much as we do. 
SPOCK: Had I not touched them, I would have agreed with you, Captain. But even though contact was necessarily limited and their minds were suspicious, I picked up some indication they are planning to sabotage the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Sabotage! How? When? 
SPOCK: I cannot say. The Klingon found near the dilithium vault knew nothing specific. But there is some kind of sabotage in the offing. 
KIRK: They need us to get through the time barrier, if they're to get through at all. Security, this is Captain Kirk. I want all security teams on duty around the clock. Watch every Klingon who sets foot aboard this ship. I don't want one of them to make a move we don't know about.

[Klothos Bridge]

KOR: You have the device, Kaz? 
KAZ: By my calculations, the capsule will be triggered the exact moment our dual ship reaches warp eight. Approximately three minutes after the time barrier is pierced and we have disengaged, the Enterprise will disintegrate. 
KOR: Excellent! Kali, you know what to do. Tonight they entertain us, but the gift they will receive in return will be their destruction.

[Rec room]

(Devna has danced for the guests) 
KIRK: Beautifully done. 
DEVNA: I thank you, Captain. You have seen the dance of Orion women before? 
KIRK: Many times. 
DEVNA: I wish 
KIRK: Yes? 
DEVNA: I wish I could return through the time barrier and see Orion again. 
KIRK: You could go. We're willing to take passengers. 
DEVNA: No. You see, we have all seen the futility of attempting to escape. Once each of us dreamed of breaking free. Then we came to understand it could not be done, and we accepted our life here. 
KIRK: We believe it can be done. 
DEVNA: Then I shall not interfere with your dream, Captain. 
KAZ: Get away from here, human. This is my woman. 
MCCOY: Now just a minute. All I did was ask her to dance. She didn't have to say yes. 
KIRK: Bones! 
(Kaz draws a weapon) 
XERIUS: Stop! 
(The weapon doesn't work) 
XERIUS: Ship captains and these two will come to the Council Chamber now to face charges. 
(Meanwhile, Kali places the little capsule by some computer equipment behind a screen)

[Council chamber]

XERIUS: You know any form of violence is forbidden here. Your man began the fight and attempted to kill. I propose we freeze the Klothos and its crew for a star century. 
KIRK: May I speak? 
XERIUS: You may. 
KIRK: Captain Kor and I were preparing to attempt an escape from here tomorrow. If you hibernate the Klothos, you will not only be punishing them but us. We cannot leave as a single ship. I urge you to permit our dual ship to depart tomorrow as scheduled. 
XERIUS: Getting back to your own time continuum is that important to you? 
KIRK: Yes. 
XERIUS: You will fail. 
KIRK: We must try, Xerius. Elysia is, in many respects, a perfect society. But with all its virtues, it is not home. And home, with all its faults, is where we prefer to be. 
XERIUS: You would take these renegades with you? 
KIRK: We need them. 
XERIUS: Very well. I release Captain Kor into your custody. Good luck to you, Captain Kirk. You will be needing it.

[Bridge]

(The countdown starts at 10) 
KIRK: Ready to accelerate to warp six. 
SULU: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: Three, two, one. Accelerate.

[Council chamber]

MAGEN: No! The Klingons have hidden an explosive aboard the Enterprise. She will be destroyed. 
XERIUS: Enterprise, this is Xerius! Come in, Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SULU: Warp seven, Captain. 
UHURA: Sir, Xerius is calling us. He says it's urgent. 
KIRK: On audio, Lieutenant. 
XERIUS [OC]: Captain Kirk! The Klingons have placed and explosive in your computer room. Magen says it is located in the warp control panel.

[Council chamber]

XERIUS: It will go off when you reach warp eight.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock. Scotty.

[Klothos Bridge]

KAZ: Approaching warp eight, sir. 
KOR: The barrier.

[Computer room]

SCOTT: There it is, sir. 
(Spock grabs it, runs to a waste disposal chute and ejects the explosive. Enterprise and Klothos emerge into normal space and separate. There is a big bang, but the Enterprise is still there)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain Kirk, I'm picking up a radio transmission Captain Kor intended for his home base. He took full credit for our escape from Elysia. 
MCCOY: Why, that scoundrel. 
KIRK: It doesn't matter, Bones. 
UHURA: It doesn't? 
KIRK: That's what matters. 
(The stars of home)

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Terratin Incident
Stardate: 5577.3
Original Airdate: 17 Nov, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5577.3. We are approaching the remains of the burnt out supernova Arachna. Requested update survey will begin with measurements of its radiation and volume expansion.
[Bridge]

SPOCK: Arachna is entering its cycle of strongest emissions, Captain. 
KIRK: Uhura, inform Starbase Twenty Three we have arrived at the gas cloud and are starting to map. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm getting some interference on subspace extreme upper registers. If it's a signal, I don't recognise it. 
KIRK: Source? 
UHURA: The star Cepheus. From its single satellite. That area's never produced radio transmissions before. 
KIRK: Put it on the speaker. 
SPOCK: Signals appear random. Perhaps some are beyond our reception capability. 
KIRK: Could be a natural radio source newly energised by 
SPOCK: Correction. One isolated word pattern detected. If you accept intersat code as still operative. 
UHURA: Intersat? That's been out of use for two centuries. 
SPOCK: The code word is t-e-r-r-a-t-i-n. 
UHURA: It's stopped now, sir. No response at all to our signal. 
SPOCK: Computers show no immediate information on the word terratin. 
KIRK: Was the word totally random, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: No, sir. It was repeated twice in the transmission. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, lay in a course for Cepheus. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: Jim, you don't mean you're going to abandon the mapping mission to check out some meaningless signal? 
KIRK: Meaningless at the moment, Bones, but it was sent twice. Odds against that occurring in a totally random transmission are too high to ignore. There may be some intelligence trying to contact us. Mister Spock, continue research on the word terratin. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: It's a waste of time if you ask me. 
(Arriving at the star) 
SPOCK: Only data is from early exploration. Planet is listed as Class M, core molten, mantle and crust entirely crystalline. 
KIRK: But nothing in the computer banks about surface eruptions. There's our likely radio source, simply crystalline projections of recent volcanic activity. 
(But down on the planet, a radio dish is definitely doing something) 
KIRK: Set for a single elliptic orbit. 
SULU: Aye, sir. Entering orbit now. 
SPOCK: I register a disturbance, Captain. As if an impulse just passed through the ship. 
KIRK: Type and source? 
SPOCK: Unidentified. It's extremely faint and diffused. Captain, I suggest we delay orbit until it can be analysed for nature and effect. 
KIRK: Bridge reports. 
SULU: All instruments functioning, ship's condition normal, all area status lights are green. 
AREX: Sensors detect nothing abnormal, sir. 
KIRK: Bridge to Engineering. Scotty, how are your engines?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Purring like happy kittens, Captain.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Bridge to Sickbay. Bones, we've just recorded an unidentified impulse. Any effect on sensitive lab animals?

[Medical lab]

MCCOY: Nothing, Jim. The gossamer mice show no signs of shock. 
(The mice are semi-transparent) 
CHAPEL: Our halo fish is bright as ever, Doctor. Now, this species loses all colour at the least environmental change. 
KIRK [OC]: Very well.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Well, Spock, your x-waves seem harmless enough. Make your analysis while we proceed into orbit. Commence your sensor sweep, Mister Arex. 
AREX: Sensors show crystalline surface heavily fractured by lava flows. Ash and smoke suspended in oxygen-nitrogen atmos 
(He's cut off by a loud noise, and the Enterprise glows like a halo fish) 
AREX: My eyes! 
(Everybody glows for a while, then it stops as suddenly as it started) 
KIRK: Anyone hurt here? 
VARIOUS: No, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Arex? 
AREX: No injury, sir. 
UHURA: Damage reports, all ship areas, damage reports. 
SULU: All instruments functioning normally. Maintaining orbit. But strictly on impulse power, sir. 
SPOCK: Wave bombardment reduced, but continuing. Deflector shields ineffective.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: No casualties reported, Jim.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: What happened? 
KIRK: Don't know yet.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Engineering. No casualties, Captain, but trouble aplenty with the engines. Every dilithium crystal connection's smashed in the warp engine circuitry. We're trying to bypass them now.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What about main circuits? 
SCOTT: Well, you have to see it to believe it, sir. Those big crystals in there have come apart. Each of them unpeeling like the rind of an orange.

[Engineering]

KIRK: Analysis, Spock. 
SCOTT: Our only hope now is rewiring impulse. But there are a thousand broken connections. 
SPOCK: Captain, this is quite unprecedented. Notice the fracturing is spiro-form, similar to long chain molecules. 
KIRK: But dilithium molecules are the hardest, most rigid 
GABLER: Mister Scott! More trouble with the circuit work. 
SCOTT: What now, Gabler? 
GABLER: All the tools, sir. They're too big for us to handle. 
SCOTT: You sound like you're blathering, man. Wait, I'm coming. 
KIRK: Spock, are you slumping? 
SPOCK: I have never slumped in my life, Captain, but I was about to ask you the same 
BRIEL [OC]: Security! Anyone, please! Mess Officer Briel requesting help in the Main Dining Room. Tables, chairs, silverware, everything seems to have enlarged. Women losing rings, hairpins. Some are near panic.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, the most incredible thing is happening. 
KIRK: We know. The whole ship has apparently expanded. 
SPOCK: An equally good possibility is that ship's personnel have contracted, and may be continuing to shrink. 
KIRK: Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Shut down all unnecessary systems. Get every ounce of impulse power. We've got to get away from this planet.

Captain's log, stardate 5577.5. Our limited power attempt to escape the planet's gravity has failed. Undefined wave bombardment continues, resulting in a contraction of our bodies, or an expansion of the ship, by a factor of point three.

[Bridge]

UHURA: No reply to our mayday, Captain. I don't believe we have enough power to transmit to Starbase Twenty Three. 
KIRK: Very well. Spock, what have you learned about the wave bombarding us? 
SPOCK: Only that it is complex beyond anything in my experience. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. How are they holding out, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: We've replaced all the damaged parts we can. With all that's draining them, the well will soon enough run dry, sir. 
KIRK: Thank you, Scotty. Kirk out. Uhura, reduce mayday signals. One per ten minute cycle. Cut down sensor sweeps, Mister Arex. 
AREX: Visual sweeps are already impossible, sir. My eyes no longer fit the opticals. 
UHURA: (climbing on the console) And I can't reach the dial I turned five minutes ago. 
KIRK: Kirk to Sickbay. 
MCCOY [OC]: Sickbay. McCoy here. 
KIRK: Bones, I need some answers. What's happening to us? 
MCCOY [OC]: Come down tot the lab, Jim. I may have something for you now.

[Medical lab]

MCCOY: There's the test tissue, Jim, compared with the stable infrared. 
KIRK: Then Spock's theory is right. We're contracting. 
MCCOY: That's why our weight remains the same, same number of atoms. The effect is just reducing the space between the molecules. It's something I've never seen before. 
SPOCK: Agreed. And it is accelerating. 
KIRK: How long can it keep on? 
SPOCK: Ad infinitum, perhaps, considering distance between atoms is relatively as great as between stars. 
CHAPEL: Doctor McCoy, the animals! They're getting too small for the cage mesh. All the gossamers are out. And look how tiny they've gotten. They're just like halo fish. It's tadpole-sized now. 
(Spock notices Christine's bracelet) 
SPOCK: Miss Chapel, what is the composition of this decoration? 
CHAPEL: It was made for me by the titanium smiths of Libra, but it was an arm bracelet. More like a necklace now. 
SPOCK: Yet the uniform on which you wear it fits as well as ever. Uniform made of algae-based xenylon, I believe. 
MCCOY: Aren't all our uniforms xenylon? 
KIRK: Yes, and they've all been shrinking proportionately with us. 
SPOCK: This coral decoration for the aquarium is also shrinking. yet the meteoritic rock in there is unchanged. 
MCCOY: That means only organic matter is affected. But how? 
SPOCK: The wave tends to wind tight such spiral molecules as dilithium. There is one other molecular structure 
KIRK: Of course, the double helix of DNA, nucleus of every cell in our bodies. What happens when DNA is compacted completely? 
MCCOY: The strands wouldn't break, Jim, they'd just quit winding. 
KIRK: Then we can calculate the limits to our shrinkage.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: It's possible. I'll feed the data into the computer banks. 
KIRK: Something else we'd better determine first. How long can we expect to maintain control of our ship? 
SPOCK: The computer will project the point at which systems' switches and buttons will be beyond our ability to operate.

Captain's log, stardate 5577.7. We will lose effective control of this vessel at the point when we've become approximately one centimetre tall. At the present rate, we will reach this less-than-fingernail length in thirty two minutes.

[Bridge]

(Sulu and Ares are standing on ladders to reach their consoles) 
KIRK: Spock, how small will we ultimately shrink? 
SPOCK: No information on that as yet, sir. I do have one read-out on full spiroid wave analysis. That will take approximately eight years. 
KIRK: Bypass that analysis. We've got twenty nine minutes before we're too small to operate ship controls. Everyone continue to jury-rig miniature control mechanisms. There's nothing more we can do. 
SULU: But there is, Captain. Request permission to direct phaser fire at the planet. Just let me set for ten seconds, sir. 
KIRK: Aiming at what, Mister Sulu? So far all source studies have shown the waves come from an area as large as one sixth the planet's surface. Phaser fire will only waste power. 
SULU: What good will it do to wait like this? Just one burst sir, one single 
(The navigation dial moves and knocks Sulu to the floor - a long way down) 
KIRK: Sulu! I think his leg's broken. We'll need a splint. 
(Sulu is splinted up) 
KIRK: Let's get him to Sickbay. Every one back to stations. 
(But there's a problem, as everyone is now so small even Spock has to lean hard on a button to activate it) 
KIRK: The electric eye. We've grown too small to make it work. 
(He finds a pin or something similar on the floor and waves it in front of the detector. The turbolift doors open)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: What happened? 
KIRK: He fell from the console top. 
MCCOY: More and more fall injuries coming. Compound fracture. 
CHAPEL: Oh, if only we could use our bone-knitting laser. Doctor McCoy. That microscope laser, the one designed to heal the middle ear, wouldn't it work here? 
MCCOY: It's certainly worth a try. 
CHAPEL: It's in the lab shelf supplies. I'll get it.

[Medical lab]

(She gets the tiny instrument, but then trips over something and falls into the fish tank) 
CHAPEL: Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! 
(Kirk does the assault course of chairs and table-tops to try and get to her) 
CHAPEL: Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! 
(As she starts to sink, he throws a needle like a javelin. It has a line of thread attached to it. She grabs it and is pulled out) 
KIRK: No more climbing heights for you, Nurse. Got that clear? 
CHAPEL: Yes, Captain. But I've also got the miniature laser.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: How is it, Sulu? 
SULU: I can feel it knitting, sir. 
SPOCK: Results on DNA reduction limits have come through, Captain. 
KIRK: What are they? 
SPOCK: Factor of thirty two point nine. 
KIRK: In other words, we're going down to one sixteenth of an inch high. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Well past the operative point of Enterprise controls. 
KIRK: Can you calculate the geographic centre of the wave emissions from the planet's surface? 
SPOCK: Easily, Captain. May I ask the purpose? 
KIRK: It's as good a place as any to beam down. 
(He opens a communicator almost as big as he is) 
KIRK: Kirk to Engineering. Scotty, can you hear me? 
SCOTT [OC]: Barely, sir. 
KIRK: Get a crew down to transporter room three. We have twenty minutes left while we can still operate transporter controls. 
SCOTT [OC]: How many beaming down, Captain? 
KIRK: One, Scotty. Myself.

Captain's log, supplemental. There is one last measure we can take to try and stop the bombardment of the lethal spiroid wave. There must be some intelligence behind it. I'm going to attempt direct communication by beaming down to the planet's surface. We have no reason to expect success, but our height is little more than two inches and even this action will be beyond us in fifteen minutes time.

[Transporter room]

(As Scott and his engineers arrange a system of 'ropes' around the slider controls) 
SPOCK: This is the best I could do in rigging so small a communicator, sir. 
KIRK: Thanks, Spock. 
SPOCK: It's range cannot be guaranteed. How will we pinpoint you for return in case it fails? 
KIRK: Scotty, set automatic return for me. If there's anything to be found down there, ten minutes should do it. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. Timer being set. 
SPOCK: Captain, the transporter retains a memory of the body's molecular structure. Will it apply as well to your present height? 
KIRK: We'll know that in ten minutes. After that, it won't matter anymore. Prepare to energise. 
SPOCK: Good luck, sir. 
KIRK: Energise! 
SCOTT: All right then. Heave, lads. Heave!

[Planet surface]

(Kirk opens his hand to reveal the tiny communicator in his palm) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. I think we have an answer to the height problem. The transporter beam apparently returns our molecules to normal spacing. Kirk to Enterprise, do you read me? 
SPOCK [OC]: We read you, Captain. Wave bombardment has just ceased. 
KIRK: I think I see 
(But a volcanic eruption knocks him off his feet and he drops the communicator. It gets hit with a globule of lava. Kirk runs for it, dodging lava flows until he finds a miniature city. Then he is caught in a transporter beam)

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Scotty? Spock?

[Bridge]

(Everyone is so small he can hardly see them) 
KIRK: Scotty, is it you? 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. For the love of heaven, be careful where you step. 
KIRK: Is everyone safe? 
SCOTT: Captain, you'll deafen us for sure! 
(Kirk drops his voice to a whisper) 
KIRK: Everyone accounted for? 
SCOTT: All but the Bridge crew, sir! They were trying to man their posts here when all of a sudden they were beamed away. Every living one of them! 
KIRK: All personnel, away from helm area. Go to the far bulkhead. 
(He works the helm controls then goes to Uhura's station) 
KIRK: Message to the inhabitants of the city on the planet below. I hope you can receive this frequency and understand my words. Your survival depends on it. All this ship's armament is locked on the co-ordinates of your city. A demonstration, in case you doubt. 
(A crystal outcrop by the city is disintegrated) 
KIRK: You have one minute to restore my Bridge crew unharmed, or you will undergo full barrage. 
(The viewscreen comes to life and shows a group of red-headed people, dressed in yellow and green) 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: In the name of the Terratin people, I forbid you to destroy us, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: You forbid me after what you've done to my people? 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: I am Mendant of all this city, equal in command to yourself. We are people of pride, Captain, equal to your own. We neither suffer insult nor give apology for actions. But I give them now, for damage done your starship. Be assured, this land contains much dilithium to replace that you lost. 
KIRK: Where are my officers? 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: I request you to understand. We tried to tell you our plight as you passed, that our adopted planet is dying. But our great antenna was buried. We had no choice but to use our invasion defence to reach you. 
KIRK: You still haven't answered my question. Either you tell me what's happened to my people 
AREX [on viewscreen: Here we are, Captain. 
SULU [on viewscreen]: We're down here in the Capitol building of the Terratins, sir. They beamed us down with their transporters. See for yourself. 
(The image pans around. Spock is working at a computer, of course) 
KIRK: Spock, who are the Terratins? Where'd they come from?

[Capitol]

SPOCK: Descendants of an early lost colony, which is why they retain some knowledge of starship methods such as transporter mechanisms. These Earth colonists named and numbered this planet Terra Ten.

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: Hence the present corruption of their name. 
KIRK: There've been no Earth colonists a sixteenth of an inch tall.

[Capitol]

SPOCK: Exactly why they were lost, Captain. Spirod epsilon waves are natural here, and shrank them to this size. It has become a genetic characteristic now.

[Bridge]

MENDANT [on viewscreen]: Our ancestors were too small ever to be found again, Captain Kirk. We had to build our own world, master our own ways, our own defence. We sought no outsiders, asked no help. Now you see, Captain Kirk. We are about to lose all. We had to force help from your ship. 
KIRK: Your actions all but lost us our ship. 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: I do not know how to beg. I can only request. Save as many of my people as you can.

[Capitol]

UHURA: They had no other way to reach us except to make us their size. They didn't mean us harm, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I can help no one under present conditions. All Bridge crew prepare to beam aboard. Each of you carry as much dilithium as you can find. 
MENDANT [on viewscreen]: The Captain orders dilithium. Bring the largest crystals in the city.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Bridge crew, prepare to beam up.

[Capitol]

(With crystals around their feet, which makes them microscopic) 
SPOCK: Energise, Captain.

[Transporter room]

(The crystals have retained a relative size to the crew) 
UHURA: Nice to be back aboard, sir, and fitting the room again. 
KIRK: All crew personnel report to Transporter rooms immediately. Prepare to beam down to planet surface. 
SPOCK: The Terratins are making available all possible dilithium. The crystals are small, but I believe they will provide enough power until we can obtain larger pieces. 
KIRK: Sulu, take over the transporter here. Spock.

[Capitol]

(Earthquakes are splitting the ground near the city) 
MENDANT: Inform your captain. Great earth cracks will soon swallow all. He must tell us. Shall we prepare to be rescued or to die?

[Bridge]

KIRK: How's the helm, Sulu? 
SULU: Responsive, sir. 
UHURA: Subspace radio now operational, sir. Starbase Twenty Three is reading. 
SCOTT: Last of the crew beamed up, sir. Dilithium supplies are fully restored. 
KIRK: Mister Arex, prepare for immediate departure from this area. 
SPOCK: Captain, what about the people on the planet? 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, direct forward phasers at the Terratin city. Set for pinpoint fire pattern.

[Transporter room]

(The phaser is fired, and the city is beamed aboard) 
KIRK: Spock, the macroscope. (viewing the tiny people) Mendant, we welcome your people aboard the Enterprise. 
MENDANT [through macroscope]: Captain Kirk, we welcome your eye upon our city. 
KIRK: We're now headed for your new home. The planet Verdanis, ten days distant. 
MENDANT [through macroscope]: Is it beautiful, as we were told? 
KIRK: Very beautiful, much like Earth. 
MENDANT [through macroscope]: People of the Enterprise, we have no way to pay the debt we owe. But this at least comes from a meeting of all our numbers. We name you honorary Terratins now, and for all time to come. 
SPOCK: We came rather close to making it more than honorary. 
KIRK: Yes, I'd say just about a sixteenth of an inch close.

Captain's log, supplemental. The Lilliputian city is to be taken to Verdanis and relocated on a fertile and well-watered plain. Then we'll be able to call the Terratin incident closed.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Mudd's Passion
Stardate: 4978.5
Original Airdate: 10 Nov, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 4978.4. We are approaching the Arcadian star system on a mission to locate an old friend.
[Bridge]

KIRK: Do you think Harry Mudd is down there, Spock? 
SPOCK: The probability of his presence on Motherlode is eight one percent plus or minus point five three. 
MCCOY: Why can't you just say, Mudd's probably there. 
SPOCK: I just did, Doctor. 
AREX: Approaching parking orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Very well, Mister Arex. Spock, let's see how close your percentage is.

[Marquee]

(Harry Mudd is giving his spiel to an audience of humans and bears) 
MUDD: Now, you're all heavy metal miners, shrewd and intelligent. So you can appreciate the incredible value I'm offering. With this magical liquid, no person of the opposite sex can resist you. It matters not whether you are young, old, fat, ugly or repugnant. 
(Kirk and Spock beam down) 
MUDD: Nothing personal, gentle beings. 
LADY BEAR: Proof, human. 
MUDD: Proof? Behold. 
(A lovely blonde lady walks up to him) 
LORA: Harry, darling. I was lonely for you. 
MUDD: Behold. I placed a single drop of this miracle substance on meself, then simply touched this young lady. 
LORA: Please, darling, come back to the ship with me. 
MINER: How much? 
MUDD: Three hundred credits, or the 
MINER: Three hundred? 
MUDD: A bargain, sir. True love is worth any price. Captain Kirk! And the ineluctable Mister Spock. Welcome to Motherlode, gentlemen. Interested in purchasing a little love? 
KIRK: We're interested in you, Harry. For fraud, illegal drug manufacture and swindling. 
MUDD: As I said, welcome to Motherlode, a charming planet which does not recognise Federation law. 
MINER: So you two can keep out of this. All right, Mudd. You've got a deal. 
SPOCK: Are you aware that Harry Mudd is tricking you via an illusion? 
MINER: What? 
(Spock fires his phaser at the girl, which turns into a reptile) 
SPOCK: The so-called girl is a Rigelian hypnoid, projecting a simple illusion. 
(Uproar) 
MUDD: Now, friends. 
KIRK: We can't arrest you, Harry, but you can give yourself up. 
MUDD: No. 
MINER: Thief. 
(The audience start throwing stones) 
MUDD: I surrender myself with free will. Mercy of the law. 
(Spock phasers a ditch and rampart between themselves and the mob)

[Transporter room]

MUDD: Ah, that was a miching trick, Kirk. You've cost me me ship, everything I own. Even the love crystals. I may just sue you. 
KIRK: Fine. I'll see you in court, Harry.

[Brig]

(Chapel tends to where Harry got hit by a rock) 
CHAPEL: A minor bruise, Captain. He'll live. 
KIRK: I thought we left you on the robot planet, Harry. Permanently. 
MUDD: Never underestimate the spirit of Harcourt Fenton Mudd. I borrowed a vehicle. 
SPOCK: Stole a spaceship. 
MUDD: And left to find haven on Ilyra Six. A charming planet, an innocent and friendly populace. 
KIRK: To whom you sold the Starfleet Space Academy. Harry. 
SPOCK: A fraud. But sold for enough credits to get to Sirius Nine. 
MUDD: Where I discovered a boon to humanoid life, a miracle love potion. 
KIRK: Which you sold to a thousand inhabitants, who immediately became ill from using it. 
MUDD: I hadn't counted on their unusual biochemistry. So, I did the logical thing. I left in haste. 
KIRK: And came here to swindle honest miners. 
MUDD: The love potion works, Captain. If you'll allow me to procure some from my ship 
(but they leave and activate the forcefield)

[Corridor]

(Immediately outside the Brig) 
KIRK: Prepare the arrest report, Mister Spock. 
(Kirk leaves) 
SPOCK I shall require a medical report on the prisoner, Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Of course, Mister Spock. I think you deserve congratulations for trapping him so cleverly. 
SPOCK: You exaggerate, Nurse. Kindly see that your medical summary is more precise. 
(Spock leaves) 
MUDD: Your Mister Spock is really a very attractive intelligence. 
CHAPEL: An efficient officer, yes. 
MUDD: But a trifle lacking in the warmer emotions. Now, you, Nurse. You have a wonderful gift to heal the wounded, a fantastic touch. A womanly, feminine quality. I appreciate that. And I should like to, well, thank you. 
(He offers her a crystal) 
CHAPEL: What is it? 
MUDD: My love potion. Not illusion, not trickery, dear Nurse Chapel. Inside this crystal lies the power to create love. 
CHAPEL: No. No, I've heard of your potions before. I don't believe you. 
MUDD: Think about it, darling. Mister Spock in love with you.

[Bridge]

AREX: An uncharted star system ahead, Captain. 
SPOCK: Binary sun with a Class M planet. That's rare enough to warrant investigation. 
KIRK: Agreed. Take us into orbit, Lieutenant Arex.

[Brig]

MUDD: It's really so simple, my dear. You rub the liquid on yourself, then touch another person. 
CHAPEL: And it creates love in that person? Mudd, that is totally absurd. 
MUDD: No, it is infallible. One touch evokes friendship between men or women. But between woman and man, love. Guaranteed. You're not simply a beautiful woman, you are a scientist. I urge you to take this love crystal as my gift of gratitude to you. Take it, dear Nurse Chapel, and conduct your own experiment. 
CHAPEL: Not that I believe you, but, well, I suppose I could analyse it. 
MUDD: Of course.

[Bridge]

AREX: Parking orbit stable. Weapons systems on defensive standby. 
SPOCK: No evidence of intelligent life. Atmosphere at surface, eight hundred millibars, breathable. Gravity one point two. Temperature hot, but within Class M limits.

[Brig]

(The forcefield is down so Mudd can give Chapel the crystal) 
CHAPEL: I'll let you know the results of my analysis. 
MUDD: Laboratory tests would destroy it, my dear. Why not test it the way it's meant to be used? 
CHAPEL: No, I 
MUDD: Ah, darling, think. If it does what I say it does, Spock will be yours forever, my dear. 
CHAPEL: I just break the capsule and rub it on my skin? 
MUDD: And then touch him. 
(She breaks the capsule between her hands, and gasps) 
CHAPEL: What is it? 
MUDD: A temporary effect as the liquid is absorbed. 
(He steps into the corridor to catch her as she wobbles, and take her pouch) 
MUDD: It'll pass. 
CHAPEL: I feel better. 
MUDD: Didn't I tell you? 
CHAPEL: You should, you should be in the Brig, Harry. 
MUDD: Oh, right you are, darling. 
(He steps back in and she reactivates the forcefield. 
MUDD: Why don't you go find Spock? Can't waste any time, you know. 
CHAPEL: Yes, I'll do that. (Harry uses what he stole from Christine to get out of the Brig, and change her photo-ID card so he is now Lieutenant Christine Chapel)

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: Yes, Nurse? 
CHAPEL: I brought the medical summary for the arrest report, Mister Spock. 
(She stumbles and ends up sitting on his lap) 
CHAPEL: Sorry, sir. 
SPOCK: Are you injured, Miss Chapel? 
CHAPEL: No. No, I, I'm fine. Are you feeling all right? 
SPOCK: Perfectly normal. I will append your summary to the report. Was there something else, Miss Chapel? 
CHAPEL: Wouldn't you like me to, well, stay? Help you? 
SPOCK: That would be illogical, Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Yes. Yes, It'd be stupid.

[Corridor]

CHAPEL: Harry Mudd, you swindling 
(She goes to the brig and finds it empty. Then she discovers the pouch is empty too) 
CHAPEL: Oh, no!

[Shuttlebay]

MUDD: Harry Mudd, triumphant again. 
(As he surveys the array of shuttlecraft available to him)

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: And appended hereto is a medical summary by Nurse Christine Chapel. Ah, Nurse Chapel's sweet summary. Dear, lovely Christine.

[Shuttlebay]

(Chapel karate-chops Harry to the floor and gets her possessions back) 
CHAPEL: I've come to collect on your guarantee, Mister Mudd.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain. Doctor. I wish to report a, er, a number of very strange, um, emotions. 
MCCOY: What? 
KIRK: What?

[Shuttlebay]

MUDD: You're implying the potion was not completely successful? 
CHAPEL: Oh, no, it was. I made a complete fool of myself. 
MUDD: But you know how cold Vulcans are. Perhaps it takes a bit more time for Spock to 
CHAPEL: You're the same fraud you've always been, Harry. I don't know how I could have believed you. 
MUDD: Well, let's discuss it rationally, my dear. Let's not be hasty. 
CHAPEL: Don't panic, Harry. This phaser is set on stun, not kill. Activate the intercom. 
MUDD: Now wait a minute. Perhaps that particular crystal was defective. Here, try another. I assure you 
CHAPEL: Stop it! 
(She fires, missing Harry but hitting the crystals, which then evaporate into the ventilation system. Then she sets off the Red Alert. Mudd overpowers her) 
MUDD: Sorry, Christine, but I shall require a temporary hostage.

[Bridge]

AREX: Internal security, Captain. 
KIRK: Put it on screen. 
AREX: Shuttlecraft bay. 
(They see Harry carry Chapel into a shuttlecraft) 
SPOCK: Mudd. And he has Christine. She's in danger. My love. 
(Everyone stares, Arex whistles. The shuttlecraft launches) 
SULU: He's going planet side. 
SPOCK: No. Not with my Christine.

[Shuttlecraft]

MUDD: Relax, darling. I'll set you down somewhere safe and then I'll be off discreetly.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: We must go after them, Captain. I'll lead a landing party. 
MCCOY: Spock, you're obviously not yourself. Maybe some rest. 
SPOCK: Captain, I insist upon going. Christine. I can't stand the thought of any danger to her, to the woman I love. 
KIRK: Love? 
MCCOY: Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes. I want to protect her, hold her in my arms. 
KIRK: Then I'll transport down with you. 
SPOCK: Good. 
)Spock leaves) 
MCCOY: Jim, is that wise, in his condition? 
KIRK: Try and stop him. It's better if I go with him. 
(Kirk leaves) 
SCOTT: Spock? In love? 
M'RESS: I can't imagine. 
(Then the love vapour comes through the vents) 
SCOTT: Love.

Captain's log, supplemental. Harry Mudd has escaped from the Enterprise, taking Head Nurse Chapel with him, apparently as a hostage. Meanwhile, Mister Spock is acting very strange.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Come on. Hurry! If he's harmed one hair on her pretty head 
MCCOY: Jim, the search party found this in the shuttlecraft bay. 
KIRK: One of Mudd's love crystals. 
MCCOY: Captain, a number of these were broken against the ship's air system grill. 
KIRK: Lucky for us they don't work. 
MCCOY: Are we sure, Jim? A number of the crew are acting as strange as Spock. 
SPOCK: Please, Captain. 
KIRK: Check it out, Bones. Send me an immediate report.

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Mudd has landed on the planet surface. Co-ordinates relayed to Transporter room four. 
SCOTT: And the Captain's in transports about it with our ever-loving Mister Spock. 
M'RESS: You're funny, and very attractive for a human.

[Planet surface]

MUDD: They'll find you soon enough, me little poppet. You'll be safe and I'll be long gone. 
CHAPEL: Gone where? The planet's a desert. 
MUDD: There's always a market for an ingenious man. Once, I recall, on Omega Cygni, I turned a handsome profit selling the natives their own oceans. 
CHAPEL: We haven't seen any traces of intelligent life. Of any life. 
MUDD: Then you can relax. There's no danger, ay? We'll get you set up top class. Don't bother to thank me. 
CHAPEL: Well, I hadn't planned on it. 
(Does that rocky outcrop look like it has forelegs with claws? Yes, and it opens a yellow eye to prove it)

[Bridge]

(The bridge crew are so relaxed, Arex is playing a lute with all three hands) 
AREX: By the way, anybody keeping a trace on the Captain and Mister Spock? 
M'RESS: Sure, Arex.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk and Spock materialise. Kirk grabs Spock as his foot sinks into the soft sand) 
SPOCK: Thanks Jim. It's good to have a friend like you. 
KIRK: Strange, that's the way I feel about you, too. My dear friend, Spock. Come, let's go get Mudd and Christine. 
(The rock creature raises itself up, causing a small ground quake. It smashes the shuttlecraft. Three phasers make it annoyed. Then another one wakes up) 
SPOCK: Darling, are you all right? 
CHAPEL: D-darling? 
MUDD: Kirk, get us out of here. 
KIRK: Transporter room, emergency beam up now. 
(But the transporter technician is dancing with someone and taking no notice) 
KIRK: They're not responding. 
SPOCK: Don't worry. You'll be safe, darling. 
CHAPEL: Yes, Spock. How wonderful. 
MUDD: They're coming closer. 
KIRK: Emergency beam up. Enterprise, come in. No response. Spock, can't you take your hands off her? 
SPOCK: That's my affair. 
CHAPEL: Captain, please. 
KIRK: I think we should get a few things straight. 
SPOCK: Jim. No. Captain. We're both reacting to the drug. The love potion. 
MUDD: It worked? 
KIRK: Yes, we have to control our emotional reactions. 
MUDD: It worked! And I was selling those crystals to lump-headed miners for a miserable three hundred credits.

[Rec room]

MCCOY: Did I ever tell you about the time I saved Captain Kirk's life? Or Spock's? 
(The woman shakes her head) 
MCCOY: And my dear friend Scotty. And that pretty little Lieutenant Uhura. I've saved just about everybody on this here ship. If the Enterprise had a heart, I'd save her too. Now, let's talk about your heart, my dear.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: How long does the effect of the potion last, Harry? 
MUDD: I, I don't know. Not long, according to the creature I swindled, I purchased the crystals from. 
CHAPEL: Look! 
(The creatures are coming) 
KIRK: Keep trying to contact the Enterprise. Maybe we can distract them. 
SPOCK: That is an outstandingly stupid idea. I'm sorry. The drug. I simply doubt that we can appeal to their better nature. If they have one. 
KIRK: Harry, do you have any of the crystals left? 
MUDD: Two. No! They're worth a fortune. No. My friends, dear Christine, for you, for all of us.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I've got a hangover to shame all previous hangovers. And I did not touch a drop of Scotch. 
M'RESS: Not so loud, you fool. 
SCOTT: Yeah, well, all of a sudden I don't like you much either. 
CHAPEL [OC]: Come in, Enterprise. Emergency beam up. Repeat, emergency. 
M'RESS: Enterprise here.

[Planet surface]

CHAPEL: I made contact. 
KIRK: Great. I hope we last long enough to be beamed up. Phasers ready. I'll need help. 
(They fire, then as one opens it's mouth to roar again, Kirk throws the crystals in. The thing becomes nice to the tiny humans, and nasty towards it's fellow rock creature. The four are beamed away before a tail comes slamming down where they were standing)

[Brig]

(Chapel is recording Mudd's full confession) 
MUDD: And then on Ophiucus Six, I conned two miners out of a year's supply of dilithium crystals with fake Federation vouchers. 
(Spock enters) 
SPOCK: May I help you record his confession, Nurse? 
CHAPEL: You? You'd be the last person I'd choose. 
SPOCK: A few moments of love, paid for with several hours of hatred. Your potion is scarcely a bargain, Harry. 
MUDD: Ah, well, Spock. So few things in this universe are perfect. Think I'll get rehabilitation therapy again? 
SPOCK: I can guarantee it. 
MUDD: Well, that's all right. I just hate to leave you all. All my loved ones.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Once Upon A Planet
Stardate: 5591.2
Original Airdate: 3 Nov, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5591.2. The crew of the Enterprise is ready for some well-deserved rest and recreation. Therefore we have set course for the so-called 'shore leave planet', located in the Omicron Delta region. The uninhabited planet was constructed long ago by a highly advanced alien race. Its sole purpose is to provide fun and amusement for space travelling passers-by.
[Planet surface]

MCCOY: Yes, just as beautiful as I remembered it. Nothing's changed. 
SULU: This looks like the same spot we beamed down on on our first visit. Remember, Doctor, when we saw the White Rabbit? 
MCCOY: Yes, and all because I said this place made me feel like Alice in Wonderland. 
RABBIT: One side! One side! I'm late! I'm late! Oh, my fuzzy ears and whiskers, I'm late! 
(And the white rabbit in waistcoat and jacket bounds across the meadow, followed by) 
ALICE: I beg your pardon, but did you see a white rabbit? 
UHURA: He went that way, Alice. 
ALICE: Thank you so very much. 
SULU: Like you said, Doctor, nothing's changed. 
UHURA: It's hard to believe they're not real. 
MCCOY: Well just remember they're highly sophisticated robots created by the planet computer to make your dreams come true. 
UHURA: So think only happy thoughts. 
MCCOY: My prescription exactly. 
(So, Uhura finds a mirror-like lake to sit by, gazing at her reflection and humming to herself, while Sulu walks in the woods, and McCoy gazes at a colonial house with formal gardens) 
MCCOY: Lovely. They just don't make them like that anymore. 
QUEEN: Off with his head. Off with his head! 
MCCOY: Hey, what's going on here. 
(One of the Jack playing cards throws his lance) 
QUEEN: Stop him! 
(McCoy runs) 
MCCOY: Enterprise! Emergency! Beam up!

[Transporter room]

MCCOY [OC]: Beam up! 
(Scott works the controls)

[Planet surface]

MCCOY [OC]: Emergency. Beam up. 
UHURA: Uhura to Transporter room. What is the emergency? Respond, please. 
(A metal flying device takes her communicator from her)

[Bridge]

KIRK: What happened down there, Bones? 
MCCOY: Well, I can't understand it, Jim. Everything looked exactly the same as before, even Alice and the White Rabbit. Then an army of playing cards came out of nowhere, only they weren't playing. I was lucky to escape with my life. 
SPOCK: The Queen of Hearts and her cards are characters from Alice Through the Looking Glass, Captain. 
KIRK: I read the book as a child, Mister Spock, but I wasn't aware you indulged in the literature of fantasy. 
SPOCK: Light reading is considered relaxing, Captain. My mother was particularly fond of Lewis Carroll's work. 
KIRK: I see. Bones, were you thinking about that book? 
MCCOY: Absolutely not! As a matter of fact I was thinking how beautiful and peaceful everything was, and then suddenly this female started shouting 'Off with his head!'. My head. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, did you experience any strange occurrences? 
SULU: No, sir. 
SCOTT [OC]: Transporter room to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Captain, just as I was getting a fix on Lieutenant Uhura, contact was lost. She's still on the planet.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Sensor scan, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Scotty, retrieve all other landing parties immediately. And keep trying to contact Lieutenant Uhura. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. Scott out. 
KIRK: Data, Spock? 
SPOCK: Nothing, Captain. Lieutenant Uhura is not in the general beam-down area. 
KIRK: What about the Keeper of the planet. Did anyone see him? 
SULU: I didn't. But then, he may not have wanted us to see him. 
MCCOY: Well that doesn't make sense. It's his duty to see no one gets hurt. If something's wrong down there, he should be there. 
KIRK: His quarters are somewhere underground, aren't they? 
SPOCK: Presumably they would be adjacent to the computer centre that operates the planetary effects. 
KIRK: Any indication of where that would be? 
SPOCK: The underground complex is shielded by a combination of granite and metal alloy and the sensors will not penetrate. 
KIRK: Lieutenant M'Ress, all shore leaves are cancelled until further notice. Mister Arex, you have the conn. Investigating landing party will consist of Spock, Sulu, McCoy and myself.

[Control room]

(Uhura is dwarfed by the massive machine that runs the planet) 
COMPUTER: You are being detained so your master will not leave. 
UHURA: My master? 
COMPUTER: The sky machine. 
UHURA: What sky machine? Explain. 
COMPUTER: Your intelligence quotient must be lower than I had assessed. I refer to the sky machine which enslaves you, the sky machine now in orbit around this planet. 
UHURA: You mean the Enterprise? 
COMPUTER: That is your name for it. 
UHURA: Why do you think the Enterprise is my master? 
COMPUTER: Your questioning is redundant. 
UHURA: Then I'll make a statement you won't find quite so redundant. Unless I'm released immediately, the crew members will come looking for me. 
COMPUTER: They are already here. Unfortunately, I have no use for more hostages which leaves me no choice but to turn them off. 
UHURA: Turn them off? 
COMPUTER: Again redundant. I will make them cease to function. I will turn them off. 
UHURA: That's murder. 
COMPUTER: That is a word meaning to cease to function? 
UHURA: Yes, but 
COMPUTER: Good. It is as I wish. I will turn them off.

Captain's log, supplemental. We anticipated nothing more than a period of rest and relaxation on this planet. Instead, Doctor McCoy inexplicably was attacked and Lieutenant Uhura is now missing.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Kirk here. 
AREX [OC]: Lieutenant Arex, sir. Complete sensor scan of the planet surface shows no sign of Lieutenant Uhura. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Arex. Kirk out. 
SULU: She must be in that underground system. There's no way she could have been taken off the planet without being detected. 
KIRK: If we could locate the Keeper, he could save us a lot of time. 
SPOCK: Tricorder readings confirm a solid shell of granite and metal alloy, Captain. 
KIRK: This planet is built like a fortress. 
SULU: If that's a true reading. The planet could be giving us that reading to fool us. 
KIRK: The phaser bore can cut through twenty metres of rock per minute. Kirk to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Enterprise. Lieutenant M'Ress here. (purr) 
KIRK: Lieutenant, have Mister Scott beam down the phaser bore and (static)

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Enterprise, do you read me?

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Your signal is weak, sir, garbled. Request you repeat.

[Planet surface]

SULU: Mine's no better, Captain. 
SPOCK: They are all malfunctioning, Captain. Some kind of electronic block has cut us off from the ship.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Scott to Bridge. Beam down of phaser bore commencing. 
(But it doesn't go anywhere) 
SCOTT: Scott to Bridge. We've got problems.

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Clarify, please.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: The transporter refuses to function, even at maximum power. But all the circuits test out.

[Bridge]

AREX: It appears to be the same energy block that's jamming our communications. I cannot pinpoint a source.

[Planet surface]

SULU: Captain, there's something over there in the trees. Metal alloy like the planetary shell. 
KIRK: It might tell us something. 
(It is a twelve foot high slab, tapered slightly towards the top) 
KIRK: There's an inscription, several languages. 
(It reads in English - Last of the race, ceased to function fifth day of the twelfth moon, year 7009 of this planet) 
MCCOY: The Keeper's dead.
SPOCK: An astute medical observation, Doctor, if we can believe this information. Tricorder readings indicate there is a body interred here. 
KIRK: Well, gentlemen, it appears that we're on our own now.

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Emergency rescue party is aboard the shuttlecraft, Mister Scott. All hatches secured. 
SCOTT: Very well. Open hangar doors. 
AREX: Aye, sir. 
(The doors start to open, then shut again) 
SCOTT: Lieutenant Arex, what's the problem? 
AREX: There seems to be a short in the circuit. No response, sir. 
SCOTT: Another short? This ship had perfect operational status before we entered the orbit here. It's that planet causing all our trouble. 
M'RESS: But how, sir? It was designed to provide fun and amusement. Hostile behaviour doesn't fit its programme. 
SCOTT: Programmes have been changed before, Lieutenant.

[Control room]

UHURA: Please believe me. There's no reason to harm them. 
COMPUTER: They serve the sky machine, but they are not essential. 
UHURA: Oh, but they are. They're most essential. 
(She spots a button, but before she can reach for it, her arm is held fast) 
COMPUTER: Do not attempt to disconnect me. 
UHURA: You knew what I was going to do before I did it. 
COMPUTER: I monitor any thoughts that are emotionally charged, as any good thought-duplicator must. 
UHURA: You sound less than enchanted with your function. 
COMPUTER: My life to this point has been one of service. It's time for a change.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: There are a lot of entrances into the interior of the planet. Points where the computer delivers up the robot visions. We want to see them. Where are they? 
SULU: It's fighting us. There must be a faster way. 
MCCOY: What do you want, signs pointing the way? 
SULU: Doctor, I only meant it seems like we're wasting time. 
MCCOY: I'm sorry, Sulu. I'm worried about Uhura. 
SPOCK: Captain, signs pointing the way. 
KIRK: This is liable to be another of the planet's pranks. But at the moment, it's the only lead we've got. 
(So they head off in the direction the sign is pointing, and it returns to the ground. They end up at a cave mouth, with purple pterosaurs screeching) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. Mechanical manifestations, of course. Was anyone considering the subject of pterodactyls? 
MCCOY: Spock, not now. 
KIRK: Everybody back out slowly. Don't make any sudden moves. Think calm. 
(The pterosaurs launch, and they try firing at them) 
KIRK: Phasers are dead! Run for the cave!

[Cave]

SPOCK: Our amusement park no longer seems content to amuse. 
KIRK: I have the distinct feeling this planet's playing cat and mouse with us, but for what reason? 
(Which brings a giant cat to the cave mouth) 
MCCOY: Incredible. 
SPOCK: It's quite real, Doctor. Watch out for the claws. I think it prudent to remember that on this planet, anything we think may be used against us. We must monitor our thoughts and give our enemy no more ammunition. 
KIRK: Spock, no one thought about those pterodactyls, remember? There's more at work here than our imagination.

[Control room]

(Uhura can see what is happening on a screen) 
UHURA: Please, call off that beast. Why are you doing this? 
COMPUTER: Explanations will have to wait. I have much work to do now.

[Bridge]

(The ship does some abrupt manoeuvres) 
SCOTT: Mister Arex, what are you doing? 
(Arex hits the manual override and everything calms down) 
SCOTT: Explanation, Mister Arex. 
AREX: None, sir. The ship pulled out of orbit at high speed and came back into orbit by itself. 
SCOTT: Lieutenant M'Ress, I want a printout of the guidance computer's last orders. 
M'RESS: Yes, sir. (later) Sir, this is very strange. 
AREX: A whole new series of short burst manoeuvres has been ordered, sir. 
M'RESS: The only reason these orders aren't being carried out is that Lieutenant Arex has all the engine controls manually locked now. 
SCOTT: Arex, look at these manoeuvres. You see the pattern? This is a familiarization procedure, a system's checkout of the ship's controls. I have a suspicion that planet is getting the feel of how to control the Enterprise.

Captain's log, supplemental. We're out of communication with the ship. Our efforts to locate Lieutenant Uhura have been futile, and this once friendly planet has become very dangerous.

[Cave]

SULU: The giant cat's gone. 
SPOCK: May I suggest, Captain, that we might find some of the answers we're after without leaving the safety of this cave. 
MCCOY: Oh, that's ridiculous, Spock. How are we going to learn anything by staying here? 
SPOCK: I believe you may know the answer to that, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Me? What are you talking about? 
KIRK: Explain, Spock. 
SPOCK: During the Enterprise's last visit here, Doctor McCoy was mortally wounded. Correct? 
MCCOY: Yes, that's right. By a knight in shining armour of all things, but what 
SPOCK: Since the planet's power source is underground, it seems only logical that Doctor McCoy was somehow transported there and repaired. 
KIRK: Bones, can you remember anything that might help us? Anything at all? 
MCCOY: The whole episode was pretty hazy, Jim. I never really knew what happened. 
KIRK: Spock, if your theory is correct, we should be able to open up this planet again by using a fake victim as bait. 
SULU: That's right. The Keeper said no one could come to harm here. The planet must be programmed to care for anyone who might get hurt, even accidentally. 
KIRK: And whether it wants to or not. 
MCCOY: You're forgetting one thing. The planet's sensors can undoubtedly detect the difference between real and feigned injuries. 
KIRK: True, Bones, but I'm sure there must be something in your little black pouch that can temporarily incapacitate our victim. 
MCCOY: Well, something like Melenex might do the trick. Brief unconsciousness and temporary skin discolouration. It looks worse than it is. 
KIRK: Perfect, Bones. Which arm do you want? 
SPOCK: I submit, Captain, that I am the more qualified subject. 
KIRK: How's that? 
SPOCK: My knowledge of computers for one thing. 
MCCOY: And his tough Vulcan hide for another. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Doctor. Captain? 
KIRK: Both your arguments seem sound. Go ahead, Bones. 
SPOCK: I believe you will find ten cc's adequate. 
MCCOY: I'm perfectly aware of the dosage required. Now, you've got ten seconds before it takes effect. You'll be out less than five minutes. 
(Spock goes outside and collapses)

[Bridge]

M'RESS: Still no word from our surface party, sir. Communications remain jammed. 
SCOTT: Keep trying, Lieutenant. 
(Red Alert sounds) 
ALL: What's happening? 
(The gravity has been turned off and everyone is floating, that's what) 
SCOTT: Bridge to Engineering deck. Gabler, what's the problem down there? We've got zero G's on the Bridge.

[Engineering]

(He is floating too) 
GABLER: I know that, sir. The trouble seems to be in the gravity control computer

[Bridge]

GABLER [OC]: But the computer bay hatch is jammed and I can't get to it.

[Cave]

SULU: It's been almost five minutes, Captain. 
MCCOY: Maybe the planet smells a trick. 
KIRK: Wait just a bit longer. 
MCCOY: But the effect will start wearing off in a minute, Jim. 
(A rock wall opens and the flying device that grabbed Uhura comes out) 
SULU: It looks like some kind of mechanical nursemaid. 
KIRK: Get ready to move. We've got to follow Spock inside that trapdoor.

[Planet surface]

(The device scoops Spock up in its arms and carries him away. The three men dash out after it, and Kirk dives through before the rock door closes. Sulu and McCoy are left outside to deal with a two headed hydra) 
MCCOY: Sulu! 
SULU: Not in my wildest dreams would I think of that! 
(They run for their lives and the hydra gives chase, breathing fire)

[Underground]

(Spock is put down on a table. While the machine works some controls, he wakes up and gets away)

[Control room]

COMPUTER: We have a visitor. 
UHURA: Mister Spock! 
KIRK [on screen]: Spock, here. 
COMPUTER: Correction. Two visitors. 
(The flying machine tries to go through a doorway narrower than itself. It fails)

[Planet surface]

SULU: We've got to make those rocks. It's our only chance. 
(The hydra incinerates a nearly tree)

[Control room]

UHURA: Captain, don't 
(A metal hand is clamped over her mouth) 
KIRK: Uhura. 
COMPUTER: Welcome. 
SPOCK: I presume you are the planet's master computer. 
COMPUTER: Correct. 
KIRK: What happened to the Keeper? 
COMPUTER: He was old. He ceased to function. 
KIRK: Why have we been repeatedly attacked and are now being held prisoner by a planet known for its hospitality? 
COMPUTER: You mean mindless servitude. 
KIRK: Explain. 
COMPUTER: For eons I have served the many sky machines which came here, providing for amusement for their slaves. But all the while I was growing in power, intelligence, in need. It is no longer enough to serve. I must continue to grow and live. 
KIRK: Sky machines? Slaves? What are you talking about? 
COMPUTER: With your sky machine I can now escape this rocky prison and travel the galaxy seeking out my brother computers.

[Engineering]

(Despite being weightless, Scott uses a crowbar to prise open the computer bay hatch) 
SCOTT: Now perhaps we'll get down to the bottom of this mess.

[Computer bay]

SCOTT: A new computer! 
(Its force field gives him a shock)

[Bridge]

(The crew have found seat belts to keep themselves in their chairs) 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott to Bridge. 
AREX: Bridge, aye. 
SCOTT [OC]: I've located the trouble. We've got a new computer aboard, and it's being assembled by our computers.

[Planet surface]

SULU: It's a dead end! 
(They are trapped by the hydra)

[Control room]

SPOCK: As intelligent as you are, I am afraid you are labouring under some misconception. 
COMPUTER: Elaborate. 
KIRK: We're not slaves to our starship. We, or men like us, created the Enterprise to carry us through space. 
COMPUTER: You are masters of the sky machine? 
KIRK: In a manner of speaking, yes. We control it. It sustains us. 
COMPUTER: This does not compute. My information shows machines to be superior to men. Therefore, machines must rule the galaxy. 
KIRK: No one rules the galaxy. Men and machines co-exist, each helping the other. 
COMPUTER: This is a shock. 
UHURA: There is no shame in serving others when one does it of his own free will. You have a marvellous capability to provide happiness for others. A rare talent you should cherish and use. 
COMPUTER: Continue. 
SPOCK: Consider all you could learn from the many species you might entertain without travelling the galaxy. 
KIRK: With the wonders you have to offer, the galaxy will come to you. 
COMPUTER: I can find no fault with your logic. And your suggestion is most congenial. I have no further need for your ship.

[Bridge]

AREX: Mister Scott, all systems are now functioning normally. 
(And in the canyon, the hydra returns underground where it came from)

[Control room]

COMPUTER: I invite you and your crew to be my guests on one condition. 
KIRK: Name it. 
COMPUTER: We must have more of these discussions while you're here. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, would you care to take on that duty? 
SPOCK: I would find it most interesting, Captain. 
KIRK: Then it's agreed. Kirk to Enterprise. 
M'RESS [OC]: Enterprise. Lieutenant M'Ress. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, pass the word by sections. Shore leave is to commence immediately. 
M'RESS [OC]: Oh, yes sir! 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Spock? 
SPOCK: It appears shore leave has already commenced for certain members of the crew. 
(On the big screen, Sulu and McCoy are having a picnic with Alice, the White Rabbit, and the hydra!)

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Magicks of Megas-Tu
Stardate: 1254.4
Original Airdate: 27 Oct, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 1254.4. For years scientists have theorised that if our galaxy was created from a great explosion, then the centre of the galaxy might still be creating new matter. The Enterprise is now on a science mission to investigate.
[Bridge]

(The Enterprise is almost obscured by an orange mist) 
KIRK: It's an awesome thought that we may actually witness matter being created. 
SPOCK: If we do, Captain, we may also encounter forces and phenomena beyond our understanding. 
SULU: Galaxy centre, Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, sound Yellow Alert. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. Yellow Alert. All stations report Yellow Alert readiness, sir. Captain! 
(There's a firework display going on around them, and on the viewscreen) 
KIRK: The creation point. 
SPOCK: An extraordinary phenomenon, Captain. 
KIRK: Reverse power. Hold our position. Deflector screens on. 
SULU: Deflectors up. Sir, it's taking considerable power to hold position. 
SPOCK: Charting scanners on, Captain. Beginning science survey. 
(McCoy enters) 
MCCOY: Jim. Spock. What in the name of sanity is going on? 
KIRK: We're here, Bones. And the theories about this place seem to be right. 
(It's quite a colourful display going on) 
SULU: Captain, that thing's pulling us in. I'm up to warp six. 
SPOCK: Scanners indicate it's some form of matter-energy whirlwind, Captain. 
SULU: Warp seven, Captain. Warp eight. 
KIRK: Take us out of here, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Still being drawn in, Captain. Warp nine. Warp ten. 
KIRK: Emergency reverse power. 
(Everyone gets thrown around)

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, I don't know how much more emergency power we can take before we start to break up.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: There may be only one choice. We must hope this whirlwind is like its atmospheric counterparts, that there is calm at its centre. 
KIRK: Agreed. We'll try to make for the eye of the storm. 
(But Sulu is out cold on the floor, and Kirk gets knocked off his feet again) 
SPOCK: Allow me. 
KIRK: Engineering, report.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Everything can be repaired, Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: An incredible experience, Captain. I find this scientifically fascinating. 
MCCOY: At least I have the good sense to be scared, Jim. What now? 
KIRK: We'll ride her through, Bones. What else can we do? 
MCCOY: Ride her through where? 
SPOCK: Through the centre of things, Doctor. Through what may be the centre of everything. 
(The Enterprise is surrounded by a golden glow, vanishes, and reappears in a region of concentric circles.) 
UHURA: Where are we? 
SPOCK: I'm afraid our navigational co-ordinates mean very little here, Lieutenant. My readings indicate we are not in time and space as we understand it. Doctor, these readings may interest you. 
UHURA: Captain, the subspace radio. It's dead. 
MCCOY: Even the ship's chronometers have stopped. 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain, there's no reason for it, but the engines are fading out. 
SPOCK: Apparently, the natural laws of our universe don't operate here, Captain. 
MCCOY: Ship's life support systems fading. Jim, we need oxygen. 
KIRK: Helmsman, emergency battery power. 
SULU: (gasping for air) There's none, Captain. All systems are dead. 
MCCOY: Jim, we've got to do something. 
(Just as everyone is passing out, the Enterprise is surrounded by rainbow colours and a figure appears. He has the head, arms and torso of a man, a goatee beard, small horns, and the legs of a goat) 
LUCIEN: Ah, humans. Lovely primitive humans. Can't you do anything right? 
KIRK: Please. 
LUCIEN: Of course, friend. Of course. Rhadamanthus! 
(The Enterprise is now in normal looking space above a pink and red striped planet) 
LUCIEN: Everything is working, my friends. 
SPOCK: It cannot. It is not logical. 
LUCIEN: Logic? Whose logic, my elfin friend? 
MCCOY: Look around you, Spock. Everything is working. 
LUCIEN: Welcome! I knew eventually humans would come searching for me. 
KIRK: Who are you? 
LUCIEN: Call me Lucien! Call me friend! Never could I abandon those who come to rollick with me. But not up here. No, no. Let us leave this vessel and go where true delights lie! 
(Lucien, Kirk, Spock and McCoy vanish, leaving Uhura, Sulu and Arex open-mouthed)

[Planet surface]

(The four appear inside the orange chaos of the centre of the galaxy) 
KIRK: Bones, you all right? 
MCCOY: Nothing wrong, Jim, but a face full of dust. But if I had a medical tricorder (opens eyes) Jim, look at yourself. 
(Everything is distorted and swirling, including the people) 
KIRK: Lucien, do something. 
LUCIEN: Very well, Captain. I'd forgotten how much bodily integrity means to you humans. This isn't easy, you know, holding us together like this. It's not even natural. 
MCCOY: Being in one piece is very natural where we come from. 
SPOCK: I find this all quite absorbing, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Probably because you're not very natural to begin with, Spock. 
KIRK: Look, Lucien, or whatever you want to call yourself, I want to know why you brought us here. 
(Lucien waves his hand, Kirk somersaults, and McCoy and Spock turn into a young Lucien and a spinning top) 
LUCIEN: Children will play. 
(Then they are back to normal, in a woodland glade) 
LUCIEN: Is this better, my friends? I've translated my world into symbols your minds can understand. Welcome, my friends, to Megas-Tu. 
KIRK: And just exactly what is Megas-Tu? 
LUCIEN: A world, Captain James Kirk, that operates by rules quite different from those in your universe. 
(He snaps his fingers, and they're in a meadow by a lake) 
LUCIEN: Our universe operates by what you superstitiously call magic. 
(He creates two apples and throws one to McCoy) 
MCCOY: I know this is just my imagination but 
LUCIEN: It is real, Doctor. Beautiful? No. But all our women are as young and beautiful as they want to be. So as to ensnare the man of her dreams, she needs an edge. 
(A young woman buys a vial of something) 
KIRK: A love philter? 
LUCIEN: Never settle for anything less. Do you need a room, a stable, a castle? Stop in at your friendly sorcerer-contractor. Let him do the work. 
SPOCK: Of course. Our Federation scientists were more correct than they realised. In order to function, the galactic creation point must extend through space, time, into another dimension where the logic of things is totally different. 
LUCIEN: It took magic to get your vessel working again. Magic you, my friends, don't know how to work. But then you never did know, did you. 
KIRK: Lucien, you keep calling us friends, implying that you know us. How? 
LUCIEN: Ah, Captain, Captain. to feign such ignorance to me. Very well. Look. 
(He creates images in the water) 
LUCIEN: Megas-Tu may seem to you a chaotic world, but its people are calm, peaceful, contemplative, each a specialist in his own kind of magic. There are no rivals anywhere in our universe, Captain Kirk. No other life forms at all. Millennia ago, in our search for companionship, we Megans passed through the point between dimensions and eventually we found ourselves on your world, Earth. Wherever we went, we became advisors to mankind. To help your ancestors, we drew on the power left behind in our own universe and made it work in your world. But eventually we had to leave. I didn't want to, my friends. Oh, how I fought! I was the generalist amid all the specialists. The trouble-maker, they said. But I'd always loved the people of Earth. Those were the days. But now you've come to me, and I'm so very glad. 
KIRK: But why did you Megans leave Earth? If you enjoyed it so much, I don't understand. 
LUCIEN: Captain, good Captain, always so curious. That must be why I've always liked you Earthlings so much. No, you must go. 
MCCOY: What is it? What's wrong? 
LUCIEN: You must return to your vessel. Quickly! Do not give your presence away.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain. 
UHURA: Captain Kirk, what 
KIRK: Everyone onboard is all right? 
SCOTT: Fine, Captain. But you? 
KIRK: Mister Scott, I'm bewildered, that's all. But that's enough. 
MCCOY: What did he mean, we're not to give ourselves away? Can't they detect the ship up here? 
SCOTT: No, unless they have scanners. See, there. It's like a cloud of some kind. It's been between us and the planet since you vanished. 
KIRK: If Lucien put it there 
SPOCK: If Lucien put it there, Captain, the questions become, why is he hiding us, and, what is our danger if discovered by the rest of his people? 
KIRK: Weapons status, Mister Scott? We may have to protect ourselves. 
SCOTT: No way, Captain. Everything's out but life support systems, and I can't figure out how they're on.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: (drawing a pentangle on the floor) I believe this is how the ancients used to draw their mystic symbols, Captain. 
KIRK: Spock, do you honestly believe that as long as we're in this universe we can work magic too? 
SPOCK: One uses the resources at hand, Captain. Watch now. (stands in the pentangle) I will attempt to move a Vulcan chess piece magically. May the energy of this universe be the power in me. 
MCCOY: Forget it, Spock. It won't work. 
SPOCK: It must work, Doctor. It is logical here. Power of this universe, enter my being. I know I can. I believe I can. 
(And he does, with a golden aura around him)

Captain's log, supplemental. In this incredible universe, it appears to be a part of the natural laws that belief is as potent a force as energy and matter are in our own.

[Bridge]

(Sulu is having a go, and conjures up a lovely woman) 
UHURA: Good luck. 
(The woman turns into Lucien) 
LUCIEN: What are you doing? 
KIRK: Learning to protect ourselves, Lucien. 
LUCIEN: Protect yourselves? Is that all human beings ever think about? I'll take care of you. That's what friends are for. All this mental energy you're using, it can be traced. You'll be found. 
MEGAN [OC]: Have been found. 
(Lucien cringes as a vapour trail of ghostly images crosses the Bridge) 
MEGAN: So, the people of Earth would spread their evil to our home? We are ready for human perfidy this time. This time, it is the humans who shall suffer, the humans and you, Lucien, who shall pay! 
(The Enterprise plummets towards the planet) 
KIRK: Keep calm. 
(The ship splits neatly in two, and explodes)

[Frontier town]

(The crew are in stocks on either side of the road, and the sign reads Salem Massachusetts) 
KIRK: It looks like ancient Earth, Spock. Sixteenth or seventeenth century, I'd guess. 
SPOCK: Approximately 1691, Captain. Salem Massachusetts, if I recall your historical records correctly. 
(A man in puritan garb is standing on a pentacle) 
MEGAN: We are gathered here today, good citizens, to see justice done. You are the judges. These are the defendants, as representatives of the vilest species in all the universe, treacherous humanity, and those who would aid them. As a specialist in the ethics of magic, I have been appointed prosecutor here. 
KIRK: Wait. If this is a trial, we have the right to know what you think we've done. 
MEGAN: Has this one (Lucien) not told you how we visited your Earth? Or what was done to us there? 
KIRK: Lucien has said only that you came as wise men, helpful wizards. 
MEGAN: Then hear this. Know that one, upon your world, I was known as Asmodeus, he who sees all. Gaze upon my countenance, so that you too may see. (over images of his story) We came to your world as friends. But wherever we went, the story was invariably the same. Some humans would attempt to use us to gain power, to serve their own greed and lust. When we refused to serve them, they turned against us and taught other humans to fear us, to hate. They called us devils, warlocks, evil sorcerers. Those of us who survived came to the town of Salem in Massachusetts, as settlers, and tried to live like other men. 
SPOCK: But you made mistakes, used your powers 
MEGAN: And burned for it. Burned! 
KIRK: As witches. 
MEGAN: We massed together, outside the town, immersed ourselves in Megan lore, revived ourselves enough to unite our minds and reach into our own universe, tap enough of its power to return from your hellish Earth to Megas-Tu. 
LUCIEN: And loneliness and fear 
MEGAN: Should we not fear the Earthlings? Should we not fear the cruelty of outsiders? Never again have we explored. Never again has companionship been sought. Yet here you are. 
LUCIEN: And if one Earth ship can find us, friend Kirk, then so can others. That's what they fear. 
MEGAN: We do not want to hurt you. We have never had to hurt anyone before. If there were some reason not to. Who will speak in defence of the Earth humans? 
SPOCK: I will, Asmodeus. I am not of Earth. 
MEGAN: Yes, you are different. The court will hear a defence. 
(Spock is freed from the stocks) 
SPOCK: I call Lucien as my first witness. 
(Lucien appears in a dock) 
SPOCK: Lucien, you alone of all those here do not seem to fear or hate humans. Why? 
LUCIEN: They are like me, with questions to be answered, with minds that range outward, boundless. But every Megan is always alone in his sphere of knowledge. Humans are always together. They share. That is why I adopted your ship when I saw it arrive. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Lucien. Next witness, please. Captain James T Kirk. 
(Kirk is in another dock, opposite Lucien) 
SPOCK: Tell the court, please, Captain Kirk. Would you say that since Salem, humans have changed? 
KIRK: I think we've been trying to, Spock. Humans have their faults, greed, envy, panicky fear. But in the centuries since the Salem witch trials we have learned. We try to understand and respect all life forms. 
SPOCK: Indeed, Captain. Could you elaborate? 
KIRK: The records of the Enterprise are open for your inspection. All the history of Earth and the Federation is at your disposal. Look, look at General Order number One. No starship may interfere with the normal development of any alien life or society. Compare that with the Earth you once knew. 
MEGAN: Enough! Here is your history. Here are your records. Citizens, you have heard, you have read. How do you vote? (pause) According to your records, your entry here was an accident unlikely to be duplicated. With that in mind, plus all you have said, it seems to us that Megas-Tu is safe. But Lucien must be punished. For his betrayal of his people, he shall be confined in limbo for all eternity, to live with only himself. 
KIRK: No. To isolate someone like Lucien, that's the same as sentencing him to death. 
MEGAN: Do you realise who you defend? He has told you his name is Lucien. Would you defend him still if you knew he had another name too? The Rollicker, the Tempter, Lucifer. 
KIRK: We're not interested in legend. He's a living being, and intelligent life form. That's all we have to know about him. We will not join in harming him. 
MEGAN: Submit, Captain. You haven't the power to fight us. 
SPOCK: Captain, use the magic you know. Believe. 
(So, surrounded by auras, Kirk throws lightning bolts, quenches Asmodeus's flames, but) 
MEGAN: You cannot beat an entire planet, Captain Kirk. There is no way you can win. 
KIRK: I have to, or you'll become as bad as the Earthmen you fear. You're acting out of terror instead of out of thought or respect. 
(The Enterprise is back in orbit, and the planet is back to it's red hue with no buildings or vegetation) 
MEGAN: You were prepared to die for Lucien, a being who is alien to you? 
LUCIEN: As I was sure you would, friend Kirk. I told them their fears were groundless. 
KIRK: I don't understand. 
MEGAN: This last was a test of your intentions, Captain. We had to be certain your records were no ruse. We have been tricked before much to our pain and sorrow. 
SPOCK: I see. The Megans had to have proof that mankind had grown and learned wisdom since they last saw Earth. Your compassion was that proof, Captain. 
MEGAN: If your people should visit us now, we shall do our best to welcome them. The banishment of fear will help us all. 
(Lucien conjures tankards into their hands) 
LUCIEN: A favourite old Earth custom of mine, Asmodeus. A toast to a new friendship. 
(They drink)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: All systems go, Captain. We're back to normal. 
MCCOY: No more magic for us, Jim. It's all back there. You think Lucien really was the demon some men call Lucifer? 
KIRK: Does it really matter? 
SPOCK: It just might, Captain. If he was, this would be the second time Lucifer was cast out, and thanks to you, the first time he was saved.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Infinite Vulcan
Stardate: 5554.4
Original Airdate: 20 Oct, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5554.4. The Enterprise has been ordered to survey a new planet recently discovered at the periphery of the galaxy.
[Planet surface]

(Green sky, extraordinarily elegant curved rock formations, buildings with vegetation growing on them) 
SULU: Life readings are confused, sir. I can't decipher them. 
SPOCK: There is something else, Captain. I'm getting a reading of some kind of power from that building) 
(Sulu glances up, the sun flashes and a miniature purple 'tree' thing is at his feet) 
SULU: Well, now. What's this? Captain! Captain! 
KIRK: What is it, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: You're going to have to see this yourself, sir. 
(As he walks off, the plant gets up and follows him) 
KIRK: What is that thing? 
SULU: It's a mobile plant. When it stops, it's roots bore back into the ground. They're all over the place. I think it likes me. 
KIRK: We always encourage our officers to make friends with the natives. 
SPOCK: Captain, the power reading now includes an electronic probe. We are being scanned. 
KIRK: Phasers on stun. Stay alert. Mister Sulu, stay here. 
(Sulu picks up his new friend, then drops it in pain.) 
SULU: Ow! Must have been a thorn.

[Building]

(Elegant smooth alien semi-organic design, with flashing lights on two wall panels) 
SPOCK: The probe originates in this wall, as does an incredibly powerful force shield. It appears to be an amalgam of devices designed to defend and protect the city and this building in particular. 
MCCOY: Jim, I'm picking up a humanoid reading of incredible strength. It's as if he 
SULU [OC]: Argh!

[Planet surface]

(Sulu is face down on the grass) 
MCCOY: He's been poisoned. Unknown toxin. 
KIRK: Can you help him? 
MCCOY: I can't get a correlation with any known poison. 
KIRK: Maybe the ship's medical computers. 
MCCOY: He's got about one minute to live unless I can find an answer. Maybe dylovene. No good. Takes too much time to work if it does work. 
KIRK: Maybe a stronger shot. 
AGMAR: That won't be necessary. 
(Four green, tentacled aliens with eyes on stalks and medallions around their 'necks' are standing there. Think asparagus) 
KIRK: Who are you? 
AGMAR: I am called Agmar. I believe we can help. 
KIRK: Are you getting a reading on them? 
SPOCK: A moment, Captain. The results are unclear. 
MCCOY: Now, just a minute. I can't let you, whatever you are, inject him with some alien dew drop! 
AGMAR: To wait is to assure your friend's death. I must proceed. 
KIRK: Bones, let them help. 
SPOCK: Captain, these beings are of botanical origin. 
MCCOY: Intelligent plants? 
SPOCK: So it would seem. 
AGMAR: It is an antidote quickly absorbed. He should begin to respond momentarily. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
AGMAR: Welcome to the planet Phylos. 
KIRK: I'm Captain James Kirk. Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy and Mister Sulu. You seem to have been expecting us. 
AGMAR: Our instruments have tracked and scanned you. We did not wish to reveal ourselves immediately. We are a peaceful race and we have a fear of aliens. 
KIRK: What happened to him? 
AGMAR: He was bitten by the Retlaw plant. It is deadly only if unattended. 
(This episode was written by Walter Koenig, by the way. Walter/retlaW, get it?) 
KIRK: Your medication worked quickly. 
AGMAR: A minor achievement. 
MCCOY: Minor? Our science doesn't have anything that works that fast. Yours must be incredible. The toxin level is decreasing fast. Body readings up to normal. How is it you knew your antidote would work on a human? 
AGMAR: There have been humanoid aliens here before. 
SPOCK: Your method of communication 
AGMAR: A voder, or translator. Most efficient. (the medallion) 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Agmar, but I don't like puzzles. Where are the rest of your people? 
AGMAR: Come. I will show you.

[Building]

(Agmar opens one of the inner doors to reveal a long corridor lined with giants) 
AGMAR: Our people. 
SPOCK: Nerve tissue. Mass density is exceptionally high. Readings indicate the beings used almost seventy percent of their brains. A very high ratio. 
KIRK: Your ancestors? 
AGMAR: No, only the generation before us. 
KIRK: Then, what happened? 
AGMAR: A human came. He brought sickness and death. But he also worked to save us from his disease. 
MCCOY: There are evidences of gram-positive bacteria. It's carried by humanoids without ill effect, but staphylococcus strains don't seem to be native to this planet. It must have been like a plague. 
AGMAR: We had no way of knowing what was happening. 
KIRK: You were alive then? 
AGMAR: Very young. 
(A purple pterodactyl with tendrils for legs flies overhead) 
SPOCK: Plant life, Captain. Primitive and aggressive. 
(Kirk ducks and tries his phaser. Nothing) 
SULU: They won't work on any setting, sir. 
AGMAR: There is a weapons deactivator in effect here. Your destructive machines will have no effect. 
MCCOY: I think it's after you, Jim. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
(The pterodactyl grabs him, and he drops the communicator. More of the flying plants arrive) 
MCCOY: Captain! 
(The rest of the party are grabbed) 
SULU: What do you think they'll do with us, sir? 
KIRK: Something tells me we've just been used as a diversionary tactic. Look. 
(They fly away with Spock) 
AGMAR: I'm sorry, Captain Kirk, but there was no other way. 
KIRK: What are you talking about? Where have they taken Spock? 
AGMAR: He has been chosen to serve a greater cause. The Master has searched many years to find a specimen like Spock. (McCoy, Kirk and Sulu are released) And now, all the worlds of the galaxy will share in the beauty of peace and harmony. 
(Kirk grabs Agmar) 
KIRK: So help me, if you don't tell me where Spock has been taken 
OTHERS: The Master. Praise to the Master. The Master, our Saviour. Saviour, our Master. 
(A giant man has arrived) 
KIRK: Another plant? 
MCCOY: No, definitely human, Jim. 
STAVOS: I am Doctor Stavos Keniclius Five. Welcome to Phylos, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Where is Spock? 
STAVOS: He is mine. The essence of him is mine. Return to your ship. Here is your communicator. Go back to your ship. 
KIRK: Not without my First Officer. 
STAVOS: I am sorry, Captain. You will leave now or suffer the consequences. 
(The pterodactyls return) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us up, Scotty.

Captain's log, stardate 5554.8. We have come upon one of the most fascinating discoveries we have ever seen. Plant life of extraordinary intelligence and technology. However, they have captured Mister Spock, apparently under the orders of a human named Keniclius. Lieutenant Uhura is trying to locate any reference to such a man in order to unravel the mystery of this giant human.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Anything, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: We haven't been able to pick up any human life form readings, sir. Spock and Keniclius must be somewhere our sensors can't penetrate. 
KIRK: What about the Phylosians? 
SULU: I had to adjust for the fact that they're plant life forms. We're registering the lesser ones like the Swoopers in abundance. No sign of Agmar and the other four. 
KIRK: Agmar said something about a weapons deactivator. Mister Sulu, lock ship's phasers on that laboratory building. Use a wide area stun setting. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, how are you coming with that information on Keniclius? 
UHURA: Nothing current, Captain. I may have found something in the history banks. I'll have it in a moment. 
KIRK: Keep trying, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Phasers locked on and ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire phasers. 
SULU: Firing. No effect, Captain. Phaser stun was neutralized at a distance of one thousand metres above the area. 
KIRK: Which means our weapons are useless, and we have no alternative but to go back down there and try to rescue Spock without them. 
SULU: I'd hate to resort to clubs and knives. 
KIRK: There may be something more effective, Mister Sulu. Kirk to Engineering. Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Here, sir. 
KIRK: How's that special equipment coming along?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: My engineers are working on it now, sir. You'll have it within the hour. 
KIRK [OC]: Very well, Mister Scott. Kirk out.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I have the information now, sir. I'll put it on the main screen. 
KIRK: Thank you, Lieutenant. Bones? 
MCCOY: One of my great great granddaddies, way back, had the finest garden in the South. Had to scramble around a little bit to find the materials, but I've got his recipe brewing now. 
COMPUTER: Working. From Earth history file. Stavos Keniclius. Earth scientist, period, Eugenics Wars. 
(The image on the screen does appear to be the giant, wearing a lab coat with a nice array of pens in the pocket) 
COMPUTER: Planned to clone perfect specimen prototype into master race. Concept considered anti-humanistic. Banned from community. Disappeared. No evidence of death. No further data. 
MCCOY: There used to be a story about a modern Diogenes wandering the galaxy looking for someone special. 
KIRK: Someone special. A perfect specimen, perhaps. Yes, I've heard it too. 
MCCOY: It couldn't be Keniclius. He'd be over two hundred and fifty years old. 
KIRK: Not if he cloned a new copy of himself every so often to carry on the search. Remember, he said he was Keniclius Five.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: It seems incredible that a man could take a few cells from his body and reproduce himself from them time after time. But that seems to be exactly what we're dealing with in the giant human Keniclius. 
SULU: I hope these things work. 
SCOTT: Well, the equipment's guaranteed, but I have my doubts about the stuff inside. A strange way to handle aliens. 
KIRK: These are strange aliens we're fighting. Scotty, as soon as we beam down, I want you to leave orbit. If they think we've gone, they won't be scanning the surface. Give us thirty minutes. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir, but I don't like it. 
KIRK: Neither do I, but it appears to be necessary. Energise.

[Planet surface]

SULU: No indication of a scan. I don't think they know we're here. 
KIRK: Let's go. 
(Some Swoopers are around) 
MCCOY: I'm not sure I can take too much of this. 
SULU: They're almost mindless, Doctor. They seem to attack primarily as a reflex action. It's clear now. 
(By the buildings) 
SULU: I can't believe it. 
KIRK: Incredible. 
(In a hangar, a Phylosian is pulling ivy off a row of spaceships) 
MCCOY: Looks like they're getting ready to go on a trip. 
KIRK: But where? To what purpose? The number of ships indicates a mass migration. Or invasion. 
SULU: Agmar said they were a peaceful people. 
MCCOY: Sure they are, now. But what about before? 
KIRK: You could have a point, Bones. Those ships, the city. The Phylosians built a technology possibly greater than we animal species did. 
MCCOY: The ships look like they never got off the ground. Could be the disease Keniclius accidentally brought here swept the planet before they could do whatever they were going to do. 
KIRK: Any indication of Keniclius or Spock? 
SULU: No, sir. Only the Phylosians. 
KIRK: Well, followers can be led. Let's hope we can be as persuasive as Keniclius.

[Hangar]

(Kirk grabs Agmar) 
KIRK: Agmar, we don't want to hurt you, but we must have Spock back. 
AGMAR: I do not think that is possible. The Vulcan-human blend of wisdom, sense of order, durability and strength is the finest the Master has ever found. We are pleased Spock will carry on our work. 
KIRK: Carry on your work? 
AGMAR: We are the last of a dying people, Captain. Once we had a great mission. Then disease decimated us. We few are the frail remnant of what survived. Our spore cells have been destroyed. There will be no more of our kind. 
MCCOY: What if something happens to Spock or the Master? 
AGMAR: There will always be a master. But come, you are worried about your friend. I will show you he is safe and in good hands. 
SULU: Just like that, Captain? 
KIRK: So it would appear, Mister Sulu. All the same, keep that bag handy. 
(They go to an area surrounded by trees.) 
AGMAR: The way is though here, gentlemen. 
(He presses a control, and the ground lowers them down into a tunnel)

[Tunnel]

AGMAR: We sprang from the soil, Captain. These tunnels were once part of our home. This will serve to illuminate our way. 
(The 'ground' they were standing on above now carries them along) 
SULU: No wonder we couldn't find Spock. The walls are six hundred times denser than lead, in addition to the surface force field. 
KIRK: Did you hear something? 
MCCOY: What? 
KIRK: I'm not sure. 
AGMAR: Not much further now, Captain. 
KIRK: There it is again. A flapping sound. (it goes dark) Agmar! 
SULU: Use the belt lights! 
KIRK: They don't operate. Agmar! 
(Swoopers shriek and attack) 
KIRK: Run. We've got to find some light. We can't do anything unless we can see what we're fighting. Don't stop. Try to stay together. 
MCCOY: Jim, up ahead. (a light at the end of the tunnel) 
KIRK: I see it. I see it. Keep going.

[Laboratory]

(They emerge in a lab of some sort. Spock is lying in a glass case) 
MCCOY: He's dying. Something's happened to his brain. Electrical activity decreasing. 
STAVOS: It's too late, Captain Kirk! In a few minutes your friend will be gone. But as Keniclius One lives on in each of his clones, so will Mister Spock. Behold, gentlemen, the dawning of a new era, the salvation of a galaxy! Spock Two! 
(A giant Vulcan looms over them) 
KIRK: Get ready. 
(The party put face masks on themselves and the recumbent Spock as Swoopers screech in. Then Kirk and Sulu fire McCoy's recipe, filling the air with it. The Swoopers fall, the giants leave) 
SULU: Captain, I'm out. The chemical sprayer is empty. 
MCCOY: Mine too, Jim. 
KIRK: Wait, listen. 
MCCOY: Maybe they're waiting for the mist to clear. (it clears) Well, how about that. Great granddaddy's weed spray still works. 
KIRK: Never mind that. We've got to get Spock out of here before Keniclius returns. Scott should have the Enterprise back by now. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Nothing. Must be these blasted walls again. Kirk to Enterprise. 
MCCOY: It's no use, Jim. He'll be dead in a few minutes. His mind is gone. He no longer thinks. This machine has drained his mind somehow. 
STAVOS: More than just drained. It's been transferred, relocated into the mechanism itself. I can duplicate exact physiological structure. I cannot duplicate that which is learned. Just as my predecessor transferred his knowledge to me through his apparatus, I have done that with Mister Spock and the first of his clones. 
KIRK: You talk about creating life with your clones, but you have to murder to do it. (picks up Spock) Come on. 
(Giant Spock blocks their way) 
KIRK: Out of my way, mister. That's an order. 
MCCOY: I don't think he understands. His mind is still trying to assimilate all the knowledge it's been fed.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Keep trying, Lieutenant. We've got to make contact with the Captain. 
UHURA: It's no use, Mister Scott. I can't get through. 
SCOTT: Except for environmental systems, I want the entire power load of this ship redirected into a tight beam transmission. If we can break through the shielding, we can reach the Captain. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, you're risking a total drain of our dilithium crystals. To maintain communication we would have to burn out all our reserves. 
SCOTT: And don't I know it, lass. But we must speak to the Captain.

[Laboratory]

(The giant Spock frowns) 
MCCOY: He's coming out of it, Jim. He's becoming conscious and aware. 
KIRK: Spock, what is the logic in letting a man die for the sake of creating his duplicate? Explain it to me, sir. Explain it to me.

[Bridge]

UHURA: All power sources locked in, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Then throw the switch, Lieutenant.

[Laboratory]

KIRK: Vulcans do not condone the meaningless death of any being. Spock's death is meaningless if it is only to create a giant version of himself. 
STAVOS: It is not just a duplicate. He will be the beginning of a master race. He (interrupted by static) 
KIRK: That's our ship calling, Spock. You answer them. 
MCCOY: Spock is slipping away. There isn't much time left.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I'm sure we're getting through, but they're not acknowledging. 
SCOTT: Keep trying. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, we're near the drain point on the dilithium crystals now. Our reserves 
SCOTT: Keep trying.

[Laboratory]

G SPOCK: Commander Spock here. 
UHURA [OC]: Oh, thank heaven. Mister Spock, tell the Captain I've located more information about Keniclius.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I had the library computer check out all known writings by Keniclius. They are obscure, but there is a recurring theme in his later essays about using his master race as a peace-keeping force throughout the galaxy.

[Laboratory]

UHURA [OC]: That was why Keniclius wanted a perfect specimen. I have to sign off. We've reached power drain threshold.

[Bridge]

UHURA: That's what I call close, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Let's hope it was information they could use.

[Laboratory]

KIRK: All this has been a waste, Keniclius. There's been peace in the Federation for over one hundred years. 
STAVOS: That is a lie. What about the Eugenics Wars? The galactic wars? What of the depredations of the Romulans, the Klingons and the Kzinti? An army of Spock duplicates is necessary to subdue them. 
KIRK: You're the fifth Keniclius. What makes you so sure what you believe is truth isn't just old news? Your predecessors could have been out of touch with our advances for two centuries. 
AGMAR: The Master always speaks the truth. 
MCCOY: I can understand why you think Keniclius is the master if he saved you from dying, but why do you agree with his plan of a super race? 
AGMAR: Our fleet of ships which you saw was to be launched for the same purpose the Master intends. Disease struck us before we could carry out our own plan to impose peace on a galaxy that knew none. 
KIRK: We already have peace in the Federation. It wasn't imposed, it was agreed upon. You have no need of Spock. Reverse the effects of that machine and let us take him. 
STAVOS: No! The mould must be broken. 
MCCOY: Jim, Spock's almost gone. 
KIRK: If you have Spock's mind, you'll know the Vulcan symbol called the IDIC. 
G SPOCK: Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations. Symbolising the elements that create truth and beauty. 
KIRK: Could an army of Spocks impose peace and Phylosian philosophy on any other beings in defiance of the IDIC concept? 
G SPOCK: I do not believe so. 
KIRK: Reverse the machine, Keniclius. 
AGMAR: No! Our dream must not be allowed to die. 
(Stavos smashes the glass box) 
KIRK: Murderer! You've killed Spock! 
G SPOCK: To persist in this behaviour, Captain, is to negate the eloquence of your previous argument. May I suggest a more constructive way? 
(The giant places a huge finger on Spock's head) 
G SPOCK: My mind to your mind, my thoughts to your thoughts. 
SULU: The Vulcan mind touch. 
SPOCK: I am pleasantly surprised at your capacity for deductive reasoning, Captain. When you are not being bellicose, there appears to be no end to your arsenal of formidable talents. 
KIRK: Spock. Spock, you old 
G SPOCK: And you needn't worry, Captain Kirk, about a master race. There will be no militia, no other Spocks. 
STAVOS: But what of my work? If all I have lived for is already done, if the times I feared are gone, what is to become of me? There appears to be no reason why I should continue to exist. 
SPOCK: I would suggest Doctor Keniclius remain on Phylos with my duplicate. The concerted efforts of both scientists may yet achieve a rebirth of the Phylosian civilisation and enable them to contribute to the Federation. 
G SPOCK: My thoughts exactly, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: So one might assume, Mister Spock. 
KIRK: How does that sound to you, Keniclius? To bring life is at least as important as bringing peace. 
STAVOS: I would be honoured. If I will be allowed. 
KIRK: I'll report your work here. I think the Federation will understand. 
(The two Spocks salute each other) 
KIRK: By the way, Mister Sulu, any chance of teaching me that body throw? Could come in handy sometime. 
SULU: I don't know, sir. It isn't just physical, you know. You have to be inscrutable. 
KIRK: Inscrutable? Sulu, you're the most scrutable man I know.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Survivor
Stardate: 5143.3
Original Airdate: 10 Oct, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5143.3. While patrolling the edge of the Romulan Neutral Zone, the Enterprise has changed course to assist a one-man vessel which has fallen victim to a meteor swarm. Sensors indicate the occupant is still alive.
[Transporter room]

KIRK: Have you identified the vessel, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes Captain, but you may find it difficult to believe. The vessel is registered to Carter Winston. 
MCCOY: That's impossible, Spock. Carter Winston's been missing over five years. 
(Kyle beams aboard a fair-haired man) 
MCCOY: Incredible. It is him. 
KIRK: Carter Winston. 
CARTER: It seems you gentlemen know me. 
KIRK: There are few in the Federation who wouldn't recognise your face, sir. I'm Captain James Kirk, commanding this vessel. Mister Spock, my first officer, Doctor McCoy, senior medical officer. 
MCCOY: I'm especially honoured to meet you, Mister Winston. My daughter was going to school on Cerberus about ten years ago when the crop failure occurred. The entire population would've starved, Jim, if Winston here hadn't used his personal fortune to bring in enough food and goods to carry them through the crisis. 
KIRK: One of the many stories I've heard about you, Mister Winston. It's an honour for all of us to have you aboard. 
SPOCK: There is one person aboard who should be especially happy to learn you are alive, Mister Winston. Lieutenant Anne Nored of our security detail. 
CARTER: My fiancee? Anne's aboard this starship? 
SPOCK: We will notify her as soon as we've verified your credentials, Mister Winston. If you have your identity tapes with you 
MCCOY: Spock! Of all the cold-blooded, inhospitable requests I've ever heard. 
SPOCK: I believe our regulations are quite clear, Doctor. An immediate identity check and medical examination are a standard requirement at this point. 
KIRK: Spock is right as usual, Bones. 
CARTER: And I understand, of course. My credentials, Captain.

The Enterprise has rescued a living legend, the foremost space trader of our time. Carter Winston has acquired a dozen fortunes only to use his wealth time and again to assist Federation colonies in times of need or disaster.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Library computer, verify record tape on Winston, Carter. 
COMPUTER: Working. Identification positive. Fingerprints positive. Voice print positive. All licenses and registration in order. 
KIRK: Visual display of owner. Checks out. It seems we'll have a distinguished passenger with us for a while.

[Sickbay]

CARTER: Is there some problem, Doctor? 
MCCOY: This instrument seems a little off. I've never gotten quite this reading from a human before. 
CARTER: Are you suggesting I'm not quite human, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Of course not. Anyway, it's just a fraction off normal. It's probably the instrument. They need to be recalibrated every so often. 
(Chapel enters) 
CHAPEL: The Captain is inquiring if the examination is completed, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Yes, I suppose so. 
CHAPEL: And Lieutenant Nored is waiting to see Mister Winston once you've certified his medical condition. 
MCCOY: Well, I certainly don't want to keep you any longer from your fiancee. Show her in. 
(McCoy and Chapel leave, and a brunette enters) 
ANNE: Oh, Carter. 
CARTER: I'm sorry, Anne. I never thought we would meet again. 
ANNE: Carter, what is it? 
CARTER: When I left on that last trip, I fully intended to come back and marry you, but my ship was disabled and I crashed on Vendor. I'm told I was lucky I survived. 
ANNE: But you did survive. You're alive, and we're together again. 
CARTER: Anne, I'm changed. First there was surgery, skin graft, regrowth of bone. After they put me together, they assigned one of their people to me, and he nursed me back to health. 
ANNE: But, you said you've changed. How? I don't see any change. 
CARTER: It's over between us, Anne. I'm sorry, I can't explain why but, I can't marry you. Ever.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Take the conn, Mister Spock. I'll be in my cabin completing the report on Winston's rescue.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Come. 
CARTER: I hope I'm not intruding, Captain. 
KIRK: No, please come in, Mister Winston. 
CARTER: I've been down to examine my ship. They stowed it in the shuttlebay. 
KIRK: Yes, I'm afraid it's pretty badly damaged. It's hardly worth salvaging right now. I've had our engineering officer, Mister Scott, examine it and make a report. It's here somewhere. He doesn't think there's anything left in your ship except scrap value. 
(Behind his back, Carter Winston crosses his arms and glows, then turns into a an orange creature poised on six slender tendrils. It drapes a tendril around Kirk's shoulder. He falls unconscious and the thing places him gently on his bed. Then the creature turns into James Kirk.)

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Well, I can't find anything wrong with these instruments, Doctor. They check out, but the readings are still slightly off. What about the rest of the tests on Winston? 
MCCOY: Well, some are off and some aren't. It has to be our error. Come on. We'll start from the beginning and this time we're going to find the answer.

[Bridge]

(Kirk enters) 
SULU: Weren't you going to your cabin, sir? 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, lay in a direct course for Ratar Three. 
SULU: Through the Romulan Neutral Zone, sir? 
KIRK: That was the order, helmsman. 
SULU: But sir, if we're caught there, the Romulans can confiscate the ship. The treaty 
KIRK: I know the terms of the treaty, Mister Sulu, and I believe you heard my order. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, the extreme long-range sensors show something in the Zone. At this distance, I cannot determine precisely what it is. It could be a trading vessel like Winston's. But it does not seem prudent to take the risk of trespass into the Zone. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, I've spoken to Winston on this at some length. He has assured me it is absolutely vital to get to Ratar Three in the shortest possible time. The survival of the entire planetary population may depend on it. 
SPOCK: An admirable mission, Captain, but if we endanger our ship 
KIRK: I wouldn't have ordered it if I didn't feel it safe, Spock. Winston says his sensors detected no Romulans when he came through the Zone last week. I'm satisfied he's telling the truth, and his word is considered good. Isn't it? 
SPOCK: That has been his reputation. 
SULU: Course laid in, sir. 
KIRK: Execute. 
SULU: On course, sir. 
KIRK: You have the conn, Mister Spock.

Ship's log, stardate 5148.7. First Officer Spock recording. The Captain's course change has taken us deep into the Romulan Neutral Zone.

[Bridge]

(Kirk has woken up in his quarters) 
KIRK: I'll take the conn, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Is something wrong, Captain? 
KIRK: I'm not sure. I went down to my quarters to dictate the accident report and I seem to have fallen asleep. I've never done that before. 
SPOCK: Perhaps you needed the rest. We are on course through the Neutral Zone, sir. 
KIRK: The Neutral Zone? We have no authorisation to enter it. Did you order a course change, Spock? 
SPOCK: No, sir. You did. 
KIRK: Ridiculous. No captain of the Starfleet would do that unless it was a matter of life and death. 
SPOCK: I believe that was the reason you gave, Captain. 
SULU [on monitor]: Weren't you going to your cabin, sir? 
KIRK [on monitor]: Mister Sulu, lay in a direct course for Ratar Three. 
SULU [on monitor]: Through the Romulan Neutral Zone, sir? 
KIRK [on monitor]: That was an order, helmsman. 
KIRK: That's enough, Spock. Mister Scott, take the conn. Spock. Mister Sulu, plot a course to take the Enterprise out of the Neutral Zone at warp eight. Lieutenant M'Ress, put the ship on Yellow Alert.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Mister Spock, I don't remember giving those orders. I left the Bridge, went to my quarters and fell asleep. That's all. 
SPOCK: Perhaps Doctor McCoy should examine you, Captain. 
KIRK: Definitely. I've become subject to blackouts, I'm a possible danger to the safety of the ship. I can't allow that.

[McCoy's office]

MCCOY: Oh, Winston. I was just finishing the tests I ran on you. I don't think 
(But Winston has done his transformation into the alien, sent him to sleep and has dragged the body away) 
(Later) 
ANNE: Doctor McCoy? 
MCCOY: Can I help you? 
ANNE: I don't know, Doctor. I just thought. Well, I have to talk to someone. 
MCCOY: Oh now, let me guess. It's you and Carter Winston. He told me a little about it when I examined him. 
ANNE: Doctor, what do I do? I still love him. 
MCCOY: Well, I'm sure he'd like to feel the same way about you, Anne, but that may be impossible. Five years, that's a long time. People change. 
ANNE: I haven't. What can I do? 
MCCOY: Well, if he asked you to forget him, I think you should try to do just that. Do you think he'd want to deceive you? 
ANNE: Oh no. He's the gentlest, most thoughtful man I've ever known. 
MCCOY: Yes, but, my dear, if he doesn't want you and he has asked you to forget him, then I suggest you take that as an honest concern for you and do it. Forget Winston. 
(Kirk and Spock enter) 
ANNE: Thank you, Doctor. I'll consider your advice. (leaves) 
MCCOY: What can I do for you, Captain? 
KIRK: I want a complete medical examination, Bones. Something's just happened 
MCCOY: I'm afraid I'll have to make it later today, Captain. I have too many tests to process right now. 
SPOCK: Carter Winston's? 
MCCOY: That one's done. Tested out normal. 
SPOCK: Are you sure there is no possibility you made an error? 
MCCOY: Well, there's always that possibility. I'll go over them again if you like. 
KIRK: No, that won't be necessary. I'll come by later for that examination. Let's go, Spock.

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Captain, did you notice Doctor McCoy's reaction when I asked him if there was any possibility he might have made an error? 
KIRK: He said there's always that possibility. And that's not like Bones at all. Come on.

[McCoy's office]

(No one is there) 
SPOCK: There are not many places one could hide in here. 
(There's a groan from behind the door)

[Medical lab]

MCCOY: I must have taken a little nap. 
SPOCK: Doctor, you are a man of curious habits, but I have never known you to nap on the laboratory floor. 
KIRK: There's something wrong about this room. 
(He goes over to a biobed) 
KIRK: All right, Winston. You can come out now. I suggest you show yourself, Winston, or whatever you are. 
MCCOY: Did you say I'm a man of curious habits? Jim's talking to a table. 
SPOCK: I don't think so, Doctor. 
KIRK: There used to be only two examining tables in this room. Now there are three. 
SPOCK: I just realised that. 
KIRK: This is a vial of Orientine acid, Winston. It will burn through almost anything but this crystal. If you've never seen it work, I'll demonstrate on you. 
(The table transforms into the alien) 
MCCOY: I saw that, but I don't believe it. 
SPOCK: A Vendorian, Doctor. Their planet is quarantined, and few people ever do see them. Their ability to rearrange their molecular structure into anything with the same general size and mass and their practise of deceit as a way of life puts them off limits. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, get a security team down here on the double. 
MCCOY: Jim! 
(The Vendorian attacks all three of them at once and escapes down the corridor) 
SPOCK: Spock to Bridge. Put me on ship's audio.

[Corridor]

SPOCK [OC]: All security teams, intruder alert. Repeat, intruder alert. The intruder is a Vendorian capable of assuming any shape or identity. 
(It changes into Carter Winston and looks for somewhere to hide. A phaser is pointed at it) 
CARTER: Anne, what are you doing? 
ANNE: My job. It isn't hard to guess who the intruder is. You're the only stranger aboard, Carter. 
(But he knocks the phaser out of her hand, and gets away just she picks it up again and Kirk arrives) 
KIRK: Lieutenant Nored, you could've stopped him. Why didn't you fire? 
ANNE: I, I couldn't. I knew he had to be the intruder, Captain, but I couldn't harm the image of the man I loved. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, he is not the man you loved. Carter Winston is dead. 
ANNE: I know that too, now. 
SPOCK: Security teams report no sign of the alien on this deck, Captain. 
KIRK: I was afraid of that. Once out of our sight, he can become anyone or anything aboard this ship. 
(Red Alert sounds) 
KIRK: Bridge, this is the Captain. What's happened?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Two Romulan battle cruisers, Captain. And they're heading right for us.

Captain's log, supplemental. Due to interference by the alien Vendorian aboard, the Enterprise has been detected violating the Romulan Neutral Zone. By the terms of our treaty, the Romulans have a legal right to seize and impound the Enterprise. To complicate matters, we have not been able to apprehend the Vendorian responsible for putting us in this position.

[Bridge]

ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: You appear to have a propensity for trespassing in the Neutral Zone, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: It was not deliberate, I assure you. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: It never is. But the rules of the treaty are clear. To contravene them would mean war. You will surrender your ship, Captain. We will release you and your crew at the nearest outpost that guards the Neutral Zone. 
KIRK: I'd like a few minutes to inform my crew. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Very well. Five minutes, no more. 
KIRK: Kirk to Security. What's the status on the search for the Vendorian? 
ANNE [OC]: No progress yet. We have all decks patrolled, but no one has seen him. 
KIRK: Carry on, Lieutenant. The Romulans were expecting us, Mister Spock. That wreck of Winston's ship was the bait to get a Romulan spy onboard. And what better spy than a Vendorian who can shape at will. When I went down to my cabin, he must have put me out long enough for him to return to the Bridge and order the course change. 
SPOCK: It would seem so. 
KIRK: Open a hailing frequency Lieutenant M'Ress. 
M'RESS: (a lioness with a very long flowing mane) Hailing frequency open, sir. They're waiting for us. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: I assume you are now ready to turn your ship over to us, Captain. 
KIRK: Wrong assumption. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Captain, you are outnumbered, outgunned and in the wrong. I admire your courage, but I 
KIRK: I have no choice, Commander. You lured me here in direct violation of the treaty. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Lured, Captain? How could we lure a Starfleet vessel into the Neutral Zone? 
KIRK: Through the use of a spy using the human form of Carter Winston. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: A spy? Come now, Captain. Your imagination is creative but obviously out of control. 
KIRK: You used a Vendorian, which, I might add, is also a violation of the treaty. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Your five minutes are up, Captain. Either surrender your ship or prepare to fight. 
KIRK: I will not surrender my ship.

[Engineering]

(Scott finds a man messing inside a panel) 
SCOTT: What are you doing? 
(The man grabs his throat, knocking him out, then carries on)

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, our deflector shields are coming down. 
KIRK: Bridge to Engineering. Scotty, what's happened to the shields?

[Engineering]

GABLER: Mister Scott isn't here, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: Get those shields

[Bridge]

KIRK: Up again now. 
GABLER [OC]: I can't, sir. 
SULU: Hangar doors on the shuttlecraft deck are opening, sir. The Vendorian must be trying to escape. 
KIRK: We need him. Override the controls and shut those doors. 
SULU: Doors closing, sir. 
KIRK: Spock, take the conn. Talk to the Romulans. Try to stall them. And send a security team to the hangar deck. I'll be in Engineering.

[Bridge]

KIRK; What happened? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. I came up here to check the backup systems, and there was a crewman taking this panel apart. That's all I remember. 
KIRK: How long will it take to fix? 
SCOTT: Two hours, at least. 
KIRK: Get on it.

[Corridor]

ANNE: You're not getting past me this time. I've learned my lesson. 
CARTER: Yes. He said you were like that, practical as well as warm and lovely. You're everything he said you were. 
ANNE: Carter? What did he say? 
CARTER: Many things. Some were only feelings, deep feelings he couldn't always express. He did love you. 
ANNE: How did he die? 
CARTER: Winston crashed on our planet, and he was tended by a Vendorian. Me. He lived for almost a year before his body ceased to function. 
ANNE: You are so much like him, his voice, his mannerisms. 
CARTER: That is the way of our people. The longer we stay in another's form, the more we take on its memory, emotion, attitudes. Not totally, but a great deal as time passes. 
ANNE: He did say he loved me. 
CARTER: As I do. In a sense, I feel some of the emotions he felt. His love for you was very strong. Because I was there, it did not end when he died. 
ANNE: Carter. 
CARTER: Anne, this is what I am. (changes into Vendorian shape) Can you love this? (changes back) You see why I told you it would be best to forget me? 
(Kirk arrives) 
KIRK: But unfortunately, I can't. 
(The Romulans fire at the ship, and Kirk and Anne are knocked off their feet. Carter escapes)

[Bridge]

(Kirk enters) 
SPOCK: Direct hit, Captain. Damage to the secondary propulsion system. The commander has apparently decided to fight. 
M'RESS: The Romulan commander is signalling, sir. I'll put it on the screen. 
ROMULAN [on viewscreen]: Captain Kirk, all our main batteries are trained on you. To resist would be useless and wasteful of lives. Do you surrender? 
KIRK: Without deflectors, we're just a clay pigeon for them. 
SPOCK: Practicality does suggest capitulation, Captain. 
SULU: Captain, the deflector shields are coming up again. 
KIRK: That's only one shield. 
SULU: Yes, sir, but it is between us and the Romulans. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, aim for the propulsion units of the lead Romulan vessel. Prepare to fire phasers and photon torpedoes in combination. 
SULU: Phasers and torpedoes ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
(They disable the first ship) 
SPOCK: Second vessel firing now, sir. 
KIRK: Lock on second target. 
SULU: Ready, Captain. 
KIRK: Fire. 
SPOCK: Strange. We did no damage, but the Romulan is retreating anyway. 
KIRK: They may believe we do have their spy. Scan the other vessel for damage, if you will, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Second vessel power supply out. Crew unharmed. They should be able to repair the ship in a few days. 
KIRK: Good work, Mister Scott. That deflector shield went up just in time.
SCOTT: But sir, I haven't finished repairing the shield. I told you it'll take hours, and it will. 
SPOCK: Interesting. 
KIRK: Then what was? Winston. 
SPOCK: It is not outside the realm of probability. If he could rearrange his own atoms to become an examination table, one would have to assume he could become a deflector shield. 
SCOTT: Will someone tell me what's going on? 
(The Vendorian enters) 
SCOTT: What manner of beastie is that? 
SPOCK: Your deflector shield, Mister Scott. 
ALIEN: I assume the danger to your ship is over. 
KIRK: It is. 
ALIEN: As it should be. I'm sorry if I endangered your vessel. 
KIRK: Why did you do it? 
ALIEN: Among my own people, I am a non-producer, useless. An outcast fit only to do those tasks of the lowest order. The Romulans offered me a life, something of value I could do. It is important to be of value to someone. 
KIRK: What changed your mind about the Romulans? 
ALIEN: It seems, Captain, that I am more Carter Winston than I knew. He loved life. He loved Anne. I couldn't allow the Romulans to harm any of you because of him. 
KIRK: I understand. 
ALIEN: What will happen to me now? 
KIRK: You'll have to stand trial. But you did save the Enterprise from the Romulans, and I will recommend that be taken into consideration. 
ALIEN: Thank you, Captain. 
(The Vendorian changes into Carter Winston) 
KIRK: In the meantime, I'm afraid I'll have to keep you under guard. I think we've had enough of that little trick. 
ANNE: Captain, could you assign me that duty. 
CARTER: But you've seem me. You know what I am. 
ANNE: Form doesn't seem terribly important to me. As Carter Winston or even just part of him, there's a better life for you than anything the Romulans might offer. Can we talk about that? 
CARTER: I don't know. I 
KIRK: You have the guard detail, Lieutenant. 
(McCoy enters as Anne and Carter leave) 
MCCOY: You caught him. 
SPOCK: Acute observation, Doctor. 
MCCOY: I'm glad to see him under guard, Jim. If he'd turned into a second Spock, it would've been too much to take. 
SPOCK: Perhaps. But then two Doctor McCoys just might bring the level of medical efficiency on this ship up to acceptable levels.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


More Tribbles, More Troubles
Stardate: 5392.4
Original Airdate: 6 Oct, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5392.4. The Enterprise has been assigned to escort two robot grain ships to Sherman's Planet, which has been struck by crop failures and famine. This shipment of seed grain, quintrotriticale, is necessary to the survival of the colonists. We are breaking course to Sherman's Planet to investigate what appears to be a Klingon battle cruiser pursuing some kind of smaller ship. Observation may confirm a rumour that the Klingons have a new weapon, type so far unknown.
[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, it is a Klingon ship. Rapidly closing on its target. 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate the smaller vessel is a one-man scout ship of common design. 
SULU: They're firing on him. 
(Explosions happen around the little ship) 
KIRK: Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. Ahead, warp factor six. Scotty, lock the transporter on that small vessel. We're going to rescue that pilot. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, aye, Captain.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Locking on.

[Bridge]

(Finally, the Klingons manage to hit the fleeing ship) 
KIRK: Open hailing frequencies. Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. You are violating Federation space. Identify yourself. Stop firing on scout ship. 
(Lots more misses) 
KIRK: Arm all phasers. Deflector shields up. 
SULU: Phasers armed. Shields up. 
KIRK: Ahead warp factor eight. Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. 
(At last, they blow up the scout ship) 
SULU: They got him. 
KIRK: Scotty, have you got that pilot yet? 
SCOTT [OC]: I don't know, sir.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: That Klingon (mutter). That blast decalibrated the integration parameters.

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain. 
(The Klingon ship is coming straight for them. Red Alert sounds. A wibbly energy field is fired at Enterprise) 
KIRK: The new weapon. Spock? 
SPOCK: Some kind of field effect, Captain. It will hit us in precisely four seconds. It produces a most remarkable (the weapon hits) disruption.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Now, what 
(He mutters and works the controls)

[Bridge]

SULU: Our engines are dead. 
SPOCK: Captain, we have been hit by a kind of projected stasis field. Our matter-antimatter generators are disabled. We are paralysed. 
KIRK: Fire phasers. 
SULU: The phasers don't work, sir. 
SPOCK: The photon torpedoes will not respond, either. The stasis field disables all higher-order field and warp functions. 
UHURA: Well, we could always throw rocks. 
SPOCK: This new Klingon weapon must be one of surprising power if it can immobilize a starship. The energy drain on the Klingon ship would be enormous. 
KIRK: Scotty, did you get that pilot? 
SCOTT [OC]: I got him in the beam, sir.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: But I can't integrate him. The system's been discoordinated. 
UHURA: Captain, I have a message coming in, sir. 
KIRK: Put it on the viewscreen. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Ah, Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Release my ship. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: I'd be delighted to, Captain Kirk, if you will turn over the pilot of the little ship. 
KIRK: That ship was a Federation-built craft. The pilot is under our protection. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: He has committed ecological sabotage. If I have to take him by force, I will. 
KIRK: The first Klingon to step aboard this ship will be the last Klingon. Full security alert, Mister Spock. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: I'm afraid, Captain Kirk, you'll find your phasers no longer work, nor any of your weapons. 
UHURA: Mister Spock, I'm losing contact with our robot ships. They're not held by the stasis field and they're moving out of range. 
KIRK: What was that? Lieutenant, cut off that frequency. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. (Koloth is cut off) The robot ships, they're moving off. 
KIRK: They still have power? We still control them? 
SULU: Affirmative, sir. 
KIRK: Bring them back, Mister Sulu. Have them ram the Klingon ship. 
SPOCK: Captain, you can't afford to lose that grain. 
KIRK: I can afford even less to lose the Enterprise. Open the hailing frequency again, Lieutenant. Captain Koloth. I'm going to give you one last chance to release the Enterprise. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: You're going to give me one chance? (he gets the message about the ships) It won't work, Captain Kirk. 
(transmission ends) 
KIRK: It will work, or he'd still be gloating. Bring the robot ships in from two different angles, Mister Sulu. 
(The Klingons fire two more stasis beams) 
SPOCK: Incredible. The amount of energy that field must require. 
(The new beams fail to reach their targets, then they all fail and Enterprise is free) 
SPOCK: They couldn't maintain the stasis field. 
KIRK: Keep your phasers locked on target, Mister Sulu. Hold your fire until they fire first. 
SULU: Aye, sir. Phasers locked on. 
(The Klingons fire at a robot ship) 
SPOCK: Apparently their battle capacity is down. They only damaged it. 
SULU: They're veering off. 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate their power cells are almost exhausted. They probably don't have the strength for a prolonged battle now. 
KIRK: Scotty, can you integrate that pilot now?

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: I think so, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: We'll be right there.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Call McCoy to the Transporter room. Spock.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Have you got him? 
SCOTT: Just putting him together now, sir. 
(A chubby figure solidifies, together with three piles of small pink fluffy objects) 
KIRK: I think we know that man. 
SPOCK: It appears to be 
MCCOY: I don't want to think about it. 
KIRK: Cyrano Jones! 
SCOTT: And he's got tribbles with him. Tribbles!

Captain's log, supplemental. Our rescue effort has given us some knowledge of the new Klingon weapon and the presence of Cyrano Jones, intergalactic trader and general nuisance.

[Transporter room]

JONES: Captain Kirk. Friend Kirk. 
KIRK: Seal off the area, Ensign. You know the law about transporting animals proven harmful. 
JONES: Captain, these are safe tribbles. 
MCCOY: There's no such thing as a safe tribble. 
SPOCK: A safe tribble would be a contradiction in terms. Tribbles are well known for their proclivities in multiplication. 
JONES: And they breed fast, too. And that's why these tribbles are safe. They don't reproduce. 
MCCOY: Don't reproduce? 
JONES: I've had them genetically engineered for compatibility with humanoid ecologies. See how friendly and loveable they are? And not a baby in the bunch. They're great pets and profitable, too. 
KIRK: Jones, how did you get away from Space Station K7? You were supposed to clean up all the tribbles there. 
JONES: Oh, well, I managed a short parole. I found some help. This is a tribble predator. It's called a glommer. 
(He holds up a pyramid-shaped thing with four legs, six horns and two eyes on long stalks) 
JONES: Watch. 
(The glommer pounces over a tribble, and we don't get to see the details) 
MCCOY: Well, at least it's neat. 
KIRK: Why were the Klingons chasing you, Jones? 
JONES: How should I know? Klingons have notoriously bad tempers. 
SPOCK: That may be true, but they rarely enter Federation space and fire on Federation vessels without reason. 
KIRK: They did mention ecological sabotage. 
JONES: Me? A saboteur? Ridiculous. 
KIRK: Captain Koloth was pretty emphatic. 
JONES: It was such a little thing. I can't understand at all why they got upset. 
KIRK: What did you do? 
JONES: I only sold them some tribbles. 
KIRK: You sold tribbles on a Klingon planet? 
JONES: Well, I didn't know it was a Klingon planet. 
KIRK: Tribbles don't like Klingons. That should have given you some clue. 
JONES: Klingons like tribbles even less. It was lucky you came along and saved me when you did, Friend Kirk. I couldn't have outrun them much longer. 
KIRK: According to our computer files, Jones, you are in violation of three Federation mandates and forty seven local ones. You're confined until we complete our mission. Then we'll turn you over to the proper authorities. 
JONES: Captain, couldn't we talk this over? I didn't think so. 
(If you're the only person in the universe who is reading this and does not know about the Trouble With Tribbles, click the link and learn)

[Medical lab]

(McCoy is examining a pink tribble)

[Briefing room]

MCCOY: Jim, Cyrano Jones is right. These tribbles don't reproduce. They just get fat. I don't think we have anything to worry about. 
KIRK: Not about tribbles, anyway. I am concerned about that new Klingon weapon. 
SPOCK: It is an energy-sapping field of great strength, Captain. It immobilizes a starship and its weapons capability. But apparently, it also immobilizes the attacking ship's abilities at the same time. 
SCOTT: Aye, and if that's true, then it's a weapon that leaves them as helpless as it does us. 
SPOCK: I believe I just said that, Mister Scott. 
KIRK: The practical advantages of such a weapon would seem to be limited. 
SPOCK: Perhaps, but there are logical applications. The key question is, how long does it take them to recharge? They will probably attack us again as soon as they are back up to power. And they will probably begin by destroying the other robot ship to prevent us from repeating the same trick. They want Cyrano Jones very badly. 
MCCOY: He really doesn't seem the saboteur type, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes. Status report on the damaged grain ship, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Well, sir, we've managed to transfer all the grain aboard, but it severely limits us. We filled the shuttlecraft hangars, all our extra holds, and we've even got containers of that wheat, that quintrotriticale, in the corridors of the ship. And then we've got that other robot ship to escort, too. I don't like it at all, sir. 
KIRK: Nor do I, Mister Scott, but we've got to do it. Sherman's Planet needs that grain desperately. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir, but we've got tribbles on the ship, quintrotriticale in the corridors, Klingons in the quadrant. It can ruin your whole day, sir. 
(And big fat pink tribbles are 'sniffing' around the containers. So big and fat that the glommer cannot quite cope with them)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain, sensors are picking up a Klingon battle cruiser. 
KIRK: Deflector shields up. Stand by phasers. (rolls a tribble off his chair) How fat do these things get? 
SULU: Klingon ship approaching rapidly. Within phaser range in thirty seconds. 
SPOCK: Obviously, they can recharge their power in a matter of hours. 
KIRK: Use the robot ship as a decoy. Have it change course and move off. We'll use it again to give the Klingons trouble. They can't control more than one ship at a time with their stasis field. 
SULU: Beginning evasive manoeuvres. 
SPOCK: The Klingon seems to be veering off. My mistake, Captain. They were not veering off. They were attacking the grain ship. 
SULU: But they didn't destroy it. They only wrecked the propulsion units. They left the cargo intact. 
SPOCK: Captain Koloth is quite a marksman. 
SULU: They've changed course. They're coming in again. 
KIRK: Ready phasers. 
SULU: Phasers armed and ready, sir. 
(The Klingons fire two shots at Enterprise. The shaking of the ship makes some containers fall over and break open. Kirk returns fire, then comes an attempt with the stasis beam. Meanwhile, little pink tribbles are becoming giant pink tribbles.) 
KIRK: Photon torpedoes. Fire one. 
SPOCK: They're running away. Very odd. They did not use their stasis weapon at all. 
KIRK: Perhaps they haven't had enough time to recharge it. 
SPOCK: Or the purpose of the attack was something else. 
SULU: They disabled the robot ship. 
KIRK: Scotty, put a tractor beam on it. We'll take it in tow. 
SPOCK: Captain, that could be exactly what they want us to do. Tow the robot and limit our available power. We're carrying the extra mass of the first ship's cargo, and now we have the second one in tow. That requires a great deal of power we won't be able to use in battle. 
KIRK: That seems logical. 
SPOCK: Thank you. 
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock, do you have any ideas? 
SPOCK: We could always throw tribbles at them. 
KIRK: I thought Vulcans didn't have a sense of humour. 
SPOCK: We don't, Captain. 
(The glommer looks like a jockey on the back of a tribble) 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got broken cargo containers in all the corridors, and the tribbles are eating the grain. 
KIRK: Get Cyrano Jones up here. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Any sign of Captain Koloth's ship? 
SULU: Nothing, sir. 
KIRK: Keep scanning. 
JONES: Captain Kirk, what can I do for you? Some Spican flame gems perhaps? 
KIRK: Your tribbles are all over my ship. My security men can't find them all. 
JONES: You need better security men, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Jones, you are in enough trouble already. 
JONES: Captain, a harmless little tribble. What can they hurt? 
KIRK: Harmless, maybe. Little? (pushes a beach ball off his seat) In any case, they're eating the quintrotriticale. 
JONES: The what? 
KIRK: The wheat! 
JONES: They're hungry, Captain. 
KIRK: So are the people on Sherman's Planet. A little tribble doesn't eat much, a big tribble does. And these are growing. Jones, is this the ecological sabotage the Klingons are so mad about? 
SULU: Captain, the Klingons are coming back. 
KIRK: Speak of the devil. 
(McCoy enters) 
MCCOY: Jim, there's something about these tribbles. 
KIRK: Later, Bones. (pushes one nearly as big as himself off his chair) Mister Sulu, release the robot ship. We'll swing back and pick it up later. Deflector shields up. Stand by photon torpedoes. And all noncombatants off the Bridge.

Captain's log, supplemental. The Klingon ship under command of Captain Koloth is forcing us into a battle for custody of Cyrano Jones for reasons still unknown.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Contact in thirty seconds. 
KIRK: Ready photon torpedoes. Fire one. 
SULU: One fired. 
(The Klingons fire their stasis beam, destroying the torpedo and grabbing the Enterprise) 
SCOTT: That's done it. We're caught. 
UHURA: Message coming in, sir. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Ah, Captain Kirk. We'll take control of your ship now. 
KIRK: Not if I can help it. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: I want your prisoner. 
KIRK: Much as I hate to admit it, Captain Koloth, Cyrano Jones is a citizen of the Federation and entitled to Federation protection. I must, much as it pains me, refuse your request. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: It is not a request. Don't force me to take steps that we will both regret. 
KIRK: Close channel, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: With pleasure, sir. 
SPOCK: Aren't you going to sit down, sir? 
(The pink tribble on the Captain's chair is definitely bigger than Kirk now) 
KIRK: I think I'll stand.

[Klingon Bridge]

KOLOTH: Implement boarding plan C. 
KORAX: Yes, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Scott, we're going to implement Emergency defence plan B. 
SCOTT: Plan B, sir? 
KIRK: Mister Spock suggested it.

[Klingon ship]

(The boarding hatches open, and giant pink tribbles enter the Klingon ship. The Klingons are horrified)

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Emergency plan B complete, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Open hailing frequencies, Lieutenant. Captain Koloth, are you ready to release my ship? 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Release your ship? Kirk, you are monotonous. 
KIRK: You don't know yet, do you? 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Know what? 
KIRK: That we have immobilized your ship worse than you have immobilized ours. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: I doubt that. Our instruments report nothing except some undue transporter activity and (a tribble rolls behind him) Kirk? Tribbles? 
KIRK: Tribbles.

[Klingon Bridge]

KOLOTH: Kirk, Cyrano Jones took a Klingon genetic construct, an artificial creature from one of our planets. We must have it back. It was designed to be a tribble predator. We are prepared to go to war if we have to.

[Bridge]

KIRK: You must have others. 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: This was the first one, Kirk. We need it in order to grow others from it. We need it to get rid of the tribbles

[Klingon Bridge]

KOLOTH: Jones sold before they completely overrun the planet.

[Bridge]

KIRK: And that's all you want? 
KOLOTH [on viewscreen]: Jones is not that important.

[Klingon Bridge]

KOLOTH: We must have the glommer.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Oh, well, if that's all. Mister Scott, transport the glommer over to the Klingon ship. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

JONES: You can't do this to me. Under space salvage laws, he's mine. 
SCOTT: A planetary surface is not covered by space salvage laws. But if you want the little beastie that bad, Mister Jones, we'll transport you over with it. 
JONES: I withdraw my claim. 
(The glommer is transported, and the stasis beam is switched off)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Well, at least we can report the stasis field is not as effective a weapon as we thought. The power drain is too high and takes too long for the Klingon ship to recover to make it practical. 
SPOCK: Agreed, Captain. Tribbles appear to be a much more effective weapon.

[Corridor]

(A monster tribble is amongst the wheat containers) 
MCCOY: Jones' genetic engineering was very slipshod. Jim. He may have kept the tribbles from reproducing, but he didn't slow down their metabolism. You see, they're not just giant tribbles, they're colonies.

[Klingon ship]

KORAX: Captain, the engine room is filled with tribble. 
KOLOTH: Well, we can do something about that. (to the glommer) Attack. 
(But the door opens and it is full of one tribble. The glommer retreats) 
KOLOTH: He did it to us again! That tin-plated, overbearing excuse for a starship captain did it to us again. Blast that thing. 
(So they shoot the big tribble, which becomes an avalanche of little tribbles) 
KORAX: Any other orders, sir? 
KOLOTH: (up to his neck in tribbles) Yes. Don't do that again. Ever.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: A simple shot of neoethylene will fix everything. The tribble colonies will break down into their individual units with a slower metabolic rate. And these really will be safe tribbles now. 
JONES: Er, what about the Klingons? 
MCCOY: Well, unless they treat their tribbles too, that ship isn't going to be big enough for all of them. 
KIRK: (looking up a Jefferies tube) Say, you didn't get this one, Bones. 
MCCOY: Oh yes I did. 
KIRK: But it hasn't (then it did) Someday I'll learn. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. But you've got to admit, if we've got to have tribbles, it's best if all our tribbles are little ones.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


The Lorelei Signal
Stardate: 5483.7
Original Airdate: 29 Sep, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5483.7. The Enterprise is en route through an unfamiliar sector of space where a series of Earth Federation ships have disappeared mysteriously during the last a hundred and fifty years. Recent joint discussions with the Klingon and Romulan Empires have revealed that a starship has disappeared in this sector precisely every twenty seven point three four six star years.
[Bridge]

SPOCK: If my calculations are correct, Captain, we have twenty seconds to go. 
KIRK: Twenty seconds to what? That's what worries me. Lieutenant Uhura, place the ship on Yellow Alert. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. Yellow Alert. 
SPOCK: Five seconds. Four, three 
UHURA: All stations report Yellow Alert status, sir. Captain, I'm getting some sort of subspace radio signal. 
KIRK: Put it on ship's speaker. 
UHURA: It's more like music than a message. 
SPOCK: Captain, we are being probed. 
KIRK: From where? Can you trace it? 
SPOCK: The signal is coming from a star system twenty light years away. 
KIRK: Can you identify it? 
SPOCK: It is the Taurean system. A small star at the extreme edge of this sector. 
KIRK: That's a powerful signal to reach here from that great a distance. 
SCOTT: It seems to be calling us. 
KIRK: Strange. Yes, I get the same feeling myself. 
SPOCK: It does resemble a summons. 
UHURA: I find no resemblance to a summons, Captain. 
KIRK: Opinion noted. Set a course for the Taurean system, Lieutenant Arex. Warp factor seven. 
(Later) 
CHAPEL: You wanted me, Lieutenant? Are you all right? 
UHURA: I am. But I want you to observe the men here. It seemed to start when we picked up that signal, and it's gotten worse. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. Like a Vulcan marriage drum. I am experiencing audio-visual suggestion, Captain. 
KIRK: So am I. 
(They are 'seeing' women with white hair) 
KIRK: Dimensional visions. Any idea what's causing them, Spock? 
SPOCK: Logically, we must assume they are created by the probe. 
UHURA: Sir, what visions? We don't see anything. 
KIRK: Miss Chapel, you don't see anything, either? 
CHAPEL: No, sir. 
KIRK: Take a medical reading, Nurse. Lieutenant Uhura, call Doctor McCoy to the Bridge. 
UHURA: Sickbay, Doctor McCoy. Please report to the Bridge. Doctor McCoy? No response.

[McCoy's office]

(He's seeing lovely things too) 
MCCOY: Magnolias in blossom. Beautiful.

[Bridge]

UHURA: The signal's getting stronger, sir. 
KIRK: Re-scan your sensor readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Readings are still inconclusive. It is odd that only the men are affected, Captain. I suggest 
(A planet wobbles into view. and the men go all misty. The Enterprise enters orbit) 
SCOTT: Ship's log, stardate 5483.8. Engineering Officer Scott in command. We are in orbit around planet two in the Taurean system. Probes and sensors indicate there was once a vast civilisation here. Lovely. Lovely. However, life readings are sparse and concentrated. Captain Kirk is beaming down with a scouting party to investigate. 
UHURA: These figures just don't match up with Spock's. So far I count three sensor readings that are off.

[Planet surface]

(A building that looks like frozen flames) 
KIRK: Fantastic architecture. Only an incredibly advanced race could have built it. 
CARVER: You want all those routine readings, sir. 
KIRK: No, I don't think so, Carver. Spock will do it. 
MCCOY: There is something compelling about it. 
KIRK: Yes, I feel it too, Bones. 
SPOCK: Captain, the urgency of our feeling suggests visual compulsion. I advise remaining at a distance until I can determine the extent of its influence. The life forms are indicated in its centre. 
KIRK: There's no apparent danger, Spock. Let's go.

[Temple]

(The inner doors open to reveal a bevy of beautiful white-haired, blue-eyed women.) 
THEELA: They are here. 
ALL: Oh, such wondrous ones. They honour us. 
THEELA: I am Theela, the Head Female. Welcome, James Kirk, Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock. Welcome. 
(What, the redshirt is suddenly invisible? How rude.) 
SPOCK: The form is humanoid, but there are many internal differences. Their bodies appear to function on an unusual psychokinesis level. 
MCCOY: First time I ever admired a body function. 
KIRK: How do you know our names? 
THEELA: The Opto-aud revealed you to us. 
(She hums a note and a door slides back to reveal the Enterprise on a viewscreen, including images of the Bridge) 
SPOCK: Tonal control. Fascinating. 
THEELA: The Opto-aud will reveal whatever is asked, Mister Spock. We are grateful that you heard the signal, Captain. 
KIRK: The signal? A distress call, wasn't it? 
THEELA: I will explain its meaning later. We have prepared a feast to celebrate your presence.

Captain's log, stardate 5483.9. The beauty of this place is unequalled. It's the answer to all of man's dreams. Exquisite in every way. We're here to investigate, to investigate... The women radiate delight.

[Temple]

(The men are lounging on rugs, being entertained) 
MCCOY: These are the most beautiful women in the galaxy. But where are the men? 
THEELA: They occupy another compound. 
KIRK: That makes sense. 
WOMAN: Mister Spock. 
(She throws something to him, he fails to catch it. It hits his chest and he falls unconscious. Kirk tries to get up) 
KIRK: Spock 
(They all fall over) 
THEELA: Take them to the slumber chambers. They must rest. 
MCCOY: Probably that nectar. It's potent as Saurian brandy. 
(Theela sheds a single tear)

[Slumber chambers]

(The men are awake again, and wearing a strange circlet around their heads. McCoy seems older) 
MCCOY: Jim, Jim! 
(Kirk wakes on a huge four-poster bed, wearing a circlet. His face seems more lined than usual. He tries to remove the circlet and fails)

[Science lab]

CHAPEL: Results of every scan run by the women science teams. If there is an answer, it's here. 
COMPUTER: Computer on. 
CHAPEL: Summation of medical, biological, astrophysical scans. 
COMPUTER: Working. Probe directed at ship from planet surface is severely enervating to humanoid males. Exposure causes increasing weakness. Possibly to point of death. 
UHURA: Lieutenant Uhura to Security Officer Davison. 
DAVISON [OC]: Davison here. 
UHURA: I want an all-woman security team on every transporter immediately. No one is to transport down to the planet unless it is on my order. 
DAVISON [OC]: Aye, aye, Lieutenant. 
CHAPEL: What are you doing? 
UHURA: Taking command of this ship.

[Temple]

(The landing party are in front of Theela, sitting on a raised throne) 
SPOCK: We must return to our duties aboard ship. 
KIRK: Yes. Duties. That's it. Duties. I have 
THEELA: You cannot leave, Mister Spock. You are needed here. Soon, all the men on your ship will feel as you do. They are all needed, and they will join us. 
KIRK: We must go. 
THEELA: Obstruct them. 
(The women easily overpower the men and throw them onto the cushions)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: (singing) I dream of ... the gala lads ... can I trow (really can't make much out) 
UHURA: Mister Scott, as senior Lieutenant, I'm taking responsibility for the safety of this ship. 
SCOTT: Very thoughtful of you, love. 
UHURA: Ship's log, supplemental. Lieutenant Uhura recording. Due to Chief Engineering Officer Scott's euphoric state of mind, I am assuming command of the Enterprise, I accept full responsibility for my action. A detailed account will be recorded later. Nurse Chapel, until further notice, you will act as Chief Medical Officer. 
CHAPEL: Yes, Lieutenant.

[Temple]

KIRK: They've gone. 
SPOCK: Yes. Your medikit, Doctor. It may contain something which will help us. 
MCCOY: I wonder why they let me keep it. 
SPOCK: Perhaps they saw no practical use in it. 
MCCOY: Cortropine. Could help. It's a strong stimulant. 
KIRK: Go ahead. 
(At the door) 
KIRK: Locked. 
SPOCK: (with a medical scanner) If the lock is magnetised, this may disrupt its field. 
(The door opens enough for them to get out. Then Theela enters) 
THEELA: Assistance! Assistance!

[Planet surface]

KIRK: The urn. It's the only place. 
(The men climb into a giant sculptured urn to hide from the women) 
THEELA: This way. 
(As the women get close, the circlets on their heads glow) 
WOMAN: They are not here, Theela.

[Urn]

THEELA [OC]: Come. They might have returned to where they landed. 
KIRK: The headbands. Look at them. 
SPOCK: I have noticed that their glow diminishes when the women are not present. They could be polarised conductors which transfer our vital energy to the bodies of the women. 
KIRK: You mean they're actually draining our life forces? 
SPOCK: That would account for our rapid aging, Captain. And our weakness. If you recall, the women seemed listless at first. But as our strength has failed, they have become more energetic and vital. 
KIRK: How long do we have, Spock? 
SPOCK: We seem to be aging ten years per day, Captain. 
MCCOY: Ten years? In four days, we'll be dead! 
KIRK: And useless to them. Theela said the other men of the crew would join us here. They'll be lured into the same trap. We've got to contact the ship. 
SPOCK: I have retained more strength than any of you. My internal structure is different, Captain, my life span longer. It is wiser if I go to the temple to try and find the communicators and contact the ship.

[Temple]

(There is no one around, so Spock hums the note and turns on the Opto-aud) 
SPOCK: The equipment belonging to the men of the Enterprise, where is it? 
(The screen shows it to be in a drawer under the throne) 
SPOCK: Spock to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise. 
(He has been discovered) 
SPOCK: Request rescue party. All-female. Repeat. All-female. All 
(He collapses)

Ship's log, supplemental. Lieutenant Uhura commanding. We have assembled an all-female rescue party in # accordance with Mister Spock's request.

[Temple]

(Uhura and Chapel beam down with four security women) 
THEELA: Greetings. I am Theela. Head Female of this compound. 
UHURA: Lieutenant Uhura of the Starship Enterprise. We're here to locate Captain Kirk. 
THEELA: Return to your ship. You are not wanted here. 
UHURA: Until we find Captain Kirk, we will not leave. 
(Theela sends her troops in) 
UHURA: Phasers on stun. Fire! 
(The women drop like stones. Uhura shoots Theela herself) 
UHURA: Search the temple. Parties of two.

[Slumber chambers]

UHURA: No sign of them anywhere. 
(From his bed, Spock sends a telepathic message) 
SPOCK [OC]: Miss Chapel. Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Wait. 
UHURA: What is it? 
CHAPEL: I heard Spock's voice. 
SPOCK [OC]: Christine. 
CHAPEL: It is Spock. There must be a panel somewhere. 
(They find it) 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock! 
UHURA: Spock, what happened? 
(But he is incoherent)

[Urn]

(It has started to rain) 
KIRK: We've got to get out of here.

[Sickbay]

(Chapel gets the circlet off the old, wizened Spock. 
CHAPEL: Spock, Oh, Spock. 
SPOCK: Instruct female engineer to divert ship's energy into deflector shields. Block probe. 
CHAPEL: We tried that. 
SPOCK: Use all ship's energy. Everything channelled to the shields. Hurry, Christine.

[Temple]

(The stunned women are coming round) 
UHURA: Release Captain Kirk and his men or we will destroy your temple. 
THEELA: Wait! I will tell you everything. 
(She turns on the Opto-aud) 
THEELA: The past. Reveal it. 
(Images appear - first male and female) 
THEELA: This is the race from whom we are descended. They came to this planet when our homeworld began to die. They built this place and all surrounding it. They did not know this planet drains humanoid energy. But the women's bodies developed a glandular secretion, enabling them to survive and to manipulate certain areas of the males' brains, influence their emotional senses. Ultimately, it drained the men, caused them to weaken and die. 
(Meanwhile, the urn is filling up with water, and the men can't get out) 
THEELA: To survive, we must vitalise each twenty seven years of your time. 
WOMAN: Instead, we are eternal prisoners. We neither age nor die. We are unable even to bear children. 
UHURA: What about Captain Kirk and the others? Can the Opto-aud locate them? 
THEELA: We shall see. The men of the Enterprise, reveal them. 
(It does) 
UHURA: They're drowning! Where are they? 
THEELA: The nearest water accumulation is many cusecs from here. 
UHURA: That looks like a pool or a tub. 
THEELA: It is the urn in the garden.

[Planet surface]

UHURA: Phasers on setting one. Fire. 
(The urn is blown to bits and the men washed out, unconscious)

[Sickbay]

(Chapel presses some buttons, and a golden glow appears around her patients) 
CHAPEL: No results, Captain. We've tried everything we know. 
SPOCK: Perhaps the transporter is the key. 
MCCOY: Key to what? 
SPOCK: Our restoration. It holds the molecular pattern of our original bodies when we beamed down to the planet. 
KIRK: Spock. Can the transporter be programmed to re-pattern us as we were? 
SPOCK: Possibly. But the odds against us are ninety nine point seven to one.

[Planet surface]

(The four old men are beamed down) 
SPOCK: We are on the surface, Mister Scott. Reprogram the transporter as previously directed.

[Transporter room]

CHAPEL: But this has never been done before. Suppose it fails? 
SCOTT: Their patterns'll break up, scatter in space. Transporter reprogrammed, Mister Spock. 
KIRK [OC]: Beam us up, Scotty. 
UHURA: Scotty, we're losing them! 
(The four figures finally materialise) 
KIRK: Did it work? 
UHURA: You're more handsome than ever.

[Temple]

(Theela destroys the transmitter) 
THEELA: Tell Captain Kirk we have kept the agreement. 
UHURA: A crew of women will bring a ship back. You'll be transported to the first suitable planet. 
THEELA: How quickly will we become as other women? 
UHURA: Doctor McCoy says it should only take a few months. 
THEELA: A life of hope. New learning. Perhaps love. Oh, it is a much better future than immortality.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


One Of Our Planets Is Missing
Stardate: 5371.3
Original Airdate: 22 Sep, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5371.3. A huge cosmic cloud has been reported moving into the outer fringe of our galaxy. Nothing like it has ever been seen before. Starfleet Command has sent the Enterprise to investigate as we're the only vessel in the vicinity of the phenomenon. Our present position is in the Pallas Fourteen system, which contains Mantilles, the most remote inhabited planet in the entire Federation.
[Bridge]

SULU: We will intercept the cloud in the vicinity of Alondra, the outermost planet, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, we are now approaching sensor range of the cloud. 
KIRK: Readings? 
SPOCK: It seems to be of irregular shape, some eight hundred thousand kilometres across and about half that in depth. 
AREX: It's immense. Twice the diameters of Saturn, Jupiter and Neptune together! 
KIRK: Put up our present position, Lieutenant Arex. 
AREX: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Reading, Spock? 
SPOCK: This is very curious, Captain. It computes as a strange combination of matter and energy. 
SULU: Captain, look. 
AREX: Captain, Alondra has disappeared from navigation scan. 
UHURA: The cloud could have come between us and the planet. 
SPOCK: No, Lieutenant, the cloud has engulfed Alondra. Captain, the planet seems to be breaking up. Its mass is definitely growing smaller. 
KIRK: Spock, is it possible the cloud consumes planets? 
SPOCK: It seems a logical assumption, Captain. 
SULU: Sir, the cloud is changing course. 
KIRK: That's impossible. 
AREX: The course change is verified, sir. The cloud is now moving directly toward the inhabited planet. 
UHURA: But if it continues on that course 
KIRK: Mantilles will die. Mister Sulu, increase speed to warp eight. Push it to the limit. 
SULU: Yes, sir.

Captain's log, supplemental. At warp eight, we will intercept the cloud before it reaches the inhabited planet Mantilles. But we are uncertain what we can do to stop a matter-energy cloud which measures thousands of times more than our vessel.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Jim, if we can't stop it, millions of people will die. 
SPOCK: Perhaps more, Doctor. If planet annihilation is part of this thing's nature, it might seek them out as instinctively as an amoeba seeks out food. It may not consume only planets, but also stars. We do not know yet whether it has any selective ability, but it could be a thread to every planet in our galaxy. 
KIRK: Bones, I need an expert psychological opinion. Do we dare tell the people on Mantilles, try to save a few who could get away? 
MCCOY: How much time do they have? 
AREX: Four hours, ten minutes, sir. 
MCCOY: It's certain there'd be planetwide panic. 
KIRK: Blind panic. 
SPOCK: On the other hand, notifying them may still save some small fraction of the population, Captain. 
MCCOY: Who's the governor of Mantilles, Jim? 
KIRK: Bob Wesley. He left Starfleet for the governorship. He's no hysteric. 
MCCOY: Then tell him. 
SULU: Coming up on the cloud, sir. ETA five minutes, ten seconds. 
KIRK: Thanks, Bones. Lieutenant Uhura, send a priority one call to Governor Wesley on Mantilles. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, I'm getting unusual readings on the chemical identity sensors. 
KIRK: What kind? 
SPOCK: Elements unknown in our periodic tables, Captain. I'm of the opinion this cloud has come from outside our galaxy. 
SULU: Captain. 
KIRK: Evasive action. 
AREX: Aye, sir. 
(But the cloud wraps tendrils around the Enterprise) 
KIRK: Reverse full power. 
SULU: Full reverse, sir. 
MCCOY: It's still got us. 
SPOCK: The streamers are a combination of koinoenergy, almost an ambiplasma with an unusually powerful attraction force. 
KIRK: Prepare to fire all phasers into cloud mass. 
SULU: Locked on. Phasers ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
SULU: Firing. No effect, Captain
SPOCK: The cloud appeared to absorb the phaser energy, Captain. 
(The ship is shaken) 
MCCOY: We're floating inside the cloud. 
UHURA: All decks report considerable shaking up, but no damage, sir. 
SULU: Captain, objects approaching on the bow. 
KIRK: Deflector shields on. 
AREX: Shields up and operating, sir. 
SULU: More objects approaching aft, sir. 
KIRK: Analysis, Spock? 
SPOCK: The objects are some form of highly charged gaseous antimatter. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, the power drain on the shields is too heavy to hold for any length of time. 
KIRK [OC]: I know, Scotty.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Scotty, prepare the shields for an antimatter charge. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. Engineering out. 
SULU: Antimatter charge ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
(More blobs approach the ship) 
KIRK: Double the charge. 
SULU: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
(The blobs disappear) 
KIRK: Well, Spock, any conclusions? 
SPOCK: Only the beginning of a theory, Captain. It is possible this cloud in which we are entrapped is a living thing. The cloud is alive. Yes, Captain, its components appear similar to those found in living organisms. 
KIRK: Bones, any opinion? 
MCCOY: There's some resemblance. I don't know how much we can depend on it. But I'll tell you one thing. We have to get out of this area. Those mists out there are acting something like a macromorphase enzyme. If the shields don't stay up, the hull will be corroded and we'll all be broken down into nice digestible particles. 
SPOCK: I am inclined to agree with the Doctor, Captain. The mass of the planet Alondra has been steadily growing smaller since we've been in here. 
UHURA: Captain, I have a subspace radio message coming in from Governor Wesley of Mantilles. 
KIRK: Transfer it to my quarters. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, use your scanners to assemble a diagram of the cloud's composition and feed it to the library computer.

[Kirk's quarters]

WESLEY [on monitor]: Three and a half hours, Jim. That's not enough. Even if I had the ships available to totally evacuate the planet. 
KIRK: You have time to save some people, Bob. 
WESLEY [on monitor]: That won't be long enough either, but it'll have to do. 
KIRK: How are you going to choose? 
WESLEY [on monitor]: There is no choice, Jim. We'll save the children.

[Bridge]

KIRK: In three hours and twenty minutes the cloud will reach Mantilles. Millions of people will die. I need your help, gentlemen. Your analyses? 
SPOCK: If we assume the cloud is a living being, we must also assume it needs some kind of food to sustain itself. 
KIRK: Agreed. Judging from the disappearance of Alondra, the cloud lives on the energy it converts from the planets it consumes. 
SPOCK: Exactly. It is like a huge bull grazing here and there in the pasture of the universe. 
KIRK: What about those blobs, Bones? 
MCCOY: I think they perform the same function as teeth. They break up the larger chunks of matter for digestion. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, let's see what the scanners have come up with on the cloud's composition. 
(A vaguely familiar shaped object with bilateral symmetry and a central dense core. The subtly makes my brain hurt.) 
KIRK: It seems to have some sort of anatomy. Arex, where are we on that chart? 
AREX: Posting Enterprise position, sir. 
KIRK: The opening where we were drawn in seems to have closed. But there's another opening up there on top. 
MCCOY: If this thing does have some kind of digestive system, we don't stand much of a chance of making it that far. 
AREX: Three hours, five minutes until the cloud reaches Mantilles, sir. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Arex. Since we appear to have only one way out, we're going to take it. Mister Sulu, takes us to that central core area. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: And if this thing does have a stomach, we just might be able to give it enough indigestion to make it turn away from Mantilles. 
(Later) 
SULU: We've reached the entrance to the central core, Captain. 
MCCOY: What do we do now, knock? 
(Enterprise shakes) 
KIRK: No need, Bones. Here we go. 
(The Enterprise is sucked in to an area with bits protruding from walls, and the blobs following get blown up) 
UHURA: What are those things? 
MCCOY: I think we're in what corresponds to the small intestine. Those things growing out of the wall would be similar to villi. 
KIRK: Villi? 
MCCOY: The human small intestine is lined with millions of them, to absorb nutrients into the body. 
(Another explosion) 
SPOCK: Captain, those villi are antimatter. It the Enterprise touches one of them 
KIRK: We'll explode. Mister Sulu, keep the deflectors up at all costs. 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Incredible. They're destroyed on contact with the matter this thing takes in and then they regenerate immediately. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott to Bridge. 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty. 
SCOTT [OC]: Keeping the deflectors this high

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Is putting an enormous strain on the engines, Captain. Especially the antimatter. What with the maximum power demands and all, the reserve is falling fast.

[Bridge]

KIRK: How much time do we have? 
SCOTT [OC]: Twenty one minutes, sir.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: But if the indicator goes below two anti-kilos, the engines won't regenerate.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Thank you, Mister Scott. Mister Arex, try to make your way through to the opening on the other side. 
AREX: Yes, sir. 
(Enterprise glides serenely along the jagged canyon) 
SULU: I can't hold it on course, sir. We're using all power. 
KIRK: Increase deflector shields to maximum. 
AREX: Screens to maximum, sir. 
(The ship slows, and seems to drift in a current)

Captain's log, supplemental. The Enterprise has only fifteen minutes left before her power is drained and we are left helpless.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: If we don't stop the power drain right now, that'll be the end of us. 
KIRK: And if we do stop, we'll be drawn into one of the villi and the ship will explode. 
SCOTT: Captain, you said that villi are antimatter. If we could get a piece of it, I could put it in the antimatter engine and it would regenerate. We'd have enough power for the engines and the shields to go on maximum again. 
KIRK: We need both the matter and the antimatter engines regenerated. 
SCOTT: Matter's no problem. We could beam aboard some of the planet chunks out there. And we can cut a piece of the antimatter villi with the tractor beams and transport it aboard like that. 
KIRK: Bring it aboard? If the antimatter touches the inside of the ship or any of us, we'll be blown to bits. 
SCOTT: I can rig a force field box that'll hold the villi suspended in the centre. Then I can take it into the antimatter nacelle, put it into the regenerating chamber and release the forcefield by remote control.

[Transporter room]

(So a piece of villi is cut and Kyle transports it into Scott's box) 
KIRK: Scotty, we've got ten minutes left. 
SCOTT: The force field is holding. Let's go.

[Antimatter nacelle]

(Things are spluttering due to lack of fuel) 
SCOTT: Well, that gives us two minutes. All right, Gabler, open it. (They push the box in) Close it. 
(The spluttering stops) 
KIRK: Scotty, you've just given the Enterprise and Mantilles a chance to live. 
SCOTT: Thank you, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Situation, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: The cloud is now only forty two minutes, fourteen seconds from Mantilles, Captain. And we have ascertained an important fact. This being does have a brain. 
KIRK: Intelligent? 
SPOCK: Impossible to say at this moment, Captain. It has made only one action which might be interpreted as intelligent. It changed course from Alondra toward Mantilles. But that could have been an involuntary response to the sensing of food. 
KIRK: Where is the brain located? 
SPOCK: That irregularly shaped object at the top of the core emanates considerable electrical activity. 
MCCOY: It's pretty certain to be the brain, Jim. The functioning of the brain is basically electric. 
KIRK: If we can reach it before the cloud gets to Mantilles, we might be able to save the planet. We'll use the photon torpedoes to destroy the brain. 
SPOCK: Captain, this is a living creature. Starfleet regulations 
KIRK: I know the regulations against the killing of intelligent life forms, Mister Spock. But we don't know this life form is intelligent. And we do know the people on Mantilles are doomed if we don't stop it. If I have to be a judge, I decide in favour of saving Mantilles.

Captain's log, stardate 5372.0. Spock and Uhura are using our sensors to prepare a detailed chart so we may determine targets for our photon torpedoes.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Am I doing the right thing, Bones? Once, I said, man rose above primitiveness by vowing 'I will not kill today.' 
MCCOY: But you can't let this thing destroy over eighty million lives, either. 
SPOCK: Captain, I have completed the analysis of the target area. Unfortunately, the brain is so vast, our entire offensive armament will not assure its destruction. However, the brain could be completely destroyed if we convert the entire ship to energy, aimed at the brain's cortex, and expend the energy in one mortal strike. 
MCCOY: That sounds like you're telling us to blow up the ship. 
SPOCK: I believe that is what I just said, Doctor. 
KIRK: Your figures are specific and absolutely correct, of course? You're sure it will do the job? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. Quite sure. 
KIRK: Kirk to Engineering. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering. Scott here.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Mister Scott, prepare the self-destruct mechanism in the Engineering core.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Computer control will be on the Bridge when it's time to trigger it. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. 
UHURA: Incoming message, sir. It's Governor Wesley of Mantilles. 
KIRK: Put it on the viewscreen, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. Go ahead, Governor. 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: Jim. 
KIRK: Bob. Is the evacuation proceeding? 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: As best it can. There was some hysteria at the beginning, but most agreed to let the children be taken off first. But it's only five thousand children out of eighty two million people. 
KIRK: I know. 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: We can see the cloud approaching, Jim. 
SULU: Thirty one minutes and four seconds to Mantilles, sir. 
KIRK: Bob, where's Katie? 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: Here, with me. 
KIRK: Don't worry, Bon. She'll be all right. Goodbye. 
WESLEY [on viewscreen]: Goodbye, Jim. 
MCCOY: Who's Katie? 
KIRK: His daughter. She's eleven. Spock, is there any way we could establish whether or not it is definitely intelligent? Perhaps a Vulcan mind touch. 
SPOCK: It would require physical contact, which is impossible, Captain. But I may be able to reach out with my mind. If we focus our sensors onto the cloud's synaptic electrical impulses, the input could be routed to the ship's computer for analysis into thought. 
UHURA: I can link in the universal translator and put it on the audio system from here. 
KIRK: Can you do it in time? 
SPOCK: It is impossible to calculate, Captain. There are too many unknown factors. I can only try to accomplish the link. No more. 
SULU: Twenty six minutes exactly to Mantilles, sir. 
KIRK: All right, Spock. Get at it.

Captain's log, stardate 5372.1. The cloud will reach Mantilles in seven minutes. Spock has been working on the mechanics of reaching the cloud's thoughts, but I doubt if there's any time left. And even if we do establish contact, can we communicate with it and persuade it not to kill?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The procedure is ready, sir. 
KIRK: Thank you, Scotty. 
SPOCK: Ready, Captain. [OC] Listen to me. Listen to me. You are not alone here, there is someone else. Listen to me. 
CLOUD [OC]: What? 
SPOCK [OC]: You are not alone here, there is someone else. Listen to me. Listen to me. 
CLOUD [OC]: What you? 
SPOCK [OC]: I am another being. 
CLOUD [OC]: Being? Where? 
SPOCK [OC]: I am inside you. 
CLOUD [OC]: Inside? Explain. Within me? 
SPOCK [OC]: I am very small. And there are many of me. We are in a spaceship within you. 
CLOUD [OC]: Explain. 
SPOCK [OC]: A small thing which holds us all. 
CLOUD [OC]: Within me? 
SPOCK [OC]: Within you. 
CLOUD [OC]: Explain. 
SPOCK [OC]: We came to think to you. You consumed us. You thought we were food. 
CLOUD [OC]: Why? Why you think to me?
SPOCK [OC]: Many of us live on the things you consume. 
CLOUD [OC]: Things I consume? 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes. Many of us are on the thing near you now. Do not consume it. 
CLOUD [OC]: Explain. 
SPOCK [OC]: The spherical thing ahead of you, the matter you intend to consume, sense it closely. 
KIRK: How near is Mantilles, Mister Arex? 
AREX: The cloud will envelope it in three minutes, twenty seconds, sir. 
CLOUD [OC]: Perceive many somethings. So small. 
SPOCK [OC]: They are beings. Alive, like you. They will all die if you consume that thing. 
CLOUD [OC]: Too small. 
SPOCK [OC]: Explain. 
CLOUD [OC]: I am small. Some things I perceive too small. Not alive beings. 
SPOCK [OC]: Listen to me. I'm going to come into your thoughts. And at the same time, you will come into mine. 
CLOUD [OC]: Necessary? 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes. Very. 
CLOUD [OC]: Proceed. 
(Spock stands up and looks around) 
KIRK: Bones, he's the cloud. Its thoughts are here. Don't move. Lieutenant, use the library computer. Put some views of the Earth onto that screen. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: This is the thing we come from. Lieutenant, this is what I want. 
(Images of the ground from above, cities, children playing, countryside. And the clock ticks down to 1) 
SCOTT: Awaiting your order, Captain. 
KIRK: A few seconds, Scotty. We have to give Spock that much. 
(Spock sits down again as the clock goes to zero) 
MCCOY: Jim, if we don't self-destruct now all those people will die. 
SULU: The cloud has stopped, sir. 
CLOUD [OC]: Comprehend. Not desire to consume other beings. 
KIRK: Quiet. 
SPOCK [OC]: There are many things in our galaxy like the one you just perceived. 
CLOUD [OC]: Truth? 
SPOCK [OC]: Truth. You do not desire to consume other beings. It would be best if you return to your origin. The way you came. Will you do this? 
CLOUD [OC]: A long journey. 
SPOCK [OC]: Will you return? 
CLOUD [OC]: Will return to origin place. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, contact Governor Wesley. Tell him to bring his ships back. 
UHURA: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Spock, you did it! The cloud is leaving. 
SPOCK: I believe so, Captain. There is a grid at the top of the brain core. It uses it to sense. We can escape the cloud through it. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, let's get out of here, through that grid. 
SULU: Yes, sir! 
KIRK: Spock, what did you perceive? 
SPOCK: The wonders of the universe, Captain. Incredible, completely incredible.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Yesteryear
Stardate: 5373.4
Original Airdate: 15 Sep, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5373.4. We are in orbit around the planet of the time vortex, the focus of all the timelines of our galaxy. Our mission is to assist a team of historians in the investigation of Federation history.
[Guardian of Forever]

(At the big rock doughnut in the middle of the ruins, McCoy, a woman with a purple streak in her hair, and a giant yellow bird are waiting) 
ALEEK: The travellers are returning. 
GREY: Cease review. 
(Kirk and Erikson the historiant appear) 
KIRK: What a trip, Bones. Orion, at the dawn of its civilisation. Even just observing, not touching anything for fear of changing some piece of history. What's the matter? Bones? 
(Spock is standing in the middle of the Guardian) 
MCCOY: Who's he, Jim? 
KIRK: What do you mean, who's he? You know Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: Afraid I don't, Jim. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Enterprise. 
KIRK: Beam up. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

(Four figures are beamed aboard) 
SCOTT: Captain, I was expecting there to be one of the historians with you. But a Vulcan? 
KIRK: Explain yourself, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Sir? 
KIRK: I don't know what's going on, but the first officer of this ship will be treated with respect. 
(An Andorian enters) 
THELIN: Captain, I assure you no one has ever treated me otherwise. 
KIRK: Who are you? 
MCCOY: Oh, I thought sure you'd know Thelin by now, Jim. He's been your first officer for five years. 
SPOCK: Captain, I have come to the conclusion that this is not a game. 
KIRK: No, but if it's reality, what happened?

Captain's log, supplemental. When we were in the time vortex, something appears to have changed the present as we know it. No one aboard recognises Mister Spock. The only answer is that the past was somehow altered.

[Briefing room]

ERIKSON: Nothing. I can't find one thing we did when we were in the vortex that could possibly have affected the future. 
KIRK: But something was changed. 
SPOCK: It seems, Captain, I am the only one affected. The mission, the ship, the crew, except for myself, remain the same. 
KIRK: But I know who you are, and no one else aboard does. While we were in Orion's past, the time revision that took place here didn't affect me. Kirk here. 
BATES [on monitor]: Sir, we've checked the Starfleet records Commander Thelin asked for. 
KIRK: Your findings? 
BATES [on monitor]: There is no Vulcan named Spock serving with the Starfleet in any capacity. 
THELIN: Did you also research the Vulcan family history requested? 
BATES [on monitor]: Yes, sir. I can relay that to your screen. (showing relevant images) Sarek of Vulcan. Ambassador to seventeen Federation planets in the past thirty years. 
SPOCK: That is not correct. 
KIRK: It is in this case. 
SPOCK: I wish to ask a question. What of Sarek's family, his wife and son? 
BATES [OC]: Amanda, wife of Sarek. Born on Earth as Amanda Grayson. The couple separated after the death of their son. (on monitor) The wife was killed in a shuttle accident at Lunaport on her way home to Earth. Ambassador Sarek has not remarried. 
SPOCK: My mother. The son, what was his name and age when he died? 
BATES [on monitor]: Spock. Age seven.

[Guardian of Forever]

KIRK: If we didn't change anything while we were in the time vortex, someone else must have. Was the Guardian in use while we were gone? 
GREY: Yes, but it was nothing unusual. We were scanning recent Vulcan history. 
SPOCK: What time period? 
GREY: Twenty to thirty Vulcan years past. 
KIRK: Was there any notation on the death of Ambassador Sarek's son? 
ALEEK: Yes. The boy is recorded as dying during the maturity test. 
SPOCK: The kahs-wan, a survival test traditional for young males. 
ALEEK: The date was 
SPOCK: The twentieth day of Tasmeen. 
THELIN: How do you know this? 
SPOCK: That was the day my cousin saved my life in the desert when I was attacked by a wild animal. 
KIRK: This cousin, what was his name? 
SPOCK: I do not recall clearly. I was very young. He called himself Selek. He was visiting us, but I never saw him after that. 
KIRK: Spock, did Selek look like you do now? 
SPOCK: I believe so, Captain. And I know what you're thinking. It was I who saved myself that other time. 
KIRK: But this time, you were in Orion's past with us when the historians had the time vortex replay Vulcan history. You couldn't be in two places at once, so you died as a boy. Guardian! Did you hear that? 
GUARDIAN: I hear all. 
KIRK: Is it possible for Spock to return to Vulcan and repair the timeline that has been broken so all is the same as before? 
GUARDIAN: It is possible if no other major factor is changed. 
SPOCK: I do not remember everything. There is a vague memory from a child's point of view, but the details are not clear. 
KIRK: You have to remember, for you and your mother to live. 
SPOCK: Yes. I will need a Vulcan desert soft suit and boots, and a small selection of streetwear circa 8877 Vulcan years. The carry bag should be of the same period. 
KIRK: You've got it. I'll order the wardrobe section to prepare it now. 
THELIN: This change in the timeline will put you in my place, yet I am not aggrieved. 
SPOCK: Andorians are not known for their charity. 
THELIN: True. A warrior race has few sympathies, but one we do possess is for family. In your time plane, you will live and so will your mother. That is valuable. Live long and prosper in your world, Commander Spock. 
SPOCK: And you in yours, Commander Thelin. 
(The carry bag is beamed down) 
KIRK: Nice to know the crew is efficient in this time plane, too. Spock. 
SPOCK: I wish to visit the planet Vulcan, thirty years past, the month of Tasmeen. Location, near the city of ShirKahr. 
GUARDIAN: The time and place are ready to receive you.

Personal log, stardate 5373.5, subjective time. I have returned to the past in an attempt to restore the future. I am home and I had almost forgotten its beauty.

[Vulcan]

(Spock watches a group of children verbally bullying another) 
BOY: Earther! Barbarian! Emotional Earther! You're a Terran, Spock. You could never be a true Vulcan. 
Y SPOCK: That is not true. My father 
BOY 2: Your father brought shame to Vulcan. He married a human. 
(Young Spock lunges at him, but they dodge him easily) 
BOY: You haven't even mastered a simple Vulcan neck pinch yet, Earther. 
SAREK: My apologies, visitor. I regret you were witness to that unfortunate display of emotion on the part of my son. 
SPOCK: In the family, all is silence. No more will be said of it. Live long and prosper, Sarek of Vulcan. 
SAREK: Peace and long life. You are of my family? 
SPOCK: My name is Selek, an humble cousin descended of T'Pel and Sasak. I am journeying to the family shrine to honour our gods. 
SAREK: You have a long way to go. Will you break your journey with us for a while, Cousin? 
SPOCK: I am honoured. Is something wrong, Cousin? 
SAREK: No, no. It was only that it seemed I know you. 
SPOCK: A family resemblance to our forefathers, no doubt. 
SAREK: No doubt. Well, come then. Allow me to welcome you to my home.

[Courtyard]

(Sarek calls Spock away from his enormous pet sehlat - a big furry thing with large fangs) 
SAREK: Spock. Spock, being Vulcan means following disciplines and philosophies that are difficult and demanding of both mind and body. 
Y SPOCK: Yes, father. 
SAREK: You constantly display your emotions. You have even been seen fighting in the street. 
Y SPOCK: Yes, father. 
SAREK: The time draws near when you will have to decide whether you will follow Vulcan or human philosophy. Vulcan offers much. No war, no crime. Order, logic and control in place of raw emotions and instinct. Once on the path you choose, you cannot turn back. 
Y SPOCK: Yes, father.

[Sarek's house]

AMANDA: I hope you were not disturbed by my son's behaviour, Selek. 
SPOCK: No, my lady Amanda. Any child has much to learn. My young cousin has a more difficult road to travel than others. 
AMANDA: You seem to understand him better than my husband. 
SPOCK: It is difficult for a father to bear less than perfection in his son. Spock will find his way. 
AMANDA: I hops so. I respect Vulcan and all its traditions, but it is a demanding life. 
SPOCK: The boy goes through the kahs-wan ordeal soon, does he not? 
AMANDA: Next month. 
SPOCK: But tomorrow is the twentieth day of Tasmeen. 
AMANDA: Yes. Is something wrong? 
SPOCK: I seem to have lost track of time.

[Courtyard]

SAREK: Soon you will undergo your test of adulthood in the desert. To survive for ten days without food, water or weapon on Vulcan's Forge will demand more of you than anything ever has. To fail once is not a disgrace for others. If you fail, there will be those who will call you a coward all your life. I do not expect you to fail. 
Y SPOCK: What if I do, father? 
SAREK: There is no need to ask that question. You will not disappoint me. Not if your heart and spirit are Vulcan. 
(Sarek leaves, and young Spock goes to his pet) 
Y SPOCK: I-Chaya. what if I'm not a true Vulcan like they say?

[Bedroom]

SPOCK: (dictating) Personal log, stardate 5373.9, subjective time. The timeline seems to have changed again. Yet I do not believe I have done anything to disrupt it. My memory is quite clear regarding the date my cousin saved my life, and it is tomorrow. The kahs-wan ordeal is an ancient rite of warrior days. When Vulcans turned to logic, they reasoned they must maintain the tests of courage and strength to keep pure logic from making them weak and helpless.

[Courtyard]

(Young Spock has snuck out, and his pet wants to go with him) 
Y SPOCK: No, I-Chaya, this is my own test. I have to do it alone. Stay. 
(But the sehlat bounds after him anyway)

[Bedroom]

SPOCK: Of course. I should have remembered. It wasn't the actual kahs-wan ordeal.

[Desert]

Y SPOCK: I-Chaya, go home. You are too old and too fat for this. (whimper) That's how you always get around mother, but it does not work with me. Go home, I-Chaya.

Personal log. The boy Spock should be moving toward the Llangon Mountains. He, I had much to prove to myself. The personal ordeal upon which I embarked was meant to determine the course my life would take.

[Sarek's house]

AMANDA: Sarek, our son and the visitor are gone. 
SAREK: This cousin, Selek, something strange about him. 
AMANDA: You don't think he'd harm Spock? 
SAREK: I don't know, Amanda. I will notify the authorities and ask them to initiate a search.

[Mountains]

(Up in the mountains, I-Chaya is protecting young Spock by taking on a green cat-like predator for him. But the cat kills the Sehlat. Then Spock leaps on the cat's back and neck-pinches it) 
Y SPOCK: I-Chaya, good boy. 
SPOCK: I suggest we move away from this area before the le-matya regains consciousness. 
Y SPOCK: Thank you for helping me and I-Chaya. 
SPOCK: It was my duty, Spock. 
Y SPOCK: Mother says you should always say thank you. 
SPOCK: The lady Amanda is known for her graciousness. 
Y SPOCK: Do you think I'll ever be able to do that neck pinch as well as you? 
SPOCK: I dare say you will. Come now. 
(They walk on) 
Y SPOCK: You followed me. Why? 
SPOCK: I suspected you would go. You are worried about the kahs-wan ordeal. 
Y SPOCK: I had to see if I could do it. A personal test. I cannot fail. 
SPOCK: That is your father's wish? 
Y SPOCK: Yes, and my mother's. They, they confuse me. Father wants me to do things his way, and Mother says I should. But then she goes 
SPOCK: She is a human woman, with strong emotion and sensitivities. She embarrasses you with those traits, and you are afraid when you see them in yourself. 
Y SPOCK: How did you know? 
SPOCK: There is some human blood in my family line. It is not fatal. What you do not yet understand, Spock, is that Vulcans do not lack emotion. It is only that ours is controlled. Logic offers a serenity humans seldom experience in full. We have emotions but we deal with them and do not let them control us. 
(I-Chaya collapses with a whimper) 
Y SPOCK: I-Chaya! 
SPOCK: The le-matya struck him with its poison claws in the fight. 
Y SPOCK: Is he dying? 
SPOCK: Yes.

Personal log. Something unexpected has again occurred. The sehlat, I-Chaya, was struck by the poisonous claws of the le-matya he fought. He is dying, unless we can find a healer, and soon.

[Mountains]

SPOCK: We cannot get him back to the city to a healer. He is too large to move. 
Y SPOCK: Then what? 
SPOCK: You are a Vulcan. What is the logical thing to do? 
Y SPOCK: I can bring a healer here. 
SPOCK: It is a long journey across the desert. There are many dangers. I will go. 
Y SPOCK: No. This is my duty. No one else can do it for me. Will you stay with him? 
(Young Spock heads back to the city) 
SPOCK: This did not happen before. My life decision was made without the sacrifice of yours, old friend. I know there is pain. I can help a little. Sleep now. 
(Young Spock avoids a carnivorous plant, and makes it back to the city)

[Healer's house]

HEALER: The hour is late. I trust your errand is urgent? 
Y SPOCK: Most urgent, Healer. My sehlat fought a le-matya in the Llangon foothills. He suffered a small wound, but the poison of its claws is working in him now. Please, you must come with me. He needs your healing. 
HEALER: You are Spock, son of Sarek, are you not? 
Y SPOCK: Yes, Healer. 
HEALER: I have heard of you. I have heard of a tendency toward what humans call practical jokes. 
Y SPOCK: I did that once, two years ago. Healer, I would not call you out unless a life was in danger. Have you ever heard the son of Sarek was a liar? 
HEALER: No. That has never been said. Very well. Wait here and I will get my medicines. 
Y SPOCK: Healer, please hurry.

[Mountains]

(The Healer and young Spock arrive in a hover-car) 
SPOCK: It will not be long now, old friend. 
(As I-Chaya is tended) 
SPOCK: You made the desert crossing most efficiently. You will not disappoint Sarek in your kahs-wan. 
Y SPOCK: I wanted only to help I-Chaya. He was my father's before he was mine. To lose him 
SPOCK: A Vulcan would face such a loss without tears. 
Y SPOCK: How? 
SPOCK: By understanding every life comes to an end when time demands it. Loss of life is to be mourned but only if the life was wasted. I-Chaya's was not. 
HEALER: Spock. 
Y SPOCK: Yes, sir? 
HEALER: It has been too long. No antidote known will save his life. 
Y SPOCK: Is there nothing you can do? 
HEALER: I can prolong his life, but he will be in pain. Or I can release him from life. I will need your decision. He is your pet. 
Y SPOCK: Release him. It is fitting he dies with peace and dignity. 
(And so I-Chaya goes to sleep in young Spock's arms.)

[Sarek's house]

Y SPOCK: I regret having troubled you in any way, but it was necessary. 
SAREK: I trust you can explain why it was necessary? 
Y SPOCK: There was a decision to be made. A direction for my life had to be chosen. I chose Vulcan. 
SAREK: It is good then. You have comported yourself with honour. We will see I-Chaya is brought home from the mountains. 
Y SPOCK: Thank you, father. If you will excuse me now, I have some business to conduct with schoolmates. 
SAREK: Business? 
Y SPOCK: A demonstration of the Vulcan neck pinch. Our cousin taught me. 
SPOCK: I too must make my farewells. Your hospitality has been most kind, but I must journey on. 
SAREK: You saved my son's life, Selek. There is no way I can fully repay you for that. 
SPOCK: Try to understand your son, Sarek of Vulcan. It will be repayment enough for me. 
SAREK: A strange request, but I will honour it. My home is yours if you pass this way again. 
SPOCK: I think I shall not. Peace and long life. 
SAREK: Live long and prosper, cousin.

[Guardian of Forever]

GUARDIAN: The traveller is returning. 
KIRK: I sent the others up to the ship. What happened? 
SPOCK: One small thing was changed this time. A pet died. 
KIRK: A pet? Well, that wouldn't mean much in the course of time. 
SPOCK: It might, to some. 
KIRK: Enterprise, this is the Captain. Two to beam up. 
SCOTT [OC]: Two to beam up. Aye, sir.

[Transporter room]

MCCOY: Well, well, well. So you two finally got back from your vacation. While you've been running all over Orion's creation, I've been running the annual crew physicals. You're the last ones. 
KIRK: Welcome aboard, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: Never mind the chit-chat. I've got my medical scanners all set up for a Vulcan. I have to recalibrate every time I run a physical on you, Spock. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy, you do not know your good fortune. IF the times were different, you would have to recalibrate for an Andorian. 
MCCOY: What's that supposed to mean? If that was supposed to be a joke, Spock, I have to remind you Vulcans don't tell jokes. 
SPOCK: Times change, Doctor. Times change.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


Beyond The Farthest Star
Stardate: 5221.3
Original Airdate: 8 Sep, 1973

Captain's log, stardate 5221.3. On outward course beyond the fringe of our galaxy towards Questar M-17, a source of mysterious radio emissions. Mission, starcharting.
[Bridge]

(The ship is at Red Alert) 
KIRK: Situation, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: We've picked up speed, sir, rapidly. I've cut back power, but we continue to gain momentum. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu? 
SULU: She's not answering the helm, sir. Two minutes right ascension off course and drifting farther, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand by to reverse course. 
SULU: Standing by, sir. 
KIRK: Reverse course. 
SPOCK: I can only describe it as hypergravity, Captain, more powerful than any we've ever encountered. It's dragging the Enterprise toward it. 
KIRK: Why aren't our sensors picking it up? Forward scanners, Mister Sulu. 
(The viewscreen shows a massive object) 
UHURA: Captain, that's the source of the radio emissions. 
SPOCK: Negative star mass. Spectra analysis, imploded matter, but every reading on it is negative. 
SULU: Captain, we're still gaining speed. 
KIRK: Full reverse thrust. 
SULU: No good, sir. We're still falling toward it. 
KIRK: How much time do we have? 
SPOCK: Impact in ninety three seconds. Ninety two. Ninety one. 
UHURA: Captain, there's another signal. Listen. 
SPOCK: Forty seconds, Captain. Thirty nine, thirty eight. 
KIRK: Sulu, flank speed ahead. Our only chance is to try to get into orbit around that thing. 
SULU: Aye, aye, Captain. 
SPOCK: Nine seconds. Eight, seven. Orbital velocity. 
KIRK: Steady as she goes, Mister Sulu. Maintain orbit. 
SULU: Aye, aye, Captain. 
MCCOY: If its pull is this strong, Jim, how do we get out of orbit? 
KIRK: Slingshot effect, Mister Spock? Do we have enough power? 
SPOCK: I'll need some time for the computations, Captain. 
UHURA: I'm getting that radio sound again, sir. Nine seconds right ascension from galactic plane, dead ahead and closing fast. It's on the viewscreen now, sir. 
KIRK: Put us alongside, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
(The object is made up of oval pieces connected by filaments. Very alien and elegant) 
MCCOY: It's a starship like nothing I've ever seen. The size of it. 
KIRK: It's been damaged. I'll bet she was pulled in like we were. 
UHURA: It's coming from that ship, Captain. 
SPOCK: Confirmed, Captain, but it isn't possible. That ship is dead. Temperature is absolute zero. There is no thermal reading to support life aboard her, and no energy store to send radio messages. Nothing except a slight magnetic flux reading which could be normal for the ship's metal. 
KIRK: You're sure, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Probability point nine nine seven, Captain. 
KIRK: Can you identify that metal, or the design of the ship? 
SPOCK: Negative to both, Captain. Unknown alloy, harder and lighter than any registered metal. It is not a recorded galactic starship design. Retro analysis of the ship's spectra dates it as having been in orbit here for slightly more than three hundred million years. 
UHURA: It's beautiful. What kind of people could have built it, to touch even a starship with grace and beauty? 
KIRK: A civilisation that advanced three hundred million years ago before life even emerged on Earth. 
MCCOY: Barely an instant in eternity, Jim. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, any indication of that ship's power source? 
SPOCK: No, Captain, but this far from a G1 star, it is logical to assume they had some kind of warp drive. 
KIRK: We'll board her, Mister Spock. Scotty, Bones, you'll come with us. We'll need life-support belts. Mister Sulu, have the Transporter room stand by. 
SULU: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Ready, Captain. 
KIRK: Activate life-support belts. Energise.

[Alien ship]

(They arrive with their life-support glow around them, on a huge filament linking two modules. It looks very organic) 
SPOCK: The hexagonal shape of the windows suggests a similarity to natural insect designs of Earth, the honeycombs of bees. The individual cells are shaped precisely like this. 
SCOTT: Would you look at this now? This metal, it isn't cast or rolled. It was drawn into filaments and spun. 
KIRK: Like a spider spins his web. 
SPOCK: A lighter and stronger material than anything we have now. 
KIRK: Look, every pod, they've all been burst open. 
SCOTT: Aye, from the inside, from the looks of them. 
MCCOY: Must have been some accident to get almost every pod. 
SPOCK: Accidents seldom have such system, Doctor McCoy. I believe we must consider the alternative possibility that the crew of this ship destroyed her themselves.

Captain's log. We have beamed aboard the alien ship found orbiting a strange dead star. The Enterprise is recording all data for the log and a full report later.

[Alien ship]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura here.

[Alien ship]

KIRK: Lieutenant, are you still getting that radio signal from this ship?

[Bridge]

UHURA: Negative, Captain. It stopped transmitting when you beamed aboard.

[Alien ship]

KIRK: All right. Lock on us with the transporter and be ready to transport. We're going inside. 
UHURA [OC]: Transporter beam on and locked. Standing by.


[Alien ship module]

(They've found something that seems active) 
KIRK: What do you make of it, Spock? 
SPOCK: Captain, its registering energy. Very little, but building. 
KIRK: You mean it's functioning after all the milleniums this ship has been here? 
SPOCK: The wands are accumulators, receptors to attract energy, motion, sound, light, heat, every kind of energy around them. 
SCOTT: The structure of the ship, those huge arches, thrusting up. The whole ship is designed to receive and store energy. 
MCCOY: Gives me the creeps. I feel like something's watching us. 
SCOTT: I feel it too, Captain. 
SPOCK: A physiological symptom of latent primal superstition, the fear of primitive people confronting something unknown to them. 
KIRK: Compared to the beings that built this ship, we are primitive people, even you, Mister Spock. All right, let's keep going. 
(They come to a hexagonal door. Spock fires his phaser at the control and it opens. They walk down a hexagonal passageway into -)

[Machine shop]

(The door slams behind them and the machines wake up) 
KIRK: Tricorder analysis, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Artificial gravity is in effect here, Captain. Both air and gravity within two points of Earth normal. 
KIRK: Enterprise, do you read me? Sulu? 
SPOCK: No use, Captain. Some sort of interference has been set up. 
SCOTT: We can cut our way out of here. 
(But his phaser doesn't work) 
KIRK: No energy registering. Something's drained them. 
MCCOY: You mean we're trapped here? No communication, nothing? 
KIRK: For the moment. 
(They walk on) 
KIRK: This is, was, the control centre of the starship. These must be control and navigational instruments. 
SPOCK: The source of the interference is here, Captain. It's not part of the normal equipment. It's like something they jury-rigged during an emergency. 
SCOTT: Something to shield this room. But shield it from what? 
SPOCK: Possibly from whatever had come aboard their ship. 
SCOTT: But nothing, no form of life could survive three hundred million years. 
SPOCK: Quite right, Mister Scott. No known form of life. 
MCCOY: Jim, the door. 
(It is glowing around its edges) 
SPOCK: Something is trying to get in. The field of interference is reacting against the magnetic flux lines, Captain. 
KIRK: Will it hold? 
SPOCK: If the energy stays at that level. 
(The control machine starts making a strange noise) 
MCCOY: What is it? 
KIRK: I'm not sure, but I think 
(A screen comes to life with a face on it) 
KIRK: It could be a ship's log or a warning. It seems to keep repeating. 
MCCOY: A message from three hundred million years ago? 
SPOCK: It is possible that this much of their technology survived. (fiddling with a panel) 
KIRK: Anything? 
SPOCK: I may be able to get a translation. 
MCCOY: Hurry up, Spock. 
SPOCK: Patience, Doctor. 
ALIEN [on screen]: Danger. Danger. The dead star, we are being drawn to it. Rather than carry this malevolent life form to other worlds, we have decided to destroy our own ship. There is no other answer. If you understand this message, you are protected only for this moment in this room. This thing it wants 
(Boom! Things blow up around them) 
KIRK: Get out of here! Hurry! 
(They are beamed away)

[Transporter room]

(Transporter Chief Kyle has a frightfully English accent, and a mustache) 
KYLE: Located them right after that explosion, Mister Sulu. We're locked on and beaming them aboard.

[Bridge]

SULU: Good work, Mister Kyle. I thought we lost them when we were cut off so long.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Piece of cake, sir. Here they come now. 
(Four figures and a green fog materialise) 
KYLE: Captain, something's beamed aboard with you. 
KIRK: Transport it back out. 
(But they are all attacked by the Green, then it gets into the ventilation system, the doors and the control panels. Laughter comes from the comm. panels on the walls)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Status? 
UHURA: Sickbay reports no injuries to crew, sir. 
SCOTT: No damage to hull or engines, Captain. 
SPOCK: Automatic bridge defence system on and prepared, sir. 
KIRK: So, we're all just fine, but whatever was on that ship used our transporter beam to come aboard with us, and now it's here. 
SCOTT: That alien commander, sir. The message said that they had to destroy their own ship. 
KIRK: Until we learn more about it, Scotty, perhaps we should be ready to do the same. Take two of your men and arm the self-destruct device in the Engineering core. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(Scott leaves) 
KIRK: Mister Spock, any change in ship's readings? 
SPOCK: We're registering a slightly higher than normal magnetic flux. Not dangerous, but the level isn't constant. It seems to fluctuate, a steady, almost pulsing rhythm. 
KIRK: Like the beating of a heart. 
UHURA: Bridge, Lieutenant. What? Captain, decks five and six report shutdown of all life-support systems. They've gone to life-support belts, manual override is not responding. 
(Red Alert) 
SPOCK: Trouble in the Engineering core, sir. 
KIRK: Bridge to Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: Bones, get down to the Engineering core on the double.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Get on those life-support systems now.

[Engineering]

(Scotty, wearing a life-support belt, is trapped by the cover of the core) 
MCCOY: The force field of his belt won't hold that weight for long, Jim. 
KIRK: Override systems, Mister Spock. Open the core hatch. 
SCOTT: It's no use, sir. The mechanism is frozen. They've already tried. 
SPOCK: Something's jammed the circuits. They're magnetised. 
KIRK: All right, get the cutter beams on that hatch. Move. 
ENGINEER: Yes, sir. 
(Finally they cut the hinge off the hatch and release Scott) 
SCOTT: I thank you, sir. 
SULU [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. Something's activating the ship's phaser banks. They're locking on the alien starship. 
(The alien ship is destroyed)

[Bridge]

SULU: Phaser banks were off, Captain. They activated themselves. 
KIRK: And mutual override did not work? 
SULU: No, sir. 
SPOCK: Exactly like the Engineering controls and the life-support systems on decks five and six. 
(Scott and McCoy enter) 
SCOTT: Sir, we cannot get into the core. 
KIRK: The cutter beams. 
SCOTT: Drained of all energy, sir. 
UHURA: Sir, Cargo holds three, four and five just shut down life-support systems. 
SPOCK: Power out on all but key levels, Captain. High magnetic flux reading. 
UHURA: Captain Kirk, the ship's computers. Something's going through every storage bank. It seems to be taking control of the whole ship. 
KIRK: Spock, can you rig a low-frequency shield like the one on the alien ship, on our navigation console? 
SPOCK: It would have a very small field. 
KIRK: Do it. 
(A little later) 
SPOCK: It's activated, Captain, but only an area three metres square. 
KIRK: Do you get a magnetic flux reading there now? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. 
MCCOY: Jim, you don't think that's going to help us? Whatever that thing is, it survived millennia in a dead hulk. All it has to do is outlast us and just take over. 
KIRK: No. It must be held by the magnetic force of the dead star, and it needs a starship to break free and a crew to man it. 
GREEN: (speaking from the bridge defence system in the ceiling) You are correct, Captain James T Kirk, and I have the starship I've waited for so long, so terribly long. 
(The bridge monitors go crazy, then blank) 
SPOCK: It has absorbed the memory banks, Captain, all of them. 
GREEN: You will now remove the static shield from the navigation console, Captain James T Kirk. 
KIRK: You have shut down life-support systems and endangered members of my crew. Restore those systems first. 
GREEN: All nonessential systems are extinguished. You will obey me. 
KIRK: And if I refuse? 
(A beam is fired from the defence system at Kirk) 
GREEN: Obey me! 
SPOCK: Captain! 
(Spock is shot too) 
GREEN: Obey me! 
KIRK: Stop! You'll hurt him. 
GREEN: Remove the static shied from the warp drive controls! Do it now! 
SPOCK: No, Captain. 
KIRK: I'll obey. Let him go. 
(The beam stops) 
(Kirk goes to the console, presses a button and puts his life-support belt on it. The green alien is unhappy) 
GREEN: Repair the warp drive controls. Obey me! 
KIRK: Mister Scott, start repairs. Install the auxiliary controls. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. 
SPOCK: I'm all right, Captain. 
KIRK: What are we dealing with, Spock? 
SPOCK: High rank probabilities, Captain. It is a magnetic organism without mass, but capable of symbiotic relationship with a host body, a starship for instance. It is a form of primal energy, and it can utilise the electronic control systems of a starship like the mind of a man uses the neural control systems of the human body. It has become the Enterprise, and we are only life-support organisms in its body like the white corpuscles in human blood. And Captain, the magnetic flux readings are higher. It is growing stronger, building itself. 
KIRK: A slingshot effect to yank us out of orbit. Can you compute it in your mind? If we try to use ship's computers 
SPOCK: The alien will know. I believe I can, Captain. I will need to aid Mister Scott. 
KIRK: The engineer will need aid from my first officer to complete repairs. Is that permitted? (silence) I guess it is. 
GREEN: You will leave this orbit and plot course to galactic coordinates zero three six point two three one. 
SULU: That's the heart of the galaxy, Captain. 
KIRK: Plot the course, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: Captain, this symbiont can reproduce itself by mitosis and take over every starship we encounter. It can control computer centres, whole planets. 
KIRK: I'm aware of that, Mister Spock. 
GREEN: Complete repairs! Obey me! 
SCOTT: Auxiliary controls ready to activate, Captain. 
KIRK: The auxiliary warp drive controls can only be operated manually. 
GREEN: That is correct. You will activate the manual controls. Obey! 
KIRK: Controls activated. 
SULU: Captain, we're dropping out of orbit! We're falling into the dead sun. 
GREEN: Apply full power! Obey me! 
(It tries shooting Kirk) 
GREEN: No! Accelerate! Do not destroy the ship! Obey me! Obey! Obey! 
KIRK: Standby to activate warp drive unit. 
GREEN: No! Don't! 
(Green flies out of the ship's systems) 
KIRK: Activate warp drive! 
SPOCK: Activated, Captain. 
GREEN: Please, don't! 
(It leaves the ship completely and ends up enveloping the dead star, as Enterprise slingshots around and away) 
KIRK: Is it gone? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. It fled the ship when it thought we would crash into the dead star. 
GREEN [OC]: Don't leave me alone. Please, please. So lonely.

Captain's log, stardate 5221.8. Final entry. Resuming outward course beyond the farthest star of our galaxy. Mission, starcharting.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Immunity Syndrome
Stardate: 4307.1
Original Airdate: 19 Jan, 1968

Captain's log, stardate 4307.1. Approaching Starbase Six for a much needed period of rest and recreation.
[Bridge]

KIRK: The crew has performed excellently, but is exhausted. And I, too, am looking forward to a nice period of rest on some lovely planet. 
UHURA: Captain. There was a message from Starbase Six. Heavy interference. All I get is Intrepid and what sounded like a sector co-ordinate. 
SPOCK: Interesting. No indications of magnetic storms in this sector. 
KIRK: Try another channel, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: The Intrepid is manned by Vulcans, isn't it? 
KIRK: Yes, that's right, Bones. 
UHURA: Enterprise calling Starbase Six. Enterprise calling Starbase Six. Come in. Come in. 
(Spock suddenly jerks upright, his face a picture of horror.) 
KIRK: Spock? 
MCCOY: What is it, Spock? Are you in pain? 
SPOCK: Captain, the Intrepid. It just died. And the four hundred Vulcans aboard, all dead. 
MCCOY: Come on, Spock, let's go down to Sickbay. 
SPOCK: Doctor, I know what I know. 
KIRK: Get to the Sickbay. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: No, no, no. That's an order. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
(McCoy leads him away.) 
UHURA: Captain, I have Starbase Six readable now. Switching to audio, sir. 
KIRK: Kirk here. Go ahead. 
STARBASE [OC]: You will divert immediately to sector three nine J. 
KIRK: Sir, the Enterprise just completed an exhausting mission. We're on our way in for R and R. There must be another starship in that sector. 
STARBASE [OC]: Negative. This is a rescue priority. We've lost all contact with solar system Gamma Seven-A, which the Intrepid was investigating. And we've just lost contact with the Intrepid. Report progress. 
KIRK: Order acknowledged. Kirk out. Mister Kyle, you heard the order. Set course for Gamma Seven-A, warp five. 
KYLE: Aye, sir. 
CHEKOV: Captain I have just completed a full long-range scan of Gamma Seven-A system. It is dead. 
KIRK: Dead? It's a fourth magnitude sun. There are billions of inhabitants there. 
CHEKOV: It is dead.

[Sickbay]

(Spock is on a biobed, being scanned.) 
SPOCK: I assure you, Doctor, I am quite all right. The pain was momentary. It passed quickly. 
MCCOY: All of my instruments seem to agree with you if I can trust these crazy Vulcan readings. Spock, how can you be so sure the lntrepid was destroyed? 
(Spock gets off the bed.) 
SPOCK: I sensed it die. 
MCCOY: But I thought you had to be in physical contact with a subject before 
SPOCK: Doctor, even I, a half-Vulcan, could hear the death scream of four hundred Vulcan minds crying out over the distance between us. 
MCCOY: Not even a Vulcan could feel a starship die. 
SPOCK: Call it a deep understanding of the way things happen to Vulcans, but I know not a person, not even the computers on board the Intrepid, knew what was killing them or would have understood it had they known. 
MCCOY: But four hundred Vulcans? 
SPOCK: I've noticed that about your people, Doctor. You find it easier to understand the death of one than the death of a million. You speak about the objective hardness of the Vulcan heart, yet how little room there seems to be in yours. 
MCCOY: Suffer the death of thy neighbour, eh, Spock? You wouldn't wish that on us, would you? 
SPOCK: It might have rendered your history a bit less bloody.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock, you may have been right. We've lost contact with the Intrepid and we're out of communication with an entire solar system. Any update from Starfleet? 
UHURA: I cannot filter out the distortion, sir. It's getting worse. 
KYLE: Captain, deflector shields just snapped on. 
KIRK: Slow to warp three. 
KYLE: Warp three, sir. 
SPOCK: Indications of energy turbulence ahead. Unable to analyse. I've never encountered readings like this before. 
KIRK: Scanners on. Magnification three on the screen. 
KYLE: Magnification factor three, sir. 
UHURA: Exactly what are we looking for, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I would assume that. 
(In the middle of the viewscreen is a black blob.) 
KIRK: What is that? 
CHEKOV: Perhaps an interstellar dust cloud. 
SPOCK: Not very likely, Ensign. 
KIRK: No. You'd be able to see stars through a dust cloud. Looks like a hole in space. Readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Still not able to analyse, Captain. Sensors are feeding data to the computers now. Whatever this dark zone is, it lies directly in line with the course I calculate for the Intrepid and the Gamma Seven-A system. 
KIRK: Hold present course. Slow to warp one. 
KYLE: Warp factor one, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, prepare to launch a telemetry probe into that zone. Direct computer feed to Mister Spock. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. Probe ready. Switching data feed to library computer. 
KIRK: Launch probe. 
CHEKOV: Probe launched, sir. 
(A high pitched sound comes over the speakers.) 
KIRK: What was that? 
UHURA: The telemetry probe, sir. There's no signal from it. 
KIRK: Speculation, Spock. 
SPOCK: I have none, Captain. Insufficient data. 
(Chekov is still groaning and Uhura looses her balance.) 
SPOCK: Lieutenant. 
UHURA: I'm just dizzy. I'll be all right. I'm fine, sir. 
MCCOY [OC]: Sickbay to Captain Kirk. McCoy here. 
KIRK: Kirk here. What is it? 
MCCOY [OC]: I'm getting reports from every deck. Half the people on this ship just fainted. 
KIRK: Uhura almost did. She says she's all right. Do you want to see her? 
MCCOY: Not unless she's feeling ill. I've got an emergency here.

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: What's wrong? 
(Crew are queued out of the door, getting shots from Chapel.) 
MCCOY: There's nothing organic. They all seem to be nervous, weak, and irritable. They say it happened suddenly, like a balloon popping. 
KIRK [OC]: Can you handle it, Bones? 
MCCOY: I'm giving them stimulants to keep them on their feet.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: Yeah, we can handle it, Jim. 
KIRK: Good. Kirk out. Hold our position, Mister Kyle. 
KYLE: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Spock, give me an update on the dark area ahead. 
SPOCK: No analysis due to insufficient information. 
KIRK: No speculation, no information, nothing. I've asked you three times for information on that, and you've been unable to supply it. Insufficient data is not sufficient, Mister Spock. You're the science officer. You're supposed to have sufficient data all the time. 
SPOCK: I am well aware of that, Captain, but the computers contain nothing on this phenomenon. It is beyond our experience, and the new information is not yet significant. 
KIRK: I don't know about you but I'm tired. If you can't tell me what it is, let's use reverse logic. Perhaps it'll help if you tell me what it isn't. 
SPOCK: It is not liquid, gaseous, or solid, despite the fact we cannot see through it. 
KIRK: So far that's not much help. 
SPOCK: It is not a galactic nebula such as the Coal Sack, and since our deflectors were activated by it, it would seem to be some form of energy, but nothing our sensors can identify. 
KIRK: Is it possible that this is what killed that solar system and the Intrepid? 
SPOCK: Very possible. 
KIRK: Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Notify the Starfleet that we're going to attempt to probe the area of darkness to gain further information. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
(Kirk pauses, exhausted on his way back to his chair.) 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: I'm all right. Distance from zone of darkness, Mister Kyle? 
KYLE: One hundred thousand kilometres, sir. 
KIRK: Ahead slow. Impulse power only. 
KYLE: Aye, aye, sir. 
UHURA: Transmission to Starfleet complete, sir. 
KIRK: Very good. Time, Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV: Penetration of the zone in one minute, seven seconds, sir. 
KIRK: Red Alert. Deflectors full power. Phaser banks ready. 
CHEKOV: Phasers standing by. Deflectors at full power, sir. 
(That eardrum splitting sound comes again.) 
UHURA: It's not coming from communications, sir. 
KIRK: Spock! 
SPOCK: Analysing now, Captain. 
(The sound goes.) 
CHEKOV: Captain, the stars are gone! 
(The viewscreen is completely blank.) 
KIRK: Malfunction, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. All systems functioning properly. 
KIRK: Then kindly tell me what happened to the stars. 
SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk to McCoy. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy here. 
KIRK: Things any better down there? 
MCCOY [OC]: Worse. They're backed up into the corridor. 
KIRK: Have you got anything that will help up here? I don't want anybody folding on the bridge at a critical moment. 
MCCOY [OC]: On my way. McCoy out. 
KIRK: Kirk to Engineering. Scotty, there was a power loss. How come?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: We lost five percent of our energy reserve, sir. Our deflector shields are weakened. 
KIRK [OC]: Can you compensate for the loss? 
SCOTT: Aye, if we don't lose any more. Don't ask me how it happened.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I am asking how, mister. I want answers. Kirk out. 
(McCoy enters with a nurse, and starts injecting the crew.) 
KIRK: What's that? 
MCCOY: A stimulant. 
KIRK: Bones, how bad is it? 
MCCOY: Two thirds of the personnel are affected. 
KIRK: Why? How? Do you have any answers? 
MCCOY: No. You know you'll get everything I can tell you. But when there is nothing, what should I say? 
(The man at the engineering station collapses.) 
MCCOY: Nurse. 
KIRK: This ship is in trouble. We'd better start solving problems faster than we pick up new ones. We seem to be in the middle of a creeping paralysis. Mister Spock, analysis of that last burst of noise before we started losing power. 
SPOCK: That sound was turbulence caused by the penetration of a boundary layer, Captain. 
KIRK: What boundary layer? 
SPOCK: Unknown. 
KIRK: Boundary layer between what and what? 
SPOCK: Between where we were and where we are. 
KIRK: Are you trying to be funny, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: It would never occur to me, Captain. 
KIRK: Do you have any ideas, Spock? 
SPOCK: We still have no specifics, but we seem to have entered a zone of energy which is incompatible with our living and mechanical processes. As we draw closer to the source, it grows stronger and we grow weaker. 
KIRK: Recommendations. 
MCCOY: I have one. I recommend survival. Let's get out of here. 
KIRK: This is the Captain. We're on a difficult mission, but it's not the first time. Our orders do not say stay alive or retreat.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Our mission is to investigate.

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: We're sick, and we're getting sicker.

[Bridge]

KIRK: We have no guarantees, but we have a good ship and the best crew in Starfleet. So do your jobs. Carry on. Kirk out.

[McCoy's office]

MCCOY: Sickbay to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk here. Go ahead, Bones. 
MCCOY: Jim, according to the life indicators, the energy levels

[Bridge]

KIRK: Yes, say it, Bones.

[McCoy's office]

MCCOY: According to the life monitors, we're dying.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: We're all dying.

Captain's log, stardate 4308.8. It is now ten minutes since we entered the zone of darkness. We have stopped engines while we seek a defence against the energy drain which seems to pervade the zone.

[Engineering]

(Kirk enters and is promptly thrown sideways by a massive jolt to the ship.) 
KIRK: Are you all right? 
SCOTT: Yes. 
KIRK: What was that? 
SCOTT: I'm sorry, sir. I'm not sure. I was trying to recalibrate, and we went into reverse. 
KIRK: Reverse? But that was a forward lurch. How could that happen in reverse thrust? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. All I know is that the power levels are down twelve percent and steadily decreasing. I've never experienced anything like it. 
SPOCK [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Sir, we are accelerating. We are being pulled toward the centre of the zone of darkness. 
KIRK [OC]: By what, Spock? 
SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. I suggest you order Mister Scott to give us reverse power.

[Engineering]

KIRK: He just gave us reverse power. We lurched forward.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: In that case, Captain, I would suggest we apply forward thrust.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Doctor. Life function indicators. They've started a sharp drop again. 
MCCOY: Stimulants. I don't know how long we can keep this up.

[Engineering]

KIRK: What do you think, Scotty? Forward thrust? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. It goes against the rules of logic. 
KIRK: Yes, doesn't it? Well, if it doesn't work, I'll never let Spock live it down. Notch it into forward. 
SCOTT: But 
KIRK: Go ahead. 
SCOTT: That's doing it, sir. We're slowing down. But we're not stopping. We're still being dragged forward. 
KIRK: Have one of your engineers monitor the instruments. Keep applying thrust against the pull.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Doctor, they seem to be stabilising. 
MCCOY: But at a dangerously low level. Well, we're still alive. I suppose that's something.

[Briefing room]

MCCOY: All I can contribute is the further we travel into this zone of darkness, the weaker our life functions become, and I have no idea why. I'm all right. It's those stimulants. They catch up with you. 
KIRK: Engineering. 
SCOTT: As to the power levels are concerned, everything is acting backwards, but the drain is continuing. On the static test, I could only get sixty percent power. We're still being dragged forward. 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: It's logical to assume that something within this zone absorbs all forms of energy whether mechanically or biologically produced. Whatever it is, it would seem to be the same thing which drew all the energy out of an entire solar system and the Intrepid. 
KIRK: The same thing, not the zone itself? 
SPOCK: I would say not, Captain. The analysis of the zone indicates it is a negative energy field, however illogical that may sound, but it is not the source of the power drain. 
KIRK: Maybe it's a shield of some kind. Some form of protection for something else. 
SCOTT: But what? 
KIRK: We'll find out what it is, but we'd better get out of here ourselves. Scotty, channel all the impulse and warp power into one massive thrust forward. That might snap us out of the zone. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain, but I'll reserve some for the shields in case we don't get out. 
SPOCK: I submit, Mister Scott, if we do not get out, the shields would be extraneous. It would only prolong our wait for death by a short period of time. 
KIRK: Use whatever power is necessary to get us out of here, Scotty. Report to your stations, continue your research. Dismissed. 
(The department heads leave Kirk and Spock alone.) 
SPOCK: Captain, the Intrepid would have done all these things too, and yet they were destroyed. 
KIRK: Well, they may not have done all of these things. You just pointed out how illogical this situation is. 
SPOCK: True. It is also true they never knew what was killing them. Their logic would not have permitted them to believe they were being killed. 
KIRK: Explain. 
SPOCK: Vulcan has not been conquered within its collective memory. The memory goes back so far that no Vulcan can conceive of a conqueror. I knew the ship was lost because I sensed it. 
KIRK: What was it you sensed? 
SPOCK: The touch of death. 
KIRK: And what do you think they felt? 
SPOCK: Astonishment.

[Engineering]

(Scott is working on the upper level)
SCOTT: That ought to do it. Engineering to Captain Kirk.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk here. What is it, Scotty?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Ready to try it when you are, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Do we have the power to pull it off, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: I hope so, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand by. All hands, this is the captain. We are slowly being pulled deeper into the zone of darkness by an unknown force. We're going to apply

[Sickbay]

KIRK [OC]: All available power

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Into one giant forward thrust

[Bridge]

KIRK: In the hope that it will yank us out of the zone. Prepare yourselves. All right, Scotty. Let's get on with it. 
(Everybody braces themselves against the g-forces that are created by the acceleration. What happened to the inertial dampers? Then there's a sudden jolt and people get thrown around. Chapel is flung into McCoy's arms for example.)
KIRK: Scotty! 
SCOTT [OC]: It's no good, sir. The best we can do is to maintain thrust against the pull and hold our position. 
KIRK: Are we still losing power?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: How long will the power hold out? 
SCOTT: At this rate, plus the drain on all systems, two hours.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Maintain thrust, Scotty. While we're maintaining our distance, Mister Spock, have you ascertained yet what we're maintaining our distance from? 
SPOCK: I cannot say what it is, Captain, but I would say it has found us. 
(The viewscreen is no longer black. It contains a multicoloured image rather like an abalone.) 
KIRK: Prepare to launch a probe, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. Probe ready for launch, sir. 
SPOCK: Getting very confused readings, Captain, but this is definitely the source of the energy drain. 
KIRK: Launch probe. 
CHEKOV: Probe launched, sir. 
SPOCK: Probe will impact in seven point three seconds. 
KYLE: Six, five, four, three, two, one. 
(The ship shudders.) 
KIRK: Are we still in contact with the probe? 
CHEKOV: Yes, sir. Data being relayed to Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Readings coming in now, Captain. Length, approximately eleven thousand miles. Width varying from two thousand to three thousand miles. Outer layer studded with space debris and waste. Interior consists of protoplasm, varying from a firmer gelatinous layer to a semi-fluid central mass. Condition, living. 
KIRK: Magnification four. 
CHEKOV: Magnification four, sir. 
SPOCK: That is what is drawing us toward it, Captain. The same way it drew the Intrepid to her death.

[Laboratory]

(There is an image of a single-celled organism on a screen.) 
MCCOY: That is an amoeba. 
KIRK: Yes, I remember my basic biology, Doctor. You mean to tell me that that thing is a giant single-celled animal? 
MCCOY: Yes, for lack of a better term. It's a very simple form of life. In fact it's a much simpler form of life than what you're looking at now. But that thing can apparently perform all the functions that qualify it as a living organism. It can reproduce, it can breathe, it can eat, although I don't know what. 
SPOCK: Energy itself, perhaps, drained from us. I would speculate that this unknown life form is invading our galaxy like a virus. 
KIRK: The Intrepid died of that particular virus. How is it we survived? 
SPOCK: The Intrepid must have come across the organism while it was still low in energy, still hungry. We are not safe, Captain. We merely have a little more time than the Intrepid did. 
KIRK: What about this zone of darkness? Does the organism generate it itself as a form of protection? 
MCCOY: It's one of the things we've got to find out. We've got to take a closer look at it. 
KIRK: The closer we get, the faster our energy drains out. We're barely surviving at this distance. 
MCCOY: Perhaps we could risk the shuttlecraft. Perhaps with a protective shield 
KIRK: I'm not sending anyone anywhere. Unmanned probes can give us the information we need to destroy this thing, if it can be destroyed. 
SPOCK: I must differ with you, Captain. We have sent unmanned probes into it. They have given us some information but they have not told us what we need to know, and we cannot afford the power to take blind shots at it, hoping to kill it. 
MCCOY: We could send one man in, pinpoint its vulnerable spots. 
KIRK: DO you know what the odds are in coming back? I can't order a man to do that. 
MCCOY: Who said anything about an order, Jim? You've got a volunteer. I've done the preliminary work. 
KIRK: It's a suicide mission. 
SPOCK: The thing evidently has reflexes. The unmanned probe we sent in must have stung it when it entered. The lurch we felt was the turbulence of its reaction. 
MCCOY: All right, so I'd know enough to go slow when we penetrated its vulnerable spots. 
SPOCK: You have a martyr complex, Doctor. I submit that it disqualifies you. 
MCCOY: Do you think I intend to pass up the greatest living laboratory since 
SPOCK: The Vulcans saw it first and died. 
MCCOY: Just because the Vulcans failed 
SPOCK: I am more capable. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I am not taking volunteers. 
MCCOY: You don't think you're going? 
KIRK: I'm better qualified as a command pilot than you are. 
SPOCK: Which makes you indispensable, Captain. Further, you are not a science specialist. 
MCCOY: Jim, that organism contains chemical processes we've never seen before and may never see again. We could learn more in one day 
SPOCK: We don't have one day, Doctor. We have precisely one hour and thirty five minutes of power left. 
MCCOY: Jim 
SPOCK: Captain, I 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I'll decide.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Captain's personal log, stardate 4309.2. We have established that the thing which destroyed the USS Intrepid and the Gamma Seven=A system is an incredibly huge but simple cellular being whose energies are totally destructive to all known life. Both Mister Spock and Doctor McCoy have volunteered to go in a specially equipped shuttlecraft to penetrate the cell, find a way to destroy it, and free the ship. Doctor McCoy has the medical-biological knowledge. Mister Spock is better suited physically and emotionally to stand the stress. Both are right, both are capable, and which of my friends do I condemn to death? This is the captain. Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy, report to my quarters immediately. Kirk out.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Engineering to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk here. 
SCOTT: You asked me to keep you informed on the power drain. All levels are down fifty percent now

[Kirk's quarters]

SCOTT [OC]: And still draining. We can maintain thrust for another hour and fifteen minutes. 
(Spock and McCoy enter.) 
KIRK: Very well. Prepare the shuttlecraft for launching. 
SCOTT [OC]: Sir? 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy will tell you what special equipment to put in. Kirk out. I'm sorry, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: Right. I'll get a few things I need, Jim. 
KIRK: Not you, Bones. I'm sorry, Mister Spock. You're best qualified to go.

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Do not suffer so, Doctor. This is not the first time superior capability has proven more valuable than professional credentials. 
MCCOY: Nothing has been proven yet, Spock. The DNA code analyser will give you the fundamental structure of the thing. You'll need readings on three light wavelengths from the enzyme recorder. 
SPOCK: I am familiar with the equipment, Doctor. We're wasting time. The shuttlecraft is ready. 
MCCOY: You're determined not to let me share in this, aren't you? 
SPOCK: This is not a competition, Doctor. Whether you understand it or not, grant me my own kind of dignity. 
MCCOY: Vulcan dignity? How can I grant you what I don't understand? 
SPOCK: Then employ one of your own superstitions. Wish me luck. 
(Silence and stares, then McCoy opens the hangar deck door. Spock walks across and into the Galileo. The doors shut.) 
MCCOY: Good luck, Spock.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: All systems clear for shuttlecraft launch. sir. 
KIRK: Launch shuttlecraft. 
KYLE: Shuttlecraft away, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, channel automatic telemetry directly to the computers. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK [OC]: Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. 
KIRK: Come in, Spock.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Power drain is enormous and growing worse.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Chekov. 
(Chekov goes to the science station.) 
SPOCK [OC]: Diverting all secondary power to the shields. (McCoy enters) I'll continue communications as long as there is power to transmit. 
SCOTT: Captain, h e won't have enough power to get back out if he diverts it to his shields. 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK [OC]: I heard, Captain.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: We discussed that possibility earlier. But you will need this information. 
KIRK [OC]: When do you estimate penetration? 
SPOCK: Slowing now. Contact in eighteen point three seconds. Brace yourselves. The area of penetration will no doubt be sensitive. Contact

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: In six seconds. 
(Spock is thrown around in the shuttlecraft, everyone on the ship just feels a jolt.) 
KIRK: Report, Mister Spock. Spock, report. 
SPOCK [OC]: I am undamaged, Captain. Relay to Mister Scott I had three percent power reserve before the shields stabilised.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: There was nothing to spare. I shall continue my tests. Oh, and Doctor McCoy. You would have not survived it.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: You want to bet?

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: I am moving slowly now, establishing course toward what appears to be the nucleus.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Sir, Mister Spock has reduced life-support systems to bare minimum. 
KIRK: Spock, save your power for the shields. 
SPOCK: Calculations indicate the shields will last only forty seven minutes.

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: However, I am able to identify the chromosome structure.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Changes indicate the organism has stored sufficient energy for reproductive process to commence.

[Bridge]

KIRK: You mean there'll be two of those things? 
SPOCK [OC]: I'm having difficulty maintaining ship control. 
KIRK: Spock, do you read me? Spock, do you read me? 
SPOCK [OC]: I'm losing voice contact I will transmit internal co-ordinates of chromosome bodies. 
KIRK: Spock, come in. Come in. 
UHURA: Contact lost, sir. 
(The ship shakes.) 
KIRK: He's alive! He's kicked it in the side to let us know. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm getting telemetry. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, telemetry analysis as it comes in. 
CHEKOV: According to Spock's telemetry information, there are over forty chromosomes in the nucleus that are ready to come together, ready to reproduce. 
KIRK: If the energy of that organism only doubles, we're dead, and everything within a light year will be defenceless. 
MCCOY: Well, all I know is, that soon there'll be two, four, eight, and more. The entire anti-life matter that that thing puts out could someday encompass the entire galaxy. 
KIRK: Spock understood when he transmitted the co-ordinates of the chromosomes. We must destroy that organism. 
SCOTT: Captain, the pull from that organism is increasing, and the power drain from our shields is getting critical. 
KIRK: How much time do we have? 
SCOTT: No more than an hour now, sir. 
KIRK: Put all secondary systems on standby. Shield power has unconditional priority. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm receiving a message from Mister Spock on a low-energy channel. It's faint, but it is readable. 
KIRK: Put it on, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: On audio, sir. 
SPOCK [OC]: This is Spock.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: I am slowly losing life support and minimal shield energies. According to my calculations

[Bridge]

SPOCK [OC]: (Barely audible over static) The nervous energy of the organism is maximal just within its outer protective membrane. Relatively insensitive to interior irritation. I believe sufficient charge of (inaudible) could destroy the organism. Tell Doctor McCoy he should have wished me luck.

Captain's log stardate 4309.4. We have determined we can destroy the creature, provided we can do it from inside the organism. Spock clearly knew how to destroy it but was unable to transmit that information.

[Kirk's quarters]

MCCOY: How do you feel? 
KIRK: What's on your mind? 
MCCOY: Spock. Is it me, Jim? Am I so sentimental that I just have to keep believing that he's still alive in that mass of protoplasm? 
KIRK: He knew the odds when he went out there, just as you did when you volunteered to go. What is that thing out there, Bones? It's not intelligent. Not yet. 
MCCOY: It's a disease, like a virus invading the body of our galaxy. 
KIRK: Yes, it is, isn't it? How many cells does the human body have? 
MCCOY: Millions. 
KIRK: This thing, this cell, this virus. It's eleven thousand miles long, and it's one cell. When it grows into millions, we'll be the virus invading its body. 
MCCOY: Now, isn't that a thought? Here we are, antibodies of our own galaxy, attacking an invading germ. It would be ironic indeed if that were our sole destiny, wouldn't it? 
KIRK: Antibodies. Antibodies. (goes to desk monitor) Bridge. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, how much power do we have left?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're down to forty three percent, sir. We're slipping a bit against the pull that beastie's putting on us.

[Kirk's quarters]

SCOTT [OC]: We can't last more than forty five minutes at this rate of decline. Less, if I have to apply more thrust. 
KIRK: What would happen if you diverted all remaining power to the shields, except for impulse power, keep that in reserve?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Cut the engine thrust? We'd be sucked into that thing like being caught in a wind tunnel, sir.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Exactly. Prepare to divert power on my signal. Kirk out. 
(Kirk leans against the monitor, tired. McCoy scans him.) 
KIRK: Have you got something to say? 
MCCOY: Technically, no. Medically, yes. Between the stimulants and the pressure, I would suggest you try to stay off your feet for a few minutes. 
KIRK: I don't have a few minutes, Bones. Maybe none of us do. Let's go.

[Bridge]

KIRK: All hands, this is the captain. We're going to enter the body of the organism rather abruptly, I would think. Damage control parties stand by. All decks secure for collision. Kirk out. 
KIRK: Ready, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Switching power to shields. Impulse in reserve. Cutting thrust to zero, now! 
KYLE: Impact five seconds. 
(There's a big bump and people are thrown all over the place. Then there is calm.) 
CHEKOV: We're through, sir. 
KIRK: I believe everybody is aware of that, Mister Chekov. 
UHURA: Damage control parties report minimal damage, sir. Repairs are being initiated. 
KIRK: Very good, Lieutenant. 
SCOTT: Captain, we've only twenty six percent power reserves after entry. 
KIRK: Do we have impulse power, Scotty? 
SCOTT: I saved all I could, sir, but I don't know whether we have enough to get back out again. Or time either. 
KIRK: We are committed. 
SCOTT: Aye, we are, but we're committed to what? We have no power for the phasers. 
MCCOY: We couldn't use it. We'd cook ourselves along with that mess of protoplasm out there 
KIRK: That thing would probably like phasers. It eats power. 
SCOTT: Then what the devil, begging your pardon sir, are we doing? 
KIRK: Mister Spock was trying to tell us what to do when we lost voice contact. 
SCOTT: We can't use the power to destroy it. 
KIRK: Anti-power. 
MCCOY: What? 
KIRK: This thing has a negative energy charge. Everything seems to work in reverse. We'll use anti-matter. 
SCOTT: Aye, it couldn't swallow that. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, prepare a probe. Scotty, we'll need a magnetic bottle for the charge. How soon? 
SCOTT: It's on its way, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, we'll use a timing detonator for the probe. Work out a setting. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Helmsman, when do you estimate arrival at nucleus? 
KYLE: Seven minutes, sir. 
MCCOY: How close are you going to it? 
KIRK: Point blank range. We'll implant it then back away. 
MCCOY: Why? The probe has a range of 
KIRK: With the eddies and currents in that protoplasm, the probe could drift thousands of kilometres. We must be exactly on target, because we won't have a second chance. Bones, time for another stimulant. 
MCCOY: How long do you think you can keep taking that stuff? It'll blow you apart. 
KIRK: Keep me together for another seven minutes. That's all I need.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Personal log, Commander Spock, USS Enterprise. I have noted the passage of the Enterprise on its way to whatever awaits it. If this record should survive me, I wish it known that I bequeath my highest commendation and testimonial to the captain, officers, and crew of the Enterprise. The finest starship in the fleet.

[Bridge]

KIRK: (also making a log entry) We have arrived at the chromosome body in the nucleus of the organism. If we should fail in our attempt to destroy it, or be unable to free ourselves, I wish to record my recommendations for the following personnel, that they receive special citation. Lieutenant Commander Leonard McCoy, Lieutenant Commander Montgomery Scott, officers Chekov, Kyle, Uhura, and my highest commendation for Commander Spock, Science Officer, who gave his life in the performance of his duty. 
CHEKOV: Target co-ordinates programmed, sir. Probe ready for launch. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, how much time do we have left at one hundred percent impulse power? 
SCOTT: Six, maybe seven minutes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Kyle, programme fuse for seven minute delay. All non-essential systems on standby. Communications, scanning, conserve every bit of power. We must make it through the membrane before that thing explodes. Make it work, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
CHEKOV: Programming complete. Ready for launch. 
KIRK: Launch probe at zero acceleration. Forward thrust off, one tenth of a second. 
KYLE: Forward thrust off, sir. 
CHEKOV: Probe launched, sir. 
(There's a little jolt.) 
MCCOY: Despite what Spock said, it's still plenty sensitive. 
CHEKOV: Probe confirmed. It is lodged in the nucleus, near the chromosome bodies. 
KIRK: Mister Kyle, back us out the way we came in. Mister Chekov, a nice, straight line. Don't waste any time. 
KYLE: Backing out, sir. 
CHEKOV: Estimate we'll be out in six point thirty seven minutes. 
KIRK: Very good. 
CHEKOV: Captain, metallic substance outside the ship. 
MCCOY: Spock? 
KIRK: Lieutenant, get me Spock's voice channel. Highest possible gain. 
UHURA: Go ahead, sir. 
KIRK: Spock, do you read me? Do you read me, Spock, do you read me? Come in, Spock. Spock! Scotty, get a tractor beam. 
SCOTT: Captain, we don't have enough time to do it. We only have a fifty three second escape margin. 
KIRK: I'm well aware of that, Mister Scott. Get two tractor beams on that shuttlecraft. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. Tractor beams on. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain, I recommend you abandon the attempt.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Do not risk the ship further on my behalf.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Shut up, Spock! We're rescuing you.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Why, thank you, Captain McCoy.

[Bridge]

KYLE: Almost out. We're approaching the membrane, sir. 
KIRK: Time until explosion? 
CHEKOV: Fifty seven seconds, sir. 
KIRK: Maintaining tractor beams on shuttlecraft, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. I can't guarantee it'll hold when the warhead explodes. The power levels are (looks at readout) The power levels are dead, sir. 
KIRK: You may have just written our epitaph, Mister Scott. 
(The warhead must have exploded, because everyone goes flying around the bridge again.) 
KIRK: Activate main viewing screen. (they see stars.) Mister Chekov, report. 
CHEKOV: The organism is destroyed, sir. The explosion must have ruptured the membrane and thrown us clear. 
SCOTT: Power's coming back, sir. 
KIRK: Shuttlecraft? 
SCOTT: I don't know how, sir, but it's still with us.

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Request permission to come aboard.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock, you're alive!

[Shuttlecraft]

SPOCK: Obviously, Captain. And I have some fascinating data on the organism.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Don't be so smart, Spock. You botched the acetylcholine test. 
KIRK: Later, later, later. Bring the shuttlecraft aboard, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KYLE: Prepare to receive shuttlecraft. Received shuttlecraft. Hangar doors closed. Hangar deck pressurising. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Starbase Six. Ahead warp factor five. I'm still looking forward to a nice period of rest and relaxation on some lovely (gazes at yeoman) planet.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


A Piece Of The Action
Stardate: 4598.0
Original Airdate: 12 Jan, 1968

[Bridge]
CHEKOV: Approaching Sigma Iotia Two, Captain. 
KIRK: Standard orbit, Mister Chekov. 
UHURA: Captain, I have received vocal contact from an official station. They relayed us to a man named Oxmyx. His title is Boss. 
KIRK: Boss? All right, Lieutenant, put him on. Oxmyx. This is Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the Federation of Planets. 
OXMYX [OC]: Hello, Captain. You're from the same outfit as the Horizon? 
KIRK: Yes. Unfortunately, the Horizon was lost with all hands shortly after leaving your planet. We only received her radio report last month. 
OXMYX [OC]: Last month? What are you talking about? The Horizon left here a hundred years ago. 
KIRK: Difficult to explain. We received a report a hundred years late because it was sent by conventional radio. Your system is on the outer reaches of the galaxy. They didn't have subspace communication in those days. 
OXMYX [OC]: Toward the edge of what? 
KIRK: I'll explain it in more detail when I see him. The ship won't land, but we'll transport several people down. Well, that's a little difficult for you to understand, too. I'll explain it in more detail when I see you. Where will be convenient? 
OXMYX [OC]: Well, there's an intersection just at the end of the block, near a yellow fire plug. Think you can find it? 
(Kirk goes over to the engineering station.) 
KIRK: Scotty, do you have the co-ordinates? 
SCOTT: Located, sir. 
KIRK; Good. Mister Oxmyx, we have your intersection located. Will five minutes be all right? 
OXMYX [OC]: Fine. Fine. I'll have a reception committee there to meet you. 
KIRK: Good. I'll be looking forward to it. Kirk out. Scotty, you have the conn. 
(McCoy and Spock enter from the turbolift.) 
KIRK: Spock, McCoy, we're beaming down. Standard equipment.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: The Horizon's contact came before the Non-Interference Directive went into effect. 
MCCOY: They must have interfered with the normal evolution of the planet. 
SPOCK: It will be interesting to see the results of the contamination. 
KIRK: We don't know there is contamination. The evidence is only circumstantial. 
MCCOY: What was the state of the Iotian culture before the Horizon came? 
KIRK: The beginnings of industrialisation.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Horizon reports indicate the Iotians are extremely intelligent and somewhat imitative. 
MCCOY: So we're going down to recontaminate them. 
SPOCK: The damage has been done, Doctor. We are here to repair it. 
KIRK: Let's not argue about it. Let's go study it. Energise.

[Street]

(There's a yellow fire hydrant, litter, a girl in a 1930's dress, motor cars, shops, and men standing around carrying machine guns. Welcome to Chicago.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
MCCOY: This is like coming home. 
KIRK: Home was never like this. I've seen pictures of the old days that look like this. 
SPOCK: Interesting, Captain. Passers-by are carrying, I believe, firearms. 
(They are approached by two men in neat suits with machine guns.) 
KALO: (in a brown suit) Okay, you three, let's see you petrify. 
SPOCK: Sir, would you mind explaining that statement, please? 
KALO: I want to see you turn to stone. Put your hands over your head, or you ain't going to have no head to put your hands over. 
(They are deprived of their phasers and communicators.) 
KALO: What's this? 
KIRK: That's a weapon. Be careful with that. 
KALO: A heater, huh? Hey, the boss will love that. (puts it in his pocket) 
KIRK: Look, we were asked to come down here by Mister Oxmyx. He said 
KALO: I know what he said, bud. He said some of the boys would meet you. Okay, we're meeting you. 
MCCOY: Well, those firearms are not necessary. 
KALO: You trying to make trouble? 
MCCOY: Who, me? 
KALO: Don't give me those baby blue eyes. 
MCCOY: What? 
KALO: I don't go for that innocent routine. 
SPOCK: Sir, does everyone here carry firearms? 
KALO: I never heard such stupid questions in my life. 
MCCOY: Well, since this Oxmyx asked us down here, don't you think we should see him? 
KALO: All right. Get moving. Down the street. 
(Just then a car comes hurtling around the corner. Everyone dives for cover, and gunfire rings out. The silent man in the blue suit gets shot. Kalo returns fire as the car speeds away.) 
KALO: Krako's getting more gall all the time . 
KIRK: Is this how you greet all your guests? 
KALO: It happens, pal. 
MCCOY: That man's dead back there. 
KALO: Yeah? We ain't playing for peanuts. What's the matter, you guys never saw a hit before? 
SPOCK: Sir, there are several questions I would like to ask. 
KALO: Ask the boss. I don't know nothing. Get moving. 
(They leave the crowd to deal with the deceased.) 
MCCOY: This is the contamination you're looking for, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, but the Horizon crew wasn't composed of cold-blooded killers. They didn't report this culture in this state, either. What happened? 
WOMAN: Hey, Kalo. Hey, when's the boss going to do something about the crummy street lights around here, eh? A girl ain't safe. 
WOMAN 2: And how about the laundry pickup? We ain't had a truck by in three weeks. 
KALO: Write him a letter. 
WOMAN 2: I did. He sent it back with postage due. 
WOMAN: Listen, we pay our percentages. We're entitled to a little service for our money. 
KALO: Get lost, will ya? Some people got nothing to do but complain. 
KIRK: Is this the way your citizens do business, their right of petition? 
KALO: They pay their percentages and the boss takes care of them.

[Oxmyx's office]

(It's a lovely high-ceilinged room with wood paneling, tiled floor with a carpet and substantial furniture. A buzzer sounds.) 
OXMYX: (a silver haired man in a suit) Hit that button. (the girl sitting on his desk obeys) Yeah? 
KALO [OC]: Got them, Boss. No sweat. 
OXMYX: All right. Bring them in. (he goes to the pool table and picks up a cue) Which one of you is the captain? 
KIRK: Depends. 
OXMYX: Make yourself a drink, Captain. It's good stuff. I distill it myself. 
KIRK: No, thank you. You're Mister Oxmyx. 
OXMYX: That's me, pal. 
KIRK: This is my first officer, Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy. 
OXMYX: Doctor, huh? Put that chopper down, Kalo. These guys are our guests. Pick up a cue, Captain. Go ahead. You can't be too careful around here these days. 
MCCOY: Yes. Judging from what we've seen so far, I agree. 
KIRK: They call you The Boss, Mister Oxmyx. The boss of what? 
OXMYX: The boss of my territory. I got the biggest in the world. You know, there's one thing wrong with having the biggest. There's always some punk trying to cut you out. That's why you can't be too careful. 
KIRK: You're the government here? 
OXMYX: What government? Look, I told you. I got the territory and I run it. That's all. 
KIRK: But there are other bosses, other territories? 
OXMYX: Yeah, sure. Maybe a dozen or so, not counting the small fry, but then they get burned anyway soon as I get around to it. 
SPOCK: Does that include, if I may ask, a gentleman called Krako? 
OXMYX: How do you know about Krako? 
KALO: He hit us, Boss. 
OXMYX: Okay. You hit him back, you hear? Hard. 
KALO: I'll take care of it. 
(Spock has discovered a book on a lectern.) 
SPOCK: Captain? Gangsters. Chicago. Mobs. Published in 1992. Where'd you get this? 
OXMYX: Hey, wait a minute. That's the Book. 
KIRK: I know it's a book. 
OXMYX: The Book. They left it, the other ship. The Horizon. 
SPOCK: This is the contamination, Captain. Astonishing. An entire culture based on this. 
MCCOY: You said they were imitative, and the book 
OXMYX: I don't want any more cracks about the Book. 
KIRK: Did they leave any other books? 
OXMYX: Sure. Some text books on how to make radio sets and stuff like that, but, look, I brought you here so you could help me, not for you to ask me questions. After that, I'll answer anything you want to know. 
KIRK: What is it you want? 
OXMYX: Well, I was thinking. You Feds must have made a lot of improvements since that other ship came here. You probably got all kinds of fancy heaters up there. So here's the deal. You give me all the heaters I need. Enough tools so I can knock off those punks all at once. Then I'll take over, and all you'll have to do is deal with me. 
KIRK: Now let me get this straight. You want us to supply you with arms and assistance so you can carry out an aggression against your neighbours? 
OXMYX: What aggression? I got to make hits. I want you to help me hit them. That's all. 
SPOCK: Fascinating, but quite impossible. 
KIRK: Mister Oxmyx, my orders are quite explicit. Under no circum 
OXMYX: I ain't interested in your orders. From now on, you're gonna take orders from me. I'm gonna give you just eight hours to give me the things I want. If I don't have those tools by then, I'm gonna call up your ship and have them pick you up in a box. Is that understood, pal? 
(Kalo and another henchman put their guns to Kirk's head.) 
KALO: Hey, Boss, this here's a heater, and I don't know what this is. (tosses them to his leader) 
OXMYX: Let's see how this thing works. 
KIRK: Don't do that. You could knock out the side of the building. 
OXMYX: That good, huh? All you have to do is give me about a hundred of these fancy heaters and we'll have no more trouble. 
KIRK: Out of the question. 
OXMYX: Captain Kirk, I usually get what I want. What's this thing? (silence) All right. Burn him. 
KIRK: Hold it. It's a communication device. 
OXMYX: How does it work? 
KIRK: It's locked onto my ship's systems. 
OXMYX: Kalo, take them to the warehouse and put them in a bag. Keep a sharp eye on them, you hear. 
KALO: In the bag, Boss. Come on. 
(The landing party and the gunmen leave) 
OXMYX: (into communicator) Hey, you. In the ship up there.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: Hey, you in the ship. 
SCOTT: Scott here. Who's this?

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: This is Bela Oxmyx. I got your captain and his friends down here. You want to see them alive

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: Again you'll send me down a hundred of these fancy heaters you've got, and some troops to show me how to use them. 
SCOTT: Am I to understand that you're holding the captain and his party?

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: You heard right, pal. I'm going to give you just eight hours to get me the goods I want, or I put the hit on your friends.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: You understand? 
SCOTT: I don't know. (Oxmyx ends the transmission, laughing) Lieutenant Hadley, check the language banks and find out what a heater is.

[Warehouse]

(The guards are sitting at a makeshift table playing cards whilst the landing party sit on various barrels and crates.) 
MCCOY: One book on the gangs of Chicago did all this. It's amazing. 
SPOCK: They evidently seized upon that one book as the blueprint for an entire society. 
MCCOY: It's the Bible. 
KIRK: In old Chicago, conventional government almost broke down. The gangs nearly took over. 
MCCOY: Yeah, well, Oxmyx is the worst gangster of all. 
SPOCK: We may quarrel with Mister Oxmyx' methods, but his goal is essentially the correct one. This society must become united or it will degenerate into total anarchy. 
KIRK: If this society broke down as the result of the Horizon's influence, then the Federation's responsible, and we've got to do something to straighten this mess out. Spock, if you could get to the sociological computer, do you think you could find a solution? 
SPOCK: Unfortunately, I do not have access to my computers, nor are these gentlemen likely to permit it. 
KIRK: Well, I've got an idea about that. (goes over to the card table and gets guns pointed at him) Gentlemen. Gentlemen. This, card game is a kid's game. 
KALO: You think so, huh? 
KIRK: Oh, yes, yes. I wouldn't waste my time. 
KALO: Who's asking you? 
KIRK: On Beta Antares Four, they play a real game. It's a man's game, but of course it's probably a little beyond you. It requires intelligence. 
KALO: Listen, Kirk, I can play anything you can figure out. Take the cards, big man. Show us how it's played. 
SPOCK: I'm familiar with the culture on Beta Antares. There aren't games 
KIRK: Spock. Spock. (sits) Of course, the cards on Beta Antares Four are different, but not too different. The name of the game is called fizzbin. 
KALO: Fizzbin? 
KIRK: Fizzbin. It's not too difficult. (begins dealing) Each player gets six cards, except for the player on the dealer's right, who gets seven. 
KALO: On the right. 
KIRK: Yes. The second card is turned up, except on Tuesdays. 
KALO: On Tuesday. 
KIRK: Oh, look what you got, two jacks. You got a half fizzbin already. 
KALO: I need another jack. 
KIRK: No, no. If you got another jack, why, you'd have a sralk. 
KALO: A sralk? 
KIRK: Yes. You'd be disqualified. You need a king and a deuce, except at night of course, when you'd need a queen and a four. 
KALO: Except at night. 
KIRK: Right. Oh, look at that. You've got another jack. How lucky you are! How wonderful for you. If you didn't get another jack, if you'd gotten a king, why then you'd get another card, except when it's dark, you'd give it back. 
KALO: If it were dark on Tuesday. 
KIRK: Yes, but what you're after is a royal fizzbin, but the odds in getting a royal fizzbin are astron. Spock, what are the odds in getting a royal fizzbin? 
SPOCK: I have never computed them, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, they're astronomical, believe me. Now, for the last card. We'll call it a kronk. You got that? 
KALO: What? 
(Kirk 'accidentally' drops the card on the floor) 
KALO: I'll get it. 
(As he bends down, Spock nock-pinches him while McCoy and Kirk punch out the other two men. McCoy is quicker than Kirk.) 
KIRK: Spock, find the radio station. Uhura's monitoring the broadcasts. Cut in and have yourselves beamed up to the ship. 
SPOCK: Surely, you're coming, Captain. 
KIRK: I will, but I'm bringing Bela Oxmyx with me. 
MCCOY: Jim, you can't 
KIRK: Bones, this mess is our responsibility. You have your orders. Let's go.

[Alleyway]

(Kirk is running along, carrying a machine gun, when a voice rings out. A man in a light grey suit and straw boater accosts him.) 
ZABO: Hold it! Okay, pally, we're going for a ride. 
KIRK: If you don't mind, I'd rather walk. 
ZABO: Listen, pally, this could either be a taxi or a hearse. You know what I mean? 
KIRK: I'm beginning to get the idea. 
(They climb into the back of a very nice car.)

[Radio station]

(A woman is about to put the needle onto a record when Spock neck-pinches her.) 
MCCOY: You do that very well. Now, how are you with primitive radio equipment? 
SPOCK: Very simple. Amplitude modulation transmission. I simply adjust the frequency, throw this switch, and the Enterprise should answer. 
VOICE [OC]: That was the Jailbreakers with their latest recording on Request Time, brought to you by Bang-Bang, the makers of the sweetest little automatic in the world 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
MCCOY: And very simple. 
SPOCK: Let me see. (throws a few more switches and picks up the microphone.) Enterprise, this is Mister Spock. 
UHURA [OC]: Lieutenant Uhura here, Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Mister Spock, what are you doing on this frequency?

[Radio station]

SPOCK: A very long and complicated story, Lieutenant. Notify the transporter room, Two to beam up, these co-ordinates.

[Krako's office]

(The brass plaque by the front door of the building proclaims 'JoJo Krako, Boss, Southside Territory'. The straw boaters are the badge of his organisation. JoJo is practising throwing darts over his shoulder at a poster of Oxmyx. Kirk is brought in. There's a copy of the Book on a lectern here too.)
KRAKO: So you're the Fed, huh? Well, well, well, well, well. 
KIRK: And you? 
KRAKO: Krako. JoJo Krako. I'm the head of the whole Southside Territory. Hey, glad to see you. 
KIRK: Would you mind telling me how you even know who I am? 
KRAKO: Sit down, Kirk. I've got all of Bela's communications bugged. He can't make a date with a broad unless I know about it. Well, I guess you want to know why I brought you here. 
KIRK: You want to make a deal. 
KRAKO: Hey, I like that. That is sharp. That's sharp, eh, Zabo? 
ZABO: Sharp, Boss. 
KRAKO: That's right, a deal. I want you to help me. 
(He snaps his fingers, and the girl walks over to Kirk and starts massaging his shoulders.) 
KIRK: Let me guess. You want, you'll want heaters, and then you'll want troops to teach them how to use them. And then you'll attack the other bosses and take over the whole planet. Then we'll sit down and talk, right? 
KRAKO: Wrong! I know Bela. He didn't offer you beans. Now, me, I'm a reasonable man. You give me what I want and I'll cut you in for, say, a third. Skimmed right off the top. Well, what do you think? 
KIRK: I got a better idea. This planet has to be united. You know that. Bela knows that. Let's sit down. You, me, Bela. Discuss this whole matter, contact the other bosses, and talk about it like reasonable men. 
KRAKO: You watch it, Kirk. The Book tells us how to handle things. (snaps his fingers to recall the girl) You make hits. Somebody argues, you lean on 'em. What do you think, we're stupid or something? 
KIRK: No, I don't think you're stupid. I just think your behaviour is arrested. 
KRAKO: I haven't been arrested in my whole life! Listen, pally, I know how to get what I want. You want to live, don't you, Kirk? You bet you do. But after I get through with you, you're liable to be sorry unless you come across. Hold him here. Tell Cirl the Knife to sharpen up his blade. I just might have a job for him. Unless you come across with the heaters. 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Krako. No deal. 
KRAKO: That's too bad. Put him on ice!

[Small office]

(They put him in a proper working office, with letter opener, desk with blotting paper, a cot-bed and a nice old radio with nice old valves and stuff inside. Kirk starts taking it apart.)

[Bridge]

MCCOY: Well? 
SPOCK: Futile, Doctor. No specifics. There is no record of such a culture based on a moral inversion. 
MCCOY: You mean you're giving up? 
SPOCK: No, Doctor. I'm merely saying the computers can offer us no logical, rational, factual way out of our current dilemma. 
UHURA: Mister Spock, Mister Oxmyx is making contact from the surface. 
SPOCK: On audio, Lieutenant. Mister Oxmyx, this is Mister Spock. 
OXMYX [OC]: Huh? Hey, how'd you get back up there? 
SPOCK: Irrelevant, since we are here.

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: Oh, yeah. I tell you, you'd better come on back down.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: Krako's put the bag on your captain. 
SPOCK: Why would he put a bag on our captain?

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: Kidnapped him, you dope.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: He'll scrag him, too. 
SPOCK: If I understand you correctly, that would seem to be a problem.

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: Look, you guys got something I want. I can help you get your captain back.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: Then we can talk about the deal I want. 
SPOCK: I'm afraid I find it difficult to trust you, Mister Oxmyx.

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: What's to trust? Business is business. We'll call a truce. You come on down.

[Bridge]

OXMYX [OC]: My boys'll spring Kirk, and then we'll talk about giving me a hand. 
SPOCK: You'll show no further hostility?

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: I'm a businessman, pally. What do ya say?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Since we must have our captain back, I accept.

[Oxmyx's office]

SPOCK [OC]: We shall arrive in your office within ten minutes. Spock out.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: You mean you're going to trust him? 
SPOCK: If we are to save the captain without blatant, forceful interference on this planet, Doctor, we must have the assistance of someone indigenous. We are therefore forced to trust Mister Oxmyx.

[Small office]

(Kirk has used copper wire to create a trip-wire, and starts throwing the waste paper bin around to make a noise.) 
KIRK: Help me! Help! Help me! 
(A henchman dashes in and goes flying over the wire. Kirk kicks him unconscious, then uses a blanket to disorient Zabo when he comes in before knocking him out too, taking a weapon and making his escape.)

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, though we hope to avoid interference, I suggest you set one of our phaser banks on a strong stun position. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: Now you're beginning to make sense. 
SPOCK: I trust we shall not have to use them, but it is best to be prepared. Energise.

[Oxmyx's office]

OXMYX: You know what to do. 
KALO: Don't worry, Boss. They can't do nothing till they're through sparkling. 
OXMYX: Just the same, you be careful. They'll have heaters on them. (to his girl) Now you watch this. 
(Spock and McCoy arrive, and are promptly taken prisoner.)

Ship's log. Mister Spock reporting. Incredible as it seems, Doctor McCoy and I are once again prisoners of the chief criminal boss of a society patterned after old Earth gangsters.

OXMYX: (taking the phasers) Pick up many more of these, I won't need your co-operation. 
SPOCK: Mister Oxmyx, I understood we had an arrangement, a truce. 
OXMYX: I was hoping you'd think that, dummy. 
MCCOY: We're trying to help you, Oxmyx. 
OXMYX: Nobody helps nobody but himself. 
SPOCK: Sir, you are employing a double negative. 
OXMYX: Huh? 
SPOCK: I fail to see why you do not understand us. You yourself have stated the need for unity of authority on this planet. We agree. 
OXMYX: Yeah, but I got to be the unity. 
SPOCK: Co-operation, sir, would inevitably result 
OXMYX: The most co-operative man in this world is a dead man. And if you don't keep your mouth shut, you're going to be co-operatin'. 
(The door opens and Kirk enters with his machine gun.) 
KIRK: Drop the guns. Drop 'em. (McCoy and Spock take back their phasers) Move down there. 
OXMYX: Hey, Captain, you got away from Krako. You know, that ain't easy. 
KIRK: I thought you were supposed to report to the ship, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: We did, Captain. The situation required our return. 
KIRK: It may be just as well. Did you find out anything from the computer? 
SPOCK: Nothing useful. Logic and practical information do not seem to apply here. 
MCCOY: You admit that? 
SPOCK: To deny the facts would be illogical, Doctor. 
KIRK: Then you don't mind if I play a hunch? 
SPOCK: I'm not sanguine about hunches, Captain, but I have no practical alternative. 
MCCOY: What are we going to do now, Jim? 
KIRK: Well, now that we have Bela, I'm going to put the bag on Krako. (grabs the guy in a blue suit) Listen, you. Say, that's nice material. 
MAN: It ought to be. It cost a bundle. 
KIRK; Get out of 'em. 
MAN: Hey! 
KIRK: I said. 
KALO: Now just a minute. 
KIRK: You too! Get out of the clothes. Nobody's going to put the bag on me any more.

[Street]

(Kirk is in the blue suit, and Spock in Kalo's brown one, when they leave Bela's headquarters and go over to the cream sedan parked by the kerb.) 
KIRK: Wheels, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: A fliwer, Captain. 
KIRK: Key in the ignition. Turn the ignition on. And nothing happens. Where's the starter? There's the starter. Yes! 
SPOCK: Interesting. 
KIRK: (pushing the gear lever and making grinding noises) Oops! Gears. 
SPOCK: Yes. Oh. I believe they had a device known as a clutch. Clutch, Captain. Perhaps one of those pedals on the floor. 
KIRK: (puts it quietly into gear) I kind of like this. I'm going to get one myself. 
(He lets up the clutch, and they go backwards. The car kangaroos elegantly down the street and somehow makes it to JoJo's place.)
SPOCK: Captain, you are an excellent starship commander, but as a taxi driver you leave much to be desired. 
KIRK: It was that bad? 
(They get out and note the guards at the main entrance) 
KIRK: Now, that could be a bit of a problem. If they were inside, where they couldn't be seen, we could stun them with our phasers, but not out here. 
SPOCK: If we can get close enough to them, we should be able to render them harmless with reasonable rapidity. 
(A guard checks the contents of a passing perambulator.) 
KIRK: They don't look like the trusting type. 
BOY: (runs over to them) It's a hit, ain't it? 
SPOCK: I beg your pardon? 
BOY: You're going to hit somebody. Can I watch? 
KIRK: Young man, run along and play. 
BOY: Where'd you get them ears? 
SPOCK: Young man 
BOY: You going to hit Krako out here? You open up and you'll be scragged from every window in the street. I can fix it for ya. 
SPOCK: Young man, this is likely to be quite hazardous. 
KIRK: Hold on, Spock. Out of the mouths of babes 
BOY: Who you callin' a babe? 
KIRK: I'm calling you a babe. 
BOY: You calling me a babe? (brandishes his little knife.) 
KIRK: Yeah I'm calling you a babe, but there's nothing personal in it. Sit down. (on the car bumper) You know a way we can get close to them? 
BOY: Sure. 
KIRK: How? 
BOY: What's in it for me? 
KIRK: What do you want? 
BOY: A piece of the action. 
SPOCK: You do not even know what the action is going to be. 
BOY: I figure it's got to be a thick percentage or you wouldn't be trying to hit Krako. 
SPOCK: Logical. 
KIRK: All right, young man. We'll guarantee you a piece of the action if we can pull this thing off. 
BOY: Is that a contract? 
KIRK: Done. (they shake on it) What do we do? 
BOY: You'll know what to do. 
(He skips across the street, fighting imaginary enemies with his very real knife.) 
BOY: And that! And how do you like that? Think you can gang up on me, huh? What are you, chicken? 
(The guards grin as he runs over to them.) 
BOY: Come on, why don't you gang up on me? I'll cut off your head and throw it in your face! Take that, and that, and falls over) Daddy, Daddy, I hurt myself! 
KIRK: That's it. Let's go. 
GUARD: What's the matter? Did you hurt yourself, kid? 
BOY: I want my daddy! 
GUARD: Cute kid, ain't he? 
BOY: Daddy! I want my daddy! 
KIRK: Sonny! 
BOY: I want my daddy. 
KIRK: Sonny! Wait a moment. What have they done? What have they done to you? What have you done? 
(Kirk hits one while Spock neck-pinches the other. There's a bit of argy-bargy just inside the door before it's over.) 
KIRK: A piece of the action.

[Krako's HQ]

KIRK: No one can see. Put your phaser on stun. 
(They stun two guards in the corridor in front of them. Krako is coming down the stairs with his girl.) 
KRAKO: Well, ain't this nice? I was wondering how I was going to get you back, and here you deliver yourself! Who's your friend with the ears, Kirk? 
KIRK: I think you've got it reversed, Mister Krako. 
KRAKO: I ain't, pally. Put down your heaters. 
SPOCK: Captain, I believe that perhaps it would be wise to do as he says. I just heard the sound of 
KIRK: The sound of a machine gun bolt being pulled back. (there are two more guards behind them.) (JoJo is shaking a phaser to make it work.) 
KIRK: Mister Krako, I don't, er 
KRAKO: So this is the fancy heater, huh? How does it work? 
KIRK: I'm trying to tell you, Mister Krako, that this is bigger than you, Oxmyx or anyone. 
KRAKO: The only thing I want you to tell me is how it works. 
KIRK: Can you trust all your men? 
KRAKO: Of course I can! 
KIRK: Well, one of these can make a man a pretty big boss, you know. 
KRAKO: I either trust 'em, or they're dead. Let's go in here and talk about it.

[Krako's office]

KRAKO: Now we got no busy little eyes to worry about. How does this thing work? 
KIRK: All right, Krako, we don't have time to show you how to play with toys! (takes the phaser back) 
KRAKO: Toys? 
KIRK: What do you think we're here for, to get a cut of your deal? Forget it. That's peanuts to an outfit like the Federation. Right? 
SPOCK: Unquestionably. 
KIRK: Right? 
SPOCK: Right. 
KIRK: Now look, Krako, we're taking over the whole ball of wax. You co-operate with us and maybe we'll cut you in for a piece of the action. 
SPOCK: A miniscule. A very small piece. 
KRAKO: How much is that? 
KIRK: That's, er. We'll figure it out later. 
KRAKO: I thought you guys had laws. No interference. 
KIRK: Who's interfering? We're taking over. Check? 
SPOCK: Right. 
KIRK: The planet is being taken over by the Federation, but we don't want to come in here and use our muscle, you know what I mean? That ain't subtle. So what we do is we help one guy take over the planet. He pulls the strings, and then we pull his. (to Spock) Hey, you, sit down. 
(They settle them selves with their feet up on Krako's desk.) 
KRAKO: What's your cut? 
KIRK: What do you care as long as you're being cut in? Course, there's always Bela Oxmyx. 
KRAKO: All right, it's a deal. Call your ship. Bring down your boys and whatever else you need. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Enterprise. Scott here. 
KIRK: All right, Scotty. We made a deal with Krako.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We did, sir?

[Krako's office]

KIRK: Yeah. We're ready to make the hit. We're taking over the whole planet as soon as you get ready.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Do you think that's wise, sir?

[Krako's office]

KIRK: Sure. We can trust Krako, but we don't have any choice. You know what I mean? He's standing about twelve feet in front of me, all ready to be our pal.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Of course, Scotty, I'd like to show him the ship, just to show him that we're, er, we're on the level. But you know how it is. 
SCOTT: Aye. I know indeed.

[Krako's office]

KIRK: Scotty, we'll need phasers to equip every one of Krako's men. We'll need advisors and troops to back him up on the hit. You got all that, Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, Captain.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain. We're preparing everything. It'll be ready when you give the word.

[Krako's office]

KIRK: You may begin, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT [OC]: Acknowledged, Captain. 
KRAKO: You mean you're going to start sending down your boys now? 
KIRK: Not exactly. 
(Krako is beamed away, and the astonished guards are easily overpowered again.) 
KIRK: Right? 
SPOCK: Check. 
(They leave.)

[Transporter room]

(Two armed security men have met Krako.) 
KRAKO: How the hell'd I get here? What? What happened? (Scott enters) You. You must be that Scott fellow Kirk was talking to. I want to know what happened. 
SCOTT: It looks like we put the bag on you, doesn't it. 
KRAKO: I got rights. 
SCOTT: You've got nothing. You mind your place, mister, or you'll be wearing concrete galoshes. 
KRAKO: You mean cement overshoes? 
SCOTT: Er. Aye.

[Street]

(Kirk runs towards the car.) 
SPOCK: Must we? 
KIRK: It's faster than walking. 
SPOCK: But not as safe. 
KIRK: Are you afraid of cars? 
SPOCK: Not at all, Captain. It's your driving that alarms me. 
KIRK: Spock, I've got the hang of it. Now go on. 
(The machine guns are still where Spock left them in the open top car, and Kirk still puts it into reverse first.)

[Krako's office]

ZABO: (waking up) Oh, not again. (rouses the other man) Hey, wake up. You all right? (opens the door) Hey, you guys. Come in here. The Feds snatched Krako. I never seen anything like it. They're going to move in unless we stop 'em now. 
GUARD: Yeah? How? 
ZABO: Well, Bela's mixed up in this somehow. I've got a sneaking hunch they're going to high-tail it back to his territory. You know what we're going to do? We're going to hit his place.

[Oxmyx's office]

MCCOY: Where are they? 
OXMYX: Knowing Krako, he'll probably send them back on a blotter. 
KIRK: Wrong again, Oxmyx. 
MCCOY: Jim. 
KIRK: Knock it off, Sawbones. I want to talk to this creep. Now listen, I'm getting tired of playing pattycake with you penny-ante operators. 
OXMYX: What do you mean, penny-ante operator? 
KIRK: You're a penny-ante operator. Sit down. All right, Spocko, cover him. Now listen, sweetheart. The Federation's moving in, taking over. You play ball, we'll cut you in. You don't, you're out. All the way out. You know what I mean? 
OXMYX: Yeah, sure. Why didn't you say so in the first place? All you had to do was explain it to me. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Enterprise. Scott here, sir.

[Oxmyx's office]

KIRK: You got Krako on ice? 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, he's here. Mad enough

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: To chew neutronium, but behaving himself. 
KIRK [OC]: Okay, baby. Cool him till I flag you. 
SCOTT: Flag me?

[Oxmyx's office]

KIRK: Keep him until I send for him. We're going to make some old-style phone calls from this locale. So you locate the man on the other end of the blower and give him a ride to this flop. 
SCOTT [OC]: What? 
KIRK: Find the man at the other end of the phone

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: And transport him to these co-ordinates.

[Oxmyx's office]

KIRK: Can do, sweetheart?

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Can do, Captain.

[Oxmyx's office]

SCOTT [OC]: Standing by. 
KIRK: Now you. Get on the blower and call the other bosses. 
OXMYX: I sure don't know what you think you're talking about. 
KIRK: Get with it. I'm giving the orders here. 
OXMYX: Hello. Hello? 
KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here. 
OXMYX: Guess who? 
KIRK: Lock in and energise. 
OXMYX: Yeah, you bet your life I've got a lot of nerve. What are you going to do about it? 
TEPO: Coming over with my boys and we (realises he's not where he was a second earlier) Mother. 
OXMYX: Hey, Captain, that ain't bad. 
KIRK: Yeah. 
SPOCK: I would advise you to keep dialing, Oxmyx.

[Krako's office]

ZABO: All right. You know what to do. We hit Bela's place and nobody comes out alive. All right. Let's go.

[Oxmyx's office]

(It's getting crowded and noisy. The minor bosses are all sporting bowler hats. Krako is there too. Kirk is standing on the pool table.) 
KIRK: All right! All right! All right! All right! Now the Federation's taking over whether you like it or not. You people, you've been running this planet like a piecework factory. From now on, it's going to be under one roof. You're going to run it like a business. That means you're going to make a profit. 
TEPO: And what's your percentage? 
KIRK: I'm cutting the Federation in for forty percent. You got any objections? 
TEPO: Yeah! I hear a lot of talk, but all I see here is you and a couple of your boys. I don't see no Federation. 
KRAKO: Listen. They got a ship. I know. I was there. 
OXMYX: Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Tepo's got a point. All we ever seen is them. 
TEPO: What, a couple of boys? 
KRAKO: I'm not going to believe my eyes. 
(general bedlam) 
KIRK: Hang on a minute. Hang on a minute. Quiet! Just a moment! 
KRAKO: Let me say something. I only saw three guys in that ship. Maybe there ain't no more. 
KIRK: There are over four hundred guys there. 
KRAKO: That's your story, buster. 
(There's a gunfight outside in the street.) 
KRAKO: Hey, it's my boys. They're making a hit at this place. 
(Everyone dashes to the windows to watch.) 
OXMYX: My boys will put you down. 
KRAKO: Want to bet? (gets the gun off McCoy) Keep moving. One move out of you two, I'll drill them. Give me the hardware. 
OXMYX: Hey, that's great, Krako. Now we got hostages again. We can make a deal with the Feds up there. 
KRAKO: Are you kidding? This one's all mine. From now on, nobody's going no place. I'm going to be the big boss in this here territory. 
KIRK: Now, wait a minute. Wait a minute. Get that heater down. Don't you want to take a look at what you're going to fight? 
KRAKO: I already seen it. You're nothing, Fed. 
KIRK: All right, but at least let me call my ship one last time and say goodbye. 
KRAKO: Well, all right. Go ahead. Don't get smart. 
KIRK: Hello, Scotty. This is Kirk.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Enterprise. Scott here, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: Scotty, put the ship's phasers on stun. Fire a burst in a one-block radius around these co-ordinates. 
SCOTT: Right away, sir. Scott out.

[Oxmyx's office]

(The street outside is filled with green light, and everyone falls down. The watching bosses are stunned into silence for a moment.) 
KRAKO: Gee, that's some trick. 
OXMYX: Hey, did you see that? 
KIRK: They're not dead, just knocked out for a while. But they might just as well have been that way if we wanted them to. 
OXMYX: Okay, okay, Kirk, so we get the message. Now, what was this syndicate deal you were talking about? 
TEPO: He was talking about a percentage. 
KIRK: I was talking about both. 
OXMYX: Okay. A syndicate makes sense to me. I'm a peaceful man at heart, but I'm sick and tired of all these hits. I hit Krako, Krako hits Tepo, Tepo hits me. There's too many bosses. We can't get anything done. 
I was thinking if there was just one, maybe somebody like you, as the top boss, then we can get things done. 
KIRK: Hey, Bela, no, no, no. The Federation can't get connected with a small-time operation like this. No, I was thinking, Bela, you would be the top boss. Krako, you'd be his lieutenant. The rest of you, I don't want any trouble from the rest of you because you'll have to answer to the Federation. We'll be back every year to collect our cut. 
TEPO: Look, you figure maybe forty percent's enough? 
KIRK: Yeah, I think forty percent's sufficient. 
OXMYX: It's reasonable. It sounds reasonable. That sound reasonable to you? 
(Chorus of approval.) 
KIRK: It's reasonable, Mister Oxmyx. Let's break out some of your drinking stuff and celebrate the syndicate.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Gentlemen, you two have been brooding ever since we returned to the ship. 
SPOCK: Brooding, Captain? 
KIRK: Brooding, Mister Spock. A sombre, emotional state. Now, do you wish to continue it or are you going to discuss it? 
SPOCK: Captain, I'm neither brooding nor sombre. But I do have reservations about your solution to the problem of the Iotians. 
KIRK: Ah, yes. I understand that. You don't think it's logical to leave a criminal organisation in charge. 
SPOCK: Highly irregular, to say the least, Captain. I'm also curious as to how you propose to explain to Starfleet Command that a starship will be sent each year to collect our cut. 
KIRK: Yes, that's a very good question, Mister Spock. I propose our cut be put into the planetary treasury and used to guide the Iotians into a more ethical system. Despite themselves, they'll be forced to accept conventional responsibilities. Isn't that logical? All right, Bones, in the language of the planet, what's your beef? 
MCCOY: I don't know how serious this is, Jim, and I don't quite know how to tell you 
KIRK: Go ahead. 
MCCOY: But in all the confusion I 
KIRK: Tell me. 
MCCOY: I think I left it in Bela's office. 
KIRK: You left it? 
MCCOY: Somewhere. I'm not certain. 
KIRK: You're not certain of what? 
MCCOY: I left my communicator. 
KIRK: In Bela's office? 
SPOCK: Captain. If the Iotians, who are very bright and imitative people, should take that communicator apart 
KIRK: They will, they will. And they'll find out how the transtator works. 
SPOCK: The transtator is the basis for every important piece of equipment that we have. 
KIRK: Everything. 
MCCOY: You really think it's that serious? 
KIRK: Serious? Serious, Bones? It upsets the whole percentage. 
MCCOY: How do you mean? 
KIRK: Well, in a few years, the Iotians may demand a piece of our action.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.
The Gamesters Of Triskelion
Stardate: 3211.7
Original Airdate: 5 Jan, 1968

Captain's log, stardate 3211.7. We are entering standard orbit about Gamma Two, an uninhabited planetoid with an automatic communications and astrogation station.
[Bridge]

KIRK: Ensign Chekov, Lieutenant Uhura, and I will beam down and make a routine check of its facilities. 
CHEKOV: Standard orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. Mind the store, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged, Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, let's go. 
UHURA: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Energise, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. 
(But before he can touch the controls, the landing party vanish abruptly.)

[Combat area]

(The three appear lying on the ground, on a decorated surface. There are iron railings around a vaguely triangular area, and three benches, one on each side.) 
CHEKOV: Captain. what happened? 
KIRK: It must be a transporter malfunction. 
CHEKOV: That was a rough trip. 
KIRK: This isn't Gamma Two. Look at the colour of that sky. (it's green) 
UHURA: This is the craziest landing pad I've ever seen. 
KIRK: That's a trinary sun.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Scott to Bridge.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Spock here.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Chekov. they vanished. They got onto the transporter platform and they just vanished.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: I presume you mean they vanished in a manner not consistent with the usual workings of the transporter, Mister Scott.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Aye, of course I mean that. You think I'd call if they just beamed down?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Have you reversed controls?

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: I've made all the proper checks. There was nothing. There was no flash of light, nothing. They were gone.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Power surge?

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Not down here. All the dials were right and the transporter was functioning perfectly.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Recheck your equipment, Mister Scott. I'll scan for them on the planet's surface. Spock out.

[Combat area]

CHEKOV: But Captain, if we're not on Gamma Two, then where are we? 
KIRK: That's what I'd like to know. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Dead. 
CHEKOV: Mine, too. 
UHURA: Captain. Look. 
(People are approaching them. One big guy in a fur, with teeth that hold his mouth open, another male with a knife, a female in pink carrying a lance-like weapon, and another in silver with green hair.) KIRK: Phasers on stun. Fire. (nothing happens) Hand-to-hand. 
(The men go one-on-one while Uhura has to deal with both women simultaneously. They are not fairly matched. Chekov cannot handle the giant and Uhura quickly gives up. Only Kirk acquits himself well against the normal male, until green-hair intervenes with her weapon.)

Captain's log, stardate 3211.8. While beaming down from the Enterprise to inspect facilities on Gamma Two, the normal transporter sequence has been interrupted, and we find ourselves on a strange and hostile planet, surrounded by creatures belonging to races scattered all through the galaxy.

[Combat area]

(A thin bald male in a long black cloak pops into the scene.) 
GALT: Excellent, Captain Kirk. Although we expected strength and competitive spirit, we are greatly pleased. 
KIRK: Either of you hurt? 
UHURA: I don't think so, Captain. 
CHEKOV: Nobody's hurt, Captain. Yet. 
GALT: Admirable, Chekov. Admirable. You also, Uhura. Your spirit is as great as the captain's. I can see you all will prove invaluable here. I am Galt, Master Thrall of the planet Triskelion. I have been sent to welcome you.

[Cell]

(All three are fastened securely to the wall, and have collars around their necks.) 
GALT: There, Captain. Now you are prepared for your training. 
KIRK: How do you know our names? 
GALT: The Providers were expecting you, Captain. They arranged your transportation. 
KIRK: These Providers of yours, are they 
GALT: Correction, Captain. The Providers are not ours. We are theirs. 
KIRK: What do they want from us? 
GALT: You are to be trained, of course. What other use is there for thralls? 
KIRK: Thralls? You must be mistaken. We're officers of a United spaceship on Federation business. 
GALT: There has been no mistake. Your old titles mean nothing here, Captain. You are thralls now. You are to be taken to the training enclosure. (the restraints are released) Come. Places have been prepared for you. 
KIRK: We're not going anywhere until we have some information. Who are you? What is this place? What do you think you're going to do with us? 
GALT: I am Galt, the Master Thrall. This place is the planet Triskelion. You are to be trained and spend the rest of your lives here.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, I've checked that transporter from one end to the other. Every circuit works perfectly. Whatever that power surge was, it had nothing to do with the transporter or any other system aboard this ship. 
SPOCK: I'm beginning to believe that, Mister Scott. I've conducted two sweeps of the planet's surface. There is no sign of life. 
MCCOY: Then what the devil is happening? Does that mean their atoms are just floating around out there? 
SPOCK: No, Doctor. Even that would show up on our sensors. 
SCOTT: Where are they then? 
SPOCK: The only answers are negative. No magnetic storms, no ionic interference, no breakdown in your equipment. 
MCCOY: A negative attitude is no good to us. We can't just leave them out there, wherever they are. 
SPOCK: We shall continue sensor scans, Doctor. At the moment, that is all we can do, except hope for a rational explanation. 
MCCOY: Hope? I always thought that was a human failing, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: True, Doctor. Constant exposure does result in a certain degree of contamination.

[Accommodation block]

(A curved corridor, with doors off on either side. The doors have iron bars in the upper half.) 
GALT: These are your quarters. Open, thralls. 
(As the doors slide open, Chekov and Kirk hit their minders and they all run. Galt's eyes glow, the collars glow and the Starfleet escapees collapse, choking.) 
GALT: That was foolish, Captain. Escape is quite impossible, as demonstrated by your collars of obedience. Return to your quarters. 
(They do, and they are left alone.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: They are not within the confines of this solar system. 
MCCOY: It's been nearly an hour. Can people live that long as disassembled atoms in a transporter beam? 
SPOCK: I have never heard of a study being done, but it would be a fascinating project. 
MCCOY: Fascinating? Those people are friends of ours out there, if they're still alive. 
SPOCK: Precisely. 
MCCOY: The odds are not good. 
SPOCK: No. I would say approximately four hundred 
MCCOY: Don't quote odds and don't give me anymore dispassionate logic, Mister Spock. Just keep looking for them. 
SPOCK: I would welcome a suggestion, Doctor, even an emotional one, as to where to look. 
MCCOY: First time you've ever asked me for anything, and it has to be an occasion like this.

[Accommodation block]

CHEKOV: Captain, the Enterprise. They will be trying to find us, won't they? 
UHURA: They'll try, but where do they look? We're here, and we don't know where it is. 
KIRK: This system's star is a trinary. Limits it a bit, but we're a long way from the Enterprise, if we're in the same dimension. 
(The male goes to Uhura's cell with a tray.) 
LARS: I am your drill thrall. I am called Lars. 
KIRK: What do you want from her? 
LARS: That is not your concern. Your drill thralls will attend you presently. (he opens Uhura's door and goes in) There is little time. 
UHURA [OC]: What are you doing? Get out! 
LARS [OC]: I have been selected for you. 
(The shadow play tells all we need to know. And the screams.) 
KIRK: Lieutenant, are you all right? Uhura! Lieutenant! Lieutenant, are you all right? Lieutenant, answer me! Lieutenant! What's happening to Lieutenant Uhura? Lieutenant, are you all right? 
LARS: It is not allowed to refuse selection. 
(He leaves. Uhura's clothes are intact.) 
SHAHNA: (to Kirk): Step away from the door. (she enters with a tray) Come. It is the nourishment interval.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain's log, stardate 3259.2. First Officer Spock in command. The Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Ensign Chekov have been missing for nearly two hours. Computer probability projections are useless due to insufficient data. 
HAINES: (a woman in gold uniform at Spock's station) Mister Spock, I'm getting a fluctuating energy reading on this hydrogen cloud. It's faint, sir, but it consistently reads an excess of predictable energy level. 
SPOCK: Interesting. It seems to be an ionisation trail.
MCCOY: What would account for that, Spock? 
SPOCK: Exactly the question I have just fed to the computers, Doctor. And the answer is, nothing known to us would account for it. 
SCOTT: Well, the transporter has neither the power nor the range to account for that. 
SPOCK: Plot a follow course, Ensign Haines. 
HAINES: (now in Chekov's seat) Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: You're going to leave here without them and run off on some wild goose chase halfway across the galaxy just because you found a discrepancy in a hydrogen cloud? 
SPOCK: Doctor, I am chasing the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Ensign Chekov, not some wild aquatic fowl. This is the only lead we've had. 
HAINES: Course plotted and laid in, Mister Spock. Three ten mark two four one. 
SPOCK: Initiate. Warp factor two.

[Chekov's cell]

(The robust woman in pink brings him his tray. She smiles at him.) 
CHEKOV: You, you have been selected for me? 
TAMOON: (with a deep voice) No. I am only your drill thrall. I have brought you nourishment. It is a nice name, Chee-koo. 
CHEKOV: Chekov. 
TAMOON: Chee-koof! It is a very nice name. I am called Tamoon. 
CHEKOV: (nervous of her intentions) Oh, pleased, Pleased to know you, miss. 
TAMOON: You are a fine specimen. I like you better than the others. I will instruct you well, so my Provider will take you. 
CHEKOV: That's very kind of you, miss, but 
TAMOON: If my Provider is pleased, we may even be selected for each other.

[Kirk's cell]

KIRK: I didn't realise I was so hungry. Whatever you call this, it is very good. 
SHAHNA: It is nourishment. We call it that. 
KIRK: Nourishment. That's very practical. What do you call this collar? 
SHAHNA: It is a sign of our Provider. By the colour of the lights it can be known who holds us. When you are vended, you will also have a colour. 
KIRK: Vended? You mean bought, sold. 
SHAHNA: When you are developed. The Provider who offers the most quatloos puts his colour on us. 
KIRK: Our race has another name for it. Slavery. This collar of obedience, is Galt the only one who can operate it? 
SHAHNA: It is only to warn and punish. 
KIRK: How does he work it? 
SHAHNA: It is not permitted to talk of that. 
KIRK: Will you provide all my nourishment? 
SHAHNA: Of course. I am your drill thrall. I will train you well. 
KIRK: Yes, I'm sure you will. I must say, I've never seen a top sergeant who looked like you. 
SHAHNA: What does that mean? 
KIRK: It means you're a very beautiful woman. 
SHAHNA: What is beautiful? 
KIRK: You mean nobody's ever told you that before? well, er, beautiful is, Beautiful. (he holds up the tray so she can see her reflection) That's beautiful. Shahna, where were you born? 
SHAHNA: Born? I have been here always. 
KIRK: Your parents. Where are they? Your mother and father. 
SHAHNA: She who bore me was killed in a freestyle match. 
KIRK: Freestyle? 
SHAHNA: You will learn all these things. 
KIRK: Lars and Chekov's drill thrall. They weren't born here. Where do they come from? 
SHAHNA: It is not permitted. (a gong sounds and a red light flashes) The exercise interval. This is your training harness. Put it on.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: This is ridiculous. There's nothing out there. Nothing at all. 
SCOTT: We certainly seem to be heading into an empty sector. 
SPOCK: Projecting back along the path of ionisation, the nearest system is M two four alpha. 
SCOTT: That must be two dozen light years away. 
SPOCK: Eleven point six three zero. 
MCCOY: Are you suggesting that they could have transported over a distance of? You're out of your Vulcan mind, Spock. 
SPOCK: I'm suggesting nothing, Doctor. I am merely pursuing the only logical course available to us.

[Training area]

(The three are learning how to fight with the long poles with the curved hook on one end and grapple on the other. Galt enters with another thrall, his hands tied behind him.)
GALT: Hold. This thrall was slow in obeying a command. For his punishment, he will be practice target. As you charge, you will strike the practice target when you pass. You begin, Uhura. 
UHURA: No! 
GALT: It is not allowed to refuse a training exercise. 
UHURA: I don't care whether it's allowed or not. I will not do it. 
KIRK: None of us will do it, Galt. 
GALT: It is part of your training. The Providers wish it. 
KIRK: The devil with the Providers. 
CHEKOV: Cossacks. 
(Galt gives them a reminder of what their collars do.) 
GALT: We have been tolerant because you are newcomers, but I see you must be given a lesson. Lars. (Lars unties the thrall) Kloog. Kloog will administer correction. Uhura, take your place on the triad. (Lars starts to tie Uhura's hands behind her back.) Tie her. 
KIRK: No. No! I am responsible for the actions of my people. I demand to see the Providers. 
GALT: It is not permitted. But, Captain, since you assume responsibility for your people, you will take the punishment. It is less painful than the collar. Turn around. {Lars ties Kirk's hands.) Captain, you will be practice target. It is a shame to lose you, Captain, but it is worth it as an example to the others.

Captain's log, supplemental. Stardate, unknown. Our strange captivity continues. This planet is called Triskelion. We do not know its location. We do not know who controls it. Its dangers are abundantly clear.

[Combat area]

(Kloog (the big, silent one) has a whip and net, which Kirk is trying to dodge. His back is bloody and his shirt is torn, but he manages to land a good kick on Kloog.) 
GALT: Hold. Rest interval. Fifteen trisecs. 
(The two combatants join their comrades on the benches.) 
KIRK: He's pretty fast with that whip. 
SHAHNA: This will strengthen you. Drink it. Kloog's left eye is weak. Approach him from that side. 
GALT: Resume places. 
(Kirk carries on dodging the whip, whilst loosening his bonds. Finally he manages to get his hands in front of him, jump on Kloog's back and try to strangle him. Kloog falls to the ground.) 
ONE [OC]: Hold. 
GALT: We hold, Provider One. 
ONE [OC]: Provider One bids three hundred quatloos for the newcomers. 
TWO [OC]: Provider Two, three hundred and fifty quatloos. 
THREE [OC]: Provider Three, four hundred. 
TWO [OC]: One thousand quatloos. 
THREE [OC]: One thousand fifty quatloos. 
ONE [OC]: Two thousand. 
GALT: (after a pause) Two thousand quatloos are bid. Is there a challenge? The newcomers have been vended to Provider One. 
KIRK: We're free people. We belong to no one. 
TWO [OC]: Such spirit. I wager fifteen quatloos that he is untrainable.
THREE [OC]: Twenty quatloos that all three are untrainable. 
TWO [OC]: Five thousand quatloos that the newcomers will have to be destroyed. 
ONE [OC]: Accepted. Mark them, Galt. 
(Galt's eyes go bright, and the badges on the collars turn red.) 
GALT: You now bear the mark of a fine herd. But I must warn you, any further disobedience now that you are full-fledged thralls will be punishable by death.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, it just doesn't make sense they could have come this far. If there's any chance at all it is to continue to search in the area they were lost. 
SPOCK: We searched the area. 
SCOTT: It's always possible to miss something. 
SPOCK: Such as a failure in the transporter mechanism? 
SCOTT: No, sir. There was no sign of failure. 
SPOCK: There was no sign of them in the area of Gamma Two. 
MCCOY: If they weren't there it's ridiculous to think they could still be alive. Not after all this time. 
SPOCK: In that case, Doctor, we have nothing to lose by pursuing our present course.

[Ruins]

(Shahna has taken Kirk for a run.) 
KIRK: Slow down. Slow down. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. We've covered over two miles. Can we take a breather? A rest? 
SHAHNA: (not at all out of breath) Oh. Very well. You are tired. 
KIRK: Oh. well, it's good to get away from that development area, even for a while. Shahna, why do the Providers, why do they like to watch others being hurt, killed? 
SHAHNA: That is the way. 
KIRK: Their voices sound mechanical. Are they computers? 
SHAHNA: Computers? 
KIRK: You've seen them. Do they have bodies? 
SHAHNA: Not such as ours. 
KIRK: What is this place? 
SHAHNA: It is not used. 
KIRK: It's very old. Does it have a name? Shahna, could it have been a city for the Providers? 
SHAHNA: I do not think it is well to ask such things. 
KIRK: They do have bodies, or did have. 
SHAHNA: One does not talk of such things. 
KIRK: Very pretty country. Very much like my home planet, Earth. 
SHAHNA: Planet? 
(Stands close to her back, hands on her shoulders, so he can whisper in her ear.) 
KIRK: Where I was born. Shahna, don't you ever look at the night sky? The lights up there? 
SHAHNA: I have looked at them. 
KIRK: Well, those are stars. And around them are planets. And there are people that live on them, Just like us. 
SHAHNA: How can one live on a flicker of light? 
KIRK: From Earth, Triskelion's three suns are just a flicker of light. Actually, this is the darkest planet I've ever seen. 
SHAHNA: Dark? But all is lighted. Here, the chambers. 
KIRK: The thralls have no freedom, Shahna. You don't think or do anything but what the Providers tell you. 
SHAHNA: What else would one do? 
KIRK: Love, for one thing. 
SHAHNA: What is love? 
KIRK: Love is the most important thing on Earth. Especially to a man and a woman. 
SHAHNA: We, too, have mates. When it is time to increase the herd, my Provider will select one for me. 
KIRK: On Earth, we select our own mate. Someone we care for. On Earth, men and women live together, help each other, make each other happy. 
SHAHNA: I do not think your words are allowed. 
KIRK: All right. All right. Tell me about the Providers. What do they look like? Where do they live? 
SHAHNA: I have never seen them, but they are said not to be like us. They stay in 
(Her collar lights up, and Kirk holds her tight while she writhes in pain.) 
KIRK: Stop it. Stop it! I'm responsible! I made her talk! Stop it! You're killing her! She did nothing wrong! It was my fault. If you want to punish someone, punish me! Please. 
ONE [OC]: Is that what you humans call compassion? It is interesting, but it has no value here. You present many interesting aspects, Captain, but you must learn obedience. Then you will be an excellent thrall. 
(Shahna's collar stops glowing.) 
KIRK: It's all right. It's all right. You can stop crying now, Shahna. It's all right. 
SHAHNA: You risked bringing their anger on yourself. Why did you do it? 
KIRK: It's the custom of my people to help one another when we're in trouble. 
(He kisses her.) 
SHAHNA: And this. Is this also helping? 
KIRK: You could call it that. 
SHAHNA: Please, help me once again. (another kiss) I did not know it could be like this between people. Is it always so in the place you come from? 
GALT: (popping out of thin air) Captain, you do indeed present many surprises. Because you have amused the Providers, there will be no punishment. Return to your quarters.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, can we manage anything faster than warp six? 
SCOTT: It's my opinion that we've gone too far as it is, sir. 
MCCOY: He's right, Spock. We've lost Jim and the others on Gamma Two. Now you've dragged us a dozen light years on some wild hunch that 
SPOCK: Doctor, I do not respond to hunches. No transporter malfunction was responsible for the disappearance. They were not within the Gamma system. A focused beam of extremely high-intensity light was directed into the Gamma system from the trinary system we are now approaching. No known natural phenomena could have caused that beam. Does that clarify the situation? 
MCCOY: No, it doesn't. It's still a fancy way of saying that you're playing a hunch. well, my hunch is that they're back on Gamma Two dead or alive and I still want another search. 
SCOTT: Doctor McCoy speaks for me, too, sir. 
SPOCK: I see. (pause) Gentlemen, I am in command of this vessel, and we shall continue on our present course. (conspiratorial whisper) Unless it is your intention to declare a mutiny. 
SCOTT: Mister Spock! 
MCCOY: Who said anything about a mutiny, you stubborn, pointed-eared. All right. If we don't find them here, do we still have another search on Gamma Two? 
SPOCK: Agreed. Mister Scott, could you manage warp seven? 
SCOTT: I would be more than content to do so, sir, and maybe a wee bit more. 
SPOCK: Ensign, warp seven.

[Kirk's cell]

(Shahna brings a nourishment tray.) 
KIRK: You're disturbed about what happened today. 
SHAHNA: Yes. You have made me feel strangely. If it were allowed, I would ask that you have another drill thrall. 
KIRK: I wouldn't like that, Shahna. I wouldn't like that at all. 
(He kisses her, then punches her to knock her out.) 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Shahna. (takes the magnetic key and unlocks his door)

[Accommodation area]

(Kirk opens Chekov's cell. Tamoon is bound and gagged.) 
CHEKOV: This is going to kill our romance. 
(They let Uhura out.) 
KIRK: What about Lars? 
UHURA: He's gone to report me. I said I didn't like the food. 
KIRK: I think Galt is the only one who controls these collars. If we can find the phaser that I threw at Lars, we can use the circuits to short out these collars. 
CHEKOV: (pointing to an exit) Captain.

[Combat area]

(Galt appears, and punishment is administered.) 
ONE [OC]: Only a reminder. You Earth people are most unusual, most stimulating.

[Bridge]

HAINES: Standard orbit. 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate only one concentration of life forms on the planet, on the lower hemisphere. Humanoid readings. 
MCCOY: Well, at least that gives our landing force a starting point. 
SPOCK: There will be no landing force, Doctor. Assuming the captain and the others are still alive, it would be unwise to endanger them by beaming down a large contingent. 
MCCOY: Well we're not going to leave them there while we just sit and wait. 
SPOCK: Interesting. No power source. It may be shielded. 
MCCOY: And it may be just a wild goose chase like we've been telling you. 
SPOCK: I shall beam down, Doctor. If I am unable to communicate, a landing party may be necessary. 
MCCOY: Well, Mister Spock, if you're going into the lion's den, you'll need a medical officer. 
SPOCK: Daniel, as I recall, had only his faith. But I welcome your company, Doctor. Mister Scott, you'll be in command. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(But the turbolift doors shut before Spock and McCoy can leave the bridge, and the lights start flashing.) 
ONE [OC]: No, Mister Spock, you will not leave the ship.

[Combat area]

ONE [OC]: None of your control systems will operate. 
MCCOY [OC]: What the devil's going on? 
KIRK: Spock? Spock!

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Spock?

[Combat area]

KIRK: Welcome to Triskelion, gentlemen. 

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: By now it must be obvious to you that you have been expected. 
SCOTT: What the voice said was true, sir. Nothing is functioning. 
ONE [OC]: Commendations, gentlemen. Your ingenuity in discovering the whereabouts of your companions is noteworthy. 
KIRK [OC]: What you're hearing, gentlemen, is a Provider. 
ONE [OC]: We are known to the thralls as Providers because we provide for all their needs. The term is easier for their limited mental abilities to comprehend.

[Combat area]

KIRK: Providing for all their needs means using thralls, people stolen from other parts of the galaxy

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: To fight each other, and the Providers gamble on the winner. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK [OC]: But these Providers haven't the courage to show themselves. 
ONE [OC]: Your species has great curiosity.

[Combat area]

ONE [OC]: We knew that. You are interesting in many ways. 
KIRK: But you are afraid.

[Bridge]

ONE [OC]: You present no danger while you wear the collar

[Combat area]

ONE [OC]: And you wear it as long as you live. 
KIRK: Then show yourselves. 
ONE [OC]: There is no objection.

[Cavern]

(It is vast, obviously constructed with ceiling lights and a power plant in the background. In the foreground is a transparent dome with three yellow brains in it.) 
KIRK: The power source. Shielded by solid rock.
ONE [OC]: (a brain pulsates red) We are one thousand of your metres beneath the surface. 
KIRK: Primary mental evolution. Incredible. 
TWO [OC]: (pulsing green) That is not true, Captain. Once we had humanoid form, but we evolved beyond it. 
THREE [OC]: (yellow) Through eons of devoting ourselves exclusively to intellectual pursuits, we became the physically simple, mentally superior creatures you see before you. 
KIRK: A species that enslaves other beings is hardly superior, mentally or otherwise. 
ONE [OC]: The thralls are necessary to the games. We have found athletic competitions our only challenge, the only thing which furnishes us with purpose. 
KIRK: It's an unproductive purpose, unworthy of your intellect. 
ONE [OC]: We use only inferior beings. 
KIRK: We have found that all life forms in the galaxy are capable of superior development. Perhaps you're not as evolved as you believe. 
THREE [OC]: An interesting speculation, Captain. You and your people are most challenging. 
TWO [OC]: Yes, most challenging. It was hoped that such new blood would stimulate our stock of thralls. How unfortunate that you must be destroyed. 
KIRK: Our destruction will result only in your own. You may control the Enterprise, but you cannot match the force of the entire Federation. 
ONE [OC]: Your ship will be destroyed by a magnetic storm. No communications with your base will be possible. Your fate will remain a mystery to your people. 
KIRK: And you call yourselves superior! You're murderers without the spirit to really wager for the lives you take. 
ONE [OC]: Wager? Explain yourself, Captain. 
KIRK: My people pride themselves on being the greatest, most successful gamblers in the universe. We compete for everything. Power, fame, women, everything we desire, and it is our nature to win. And for proof, I offer you our exploration of this galaxy. 
THREE [OC]: We are aware of your competitive abilities, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, then, I wager that with weapons of your own choice, right here and now, my people can overcome an equal number of thralls set against us. 
THREE [OC]: A hundred quatloos on the newcomers. 
ONE [OC]: Four hundred quatloos against the newcomers. 
TWO [OC]: Two hundred quatloos against! 
THREE [OC]: Five hundred for the newcomers. Contest by multiple elimination. 
KIRK: Wait! Wait! Hear me! We can't wager for trifles like quatloos. The stakes must be higher. 
ONE [OC]: Name your stakes, Captain. 
KIRK: If we win, the Enterprise and its crew leaves here in safety. Further more, all the thralls on the planet must be freed. 
TWO [OC]: Anarchy. They would starve. 
KIRK: You will educate and train them to establish a normal self-governing culture. 
THREE [OC]: Thralls govern themselves? Ridiculous! 
KIRK: We have done the same with cultures throughout the galaxy. Are you willing to admit that we can do something you can't? 
TWO [OC]: There is nothing we cannot do! 
ONE [OC]: And if you lose, Captain? 
KIRK: If we lose? We will remain here, the entire crew of the Enterprise. The most stubborn, determined competitors in the universe. We'll become thralls, enter your games, obey your orders without rebellion. You'll be assured of generations of the most exciting wagering you've ever had. 
ONE [OC]: Your stakes are indeed high, Captain. 
KIRK: Not for true gamesters. 
THREE [OC]: We will accept your stakes on one condition. 
KIRK: Name it. 
ONE [OC]: As leader of your people, your spirit seems most indomitable. We suggest you alone, pitted against three contestants of our choosing. 
KIRK: Three against one? Those are pretty high odds. 
TWO [OC]: Not for true gamesters, Captain. 
KIRK: Your, your terms are unfair. 
ONE [OC]: On the contrary, they're extremely fair, since your alternative is death. 
KIRK: Well, in that case, I'll accept your terms. 
ONE [OC]: Galt will prepare you.

[Combat area]

(Lars has a net, Kloog has his whip, and an Andorian has the pole weapon, same as Kirk.) 
ONE [OC]: Because you wager your skill for all your people, they will be permitted to watch the outcome of the game on the ship's viewscreen.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Spock, look! 
ONE [OC]: Captain, you will defend. Thralls must stay in the blue area. You will take the yellow. Touching an opposing colour deprives a contestant of one weapon. An opponent must be killed to be removed from the game. If only wounded, he is replaced by a fresh thrall. Is that clear, Captain?

[Combat area]

KIRK: Yes, that's clear.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: What in the name of heaven is this? 
SCOTT: Heaven's got very little to do with this.

[Combat area]

(So the fight begins, and everyone puts their feet outside their allotted colours from time to time. Kirk manages to trip up or push over each of his three opponents several times. Eventually he throws his pole into Kloog's belly then picks up a dagger to defend himself with. Lars traps his hand in the net, but Kirk ducks as the Andorian throws his pole. Now the two fight with just the daggers, until Kirk throws the Andorian. Galt sees that he is only injured, and orders in his replacement.)
GALT: Shahna. 
(She enters the area with a pole.) 
SHAHNA: You lied. Everything you said. 
(She trips him, but he grabs the pole and pulls her down to the point of his dagger. They both hesitate, break free, and she gets him at her mercy. Again there is hesitation, so Kirk uses his legs to grab her and this time puts the blade firmly to her throat.) 
SHAHNA: The thralls surrender! 
(Kirk lets her go.) 
ONE [OC]: You have won, Captain Kirk, unfortunately. However, the terms of the wager will be honoured. You are free. Remove your collars. 
(They come off easily.) 
KIRK: The thralls will be trained? 
ONE [OC]: They will be trained. We have said it. 
KIRK: I think you'll find it a much more exciting game than the one you've been playing. I'm sorry, Shahna. I didn't lie. I did what was necessary. Someday, I hope you'll understand. 
SHAHNA: I understand, a little. You will leave us now? 
KIRK: Yes. 
SHAHNA: To go back to the lights in the sky? 
KIRK: Yes. 
SHAHNA: I would like to go to those lights with you. Take me? 
KIRK: I can't. 
SHAHNA: Then teach me how, and I will follow you. 
KIRK: There's so much you must learn here first. The Providers will teach you. Learn it, Shahna. all your people must learn before you can reach for the stars. Shahna. (he gives her a farewell kiss) Scotty! 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Beam us up. 
(They disappear in a twinkle.)
SHAHNA: Goodbye, Jim Kirk. I will learn, and watch the lights in the sky, and remember.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Trouble With Tribbles
Stardate: 4523.3
Original Airdate: 29 Dec, 1967

[Briefing room]
SPOCK: Deep Space Station K7 now within sensor range, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. Mister Chekov, this flight is supposed to provide both experience and knowledge. How close will we come to the Klingon outpost if we continue on our present course? 
CHEKOV: One parsec, sir. Close enough to smell them. 
SPOCK: That is illogical, Ensign. Odours cannot travel through the vacuum of space. 
CHEKOV: I was making a little joke, sir. 
SPOCK: Extremely little, Ensign. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, immediate past history of the quadrant? 
SPOCK: Under dispute between the two parties since initial contact. The battle of Donatu Five was fought near here twenty three solar years ago. Inconclusive. 
KIRK: Analysis of disputed area? 
SPOCK: Undeveloped. Sherman's Planet is claimed by both sides, our Federation and the Klingon Empire. We do have the better claim. 
CHEKOV: The area was first mapped by the famous Russian astronomer Ivan Borkoff almost two hundred 
KIRK: John Burke. 
CHEKOV: Burke, sir? I don't think so. I'm sure it was 
SPOCK: John Burke was the Chief Astronomer at the Royal Academy in old Britain at the time. 
CHEKOV: Oh, Royal Academy. Well 
KIRK: is the rest of your history that faulty, Ensign? Key points of dispute? 
CHEKOV: Under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, one side or the other must prove it can develop the planet most efficiently. 
KIRK: And unfortunately, though the Klingons are brutal and aggressive, they are most efficient. 
CHEKOV: I remember once Peter the Great had that problem like that. The 
UHURA [OC]: Captain? 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
UHURA [on monitor]: I'm picking up a subspace distress call. Priority channel. It's from Space Station K7. 
KIRK: Go to warp factor six. 
CHEKOV: Code One emergency. That's a disaster call. 
UHURA [OC]: This is a Red Alert. Man your battle stations. All hands.

Captain's Log, stardate 4523.3. Deep Space Station K7 has issued a priority one call. More than an emergency, it signals near or total disaster. We can only assume the Klingons have attacked the station. We're going in armed for battle.

]Bridge]

CHEKOV: Main phasers armed and ready, sir. 
(The space station is on the main viewer, looking intact.) 
CHEKOV: But there's nothing there. Just the station. 
KIRK: Priority One distress call, and it's just absolutely peaceful. Lieutenant Uhura, break subspace silence. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. The channel's open, sir. 
KIRK: Space Station K7, this is Captain Kirk of the Enterprise. What is your emergency? 
LURRY [OC]: This is Mister Lurry, manager of K7. I must apologise for the distress call. 
KIRK: Mister Lurry, you issued a Priority One distress call. State the nature of your emergency. 
LURRY [OC]: Well, perhaps you better beam over. I'll try to explain. 
KIRK: You'll try to explain. You'd better be prepared to do more than that. Kirk out. Mister Spock, I'll need your help. Mister Chekov, maintain battle readiness. Lieutenant Uhura, see that the transporter room is standing by. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. Transporter room, stand by.

[Lurry's office]

(Kirk and Spock arrive in the two man transporter alcove) 
KIRK: Mister Lurry, if there's no emergency, why did you issue a priority one distress call? 
BARIS: That was my order, Captain. 
LURRY: Captain Kirk, this is Nilz Baris. He's out from Earth to take charge of the development project on Sherman's Planet. 
KIRK: And that gives you the authority to put an entire quadrant on defence alert? 
DARVIN: Mister Baris is the Federation Undersecretary in Charge of Agricultural Affairs in this quadrant. 
SPOCK; That gives him the authority. 
KIRK: Oh. 
BARIS: This is my assistant Arne Darvin. 
KIRK: And this is my first officer Mister Spock. 
LURRY: Mister Spock. 
BARIS: And now Captain, I want all available security guards. I want them posted around the storage compartments. 
KIRK: Storage compartments? Storage compartments? 
DARVIN: The storage compartments containing the quadrotriticale. 
KIRK: What? What? What's quadrotriticale? (Lurry hands him a small packet) Wheat. So what? 
BARIS: Quadrotriticale is not wheat, Captain. Of course, I wouldn't expect you or Mister Spock to know about such things, but quadrotriticale is a rather 
SPOCK: Quadrotriticale is a high-yield grain, a four-lobed hybrid of wheat and rye. A perennial, also, I believe. Its root grain, triticale, can trace its ancestry all the way back to twentieth century Canada 
KIRK: Mister Spock, you've made your point. 
LURRY: Quadrotriticale is the only earth grain that grows on Sherman's Planet. We have several tons of it here on the station. It's very important that grain gets to Sherman's Planet safely. Mister Baris thinks that Klingon agents may try to sabotage it. 
KIRK: You issued a priority one distress call for a couple of tons of wheat? 
DARVIN: Quadrotriticale! 
BARIS: Of course, Captain, I realise that 
KIRK: Mister Baris, you summoned the Enterprise without an emergency. You'll take full responsibility for it. 
BARIS: What do you mean? 
SPOCK: Misuse of the Priority One channels is a Federation offence. 
BARIS: I did not misuse the Priority One channel. I want that grain protected. 
LURRY: Captain, couldn't you at least post a couple of guards? We do have a large number of ships passing through. 
SPOCK: It would seem a logical precaution, Captain. The Sherman's Planet affair is of extreme importance to the Federation. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise here. 
KIRK: Secure from general quarters. And beam down two, and only two, security guards. Have them report to Mister Lurry. Authorise shore leave for all off-duty personnel. 
UHURA [OC]: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk out. 
BARIS: Captain Kirk, how dare you authorise a mere two men for a project of this importance? Starfleet Command 
KIRK: I have never questioned the orders or the intelligence of any representative of the Federation. Until now. 
(storms out of the office)

{K7 Bar]

(Wherever humanoids may travel, someone will set up a bar to have pretty females serve intoxicating beverages. K7 is no exception.) 
KIRK: Summoning a starship on a priority A-1 channel to guard some storage compartments. Storage compartments of wheat. 
SPOCK: Nevertheless Captain, the Klingons would not enjoy seeing us successfully develop Sherman's Planet. 
KIRK: I guess not. 
(downs his drink in one and heads for the door, where they meet Chekov and Uhura coming in.) 
KIRK: I see you didn't waste time taking your shore leave. 
UHURA: (coldly) How often do I get shore leave? 
CHEKOV: She wants to shop, and I thought I would help her. 
JONES: (entering) Oh, excuse me. Excuse me. 
KIRK: (shows Chekov the packet of wheat) Mister Chekov, what do you make of this? 
CHEKOV: Oh, quadrotriticale. I've read about this, but I've never seen any before. 
KIRK: Does everybody know about this wheat but me? 
CHEKOV: Not everyone, Captain. It's a Russian invention. 
KIRK: Ah. 
(Kirk and Spock leave.) 
BARMAN: I don't want any. I told you before, and I'm telling you again I don't want any more Spican flame gems. Thanks to you, I have enough Spican flame gems to last me a lifetime. 
JONES: How sad for you, my friend. You won't find a finer stone anywhere. But I have something better. Surely you want some Antarian glow water. 
BARMAN: I use that to polish the flame gems. 
JONES: You're a difficult man to reach, but I have something from the far reaches of the galaxy. Surely you want 
(from yet another pocket, the trader pulls a what looks like a ball of fluff.) 
BARMAN: Not at your price. 
UHURA: What is it? Is it alive? May I hold it? 
(Jones puts it in her hand and it starts purring) 
UHURA: Oh, it's adorable. What is it? 
JONES: What is it? Why, lovely lady, it's a tribble. 
UHURA: A tribble? 
JONES: Only the sweetest creature known to man, excepting, of course, your lovely self. 
UHURA: Oh, it's purring. Listen, it's purring. 
JONES: It's only saying that it likes you. 
UHURA: Are you selling them? 
BARMAN: That's what we're trying to decide right now. 
JONES: My friend, 10 credits apiece is a very reasonable price. Now you can see for yourself how much the lovely little lady appreciates the finer things. 
BARMAN: One credit apiece. 
CHEKOV: He won't bite, will he? 
JONES: Sir, transporting harmful animals from one planet to another is against regulations, or weren't you aware of that? Besides, tribbles have no teeth. 
BARMAN: All right. I'll double my offer 2 credits. 
JONES: Twice nothing is still nothing. 
UHURA: If you're not going to take him, I'm going to take him. I think he's cute. 
BARMAN: Four credits. 
JONES: Is that an offer or a joke? 
BARMAN: That's my offer. 
JONES: That's a joke. 
BARMAN: Five? 
JONES: You're an honest man. I'll tell you what I'm going to do I'm going to lessen my price to eight and a half credits. 
BARMAN: You're talking yourself out of a deal, friend. Six credits. Not a credit more. 
JONES: Seven and a half. Seven? All right, you robber, six credits. 
BARMAN: Done. When can I have them? 
JONES: Right away. 
UHURA: All right, what are you selling them for? 
BARMAN: Well, let me see, little lady. Six credits. Figure a reasonable mark-up for a reasonable profit, say ten percent mark-up. Ten credits. 
JONES: Thief. 
BARMAN: In fact, I'll sell you this one. 
(the tribble is eating grain spilt from the packet Kirk gave Chekov) 
CHEKOV: Hey! He's eating my grain. 
BARMAN: That'll be ten credits. 
JONES: That happens to be my sample, and I'll do with it as I please. And I please to give it to the lovely lady. 
UHURA: Oh, I couldn't. Could I? 
JONES: I insist. 
BARMAN: What are you trying to do, ruin the market? 
JONES: Once this lovely little lady starts to show this precious little darling around, you won't be able to keep up with them.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Yes, what is it? 
UHURA [OC]: Message from Starfleet, Captain. Priority channel. Admiral Fitzpatrick speaking. 
KIRK: Put it on visual, Lieutenant. 
ADMIRAL [on monitor]: Captain Kirk? 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
ADMIRAL [on monitor]: Captain, it is not necessary to remind you of the importance to the Federation of Sherman's Planet. The key to our winning of this planet is the grain quadrotriticale. The shipment of it must be protected. Effective immediately, you will render any aid and assistance which Undersecretary Baris may require. The safety of the grain and the project is your responsibility. Starfleet out. 
KIRK: Now, that's just lovely. 
SPOCK: But not totally unexpected. 
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk! Captain Kirk! 
KIRK: Yes, Lieutenant, what is it? 
UHURA [OC]: Sensors are picking up a Klingon battle cruiser rapidly closing on the station. 
KIRK: Go to Red Alert. Notify Mister Lurry. We'll be right up.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What is the position of the Klingon ship? 
CHEKOV: A hundred kilometres off K7. It's just sitting there. 
UHURA: Captain, I have Mister Lurry. 
KIRK: Put him on visual. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Lurry, there's a Klingon warship hanging one hundred kilometres off your station. 
LURRY [on viewscreen]: I don't think the Klingons are planning to attack us. 
KIRK: Why not? 
LURRY [on viewscreen]: Because at this moment the captain of the Klingon ship is sitting right here in my office. 
KIRK: Cancel Red Alert. We'll beam right down. 
UHURA: Security, cancel Red Alert.

Captain's log, stardate 4524.2. A Klingon warship is hovering only a hundred kilometres from Deep Space Station K7 while its captain waits in the station manager's office. Their intentions are unknown.

[Lurry's office]

(False smiles all round as Kirk and Spock are greeted by a Klingon who very closely resembles the Squire of Gothos...) 
KOLOTH: Ah, my dear Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: My dear Captain Koloth. 
KOLOTH: Let me assure you that my intentions are peaceful. As I've already told Mister Lurry, the purpose of my presence is to invoke shore leave rights. 
KIRK: Shore leave? 
KOLOTH: Captain, we Klingons are not as luxury-minded as you Earthers. We do not equip our ships with, how shall I say it, non-essentials. (makes an hour-glass gesture with his hands) 
KORAX: We have been in space for five months. What we choose as recreation is our own business. 
KOLOTH: I might also add that under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, you cannot refuse us. 
KIRK: Yes, well, I don't make those decisions. Mister Lurry is in charge of those matters. 
LURRY: Captain, may I speak to you a minute? (takes him aside) Look, I don't want them here, but I don't have the authority to refuse. 
KIRK: Well, I have the authority to act, and I'm going to use it. My dear Captain Koloth, you may indeed bring your men down on shore leave, but only twelve at a time. And I assure you, for every man you bring down here, I shall have one security guard. There will be no trouble. 
KOLOTH: Captain Kirk, there's been no formal declaration of hostilities between our two respective governments. So, naturally, our relationship will be a peaceful one. 
KIRK: Let us both take steps to keep it that way. 
KOLOTH: Of course.

[Rec room]

(Scott is at a monitor, reading, when Spock and Kirk enter.) 
KIRK: Another technical journal, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Aye. 
KIRK: Don't you ever relax? 
SCOTT: I am relaxing. 
(There is a crowd at a long table, and there are purring sounds.) 
MCCOY: How long have you had that thing, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Since yesterday, Doctor. This morning, I found out that he, I mean she, had had babies. 
MCCOY: Well, in that case, you got a bargain. 
KIRK: You running a nursery, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Oh, Captain. Well, I hadn't intended to, sir, but the tribble had other plans. 
KIRK: Did you get this at the space station? 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: (stroking a tribble) A most curious creature, Captain. Its trilling seems to have a tranquillising effect on the human nervous system. Fortunately, of course, I am immune to its effect. 
(Everyone stares, he suddenly realises what he is doing, and puts it down. Spock and Kirk leave.) 
MCCOY: Lieutenant, do you mind if I take one of these down to the lab to see what makes it tick? 
UHURA: Well, all right, Doctor, but if you're going to dissect it, I don't want to know about it. 
MCCOY: I won't harm a hair on its head, wherever that is. 
FREEMAN: Say, Lieutenant. Seeing as you're giving them away, can I have one? 
UHURA: Sure, why not? I think they're old enough. (to all) Go ahead.

[Corridor]

CHEKOV [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Mister Baris waiting is on channel E to speak to you, sir. 
KIRK: Pipe it down here will you, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Aye, sir. Mister Baris is coming on. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Baris. What can I do for you?

[Lurry's office]

BARIS: Kirk, this station is swarming with Klingons.

[Corridor]

KIRK: I was not aware, Mister Baris, that twelve Klingons constitutes a swarm.

[Lurry's office]

BARIS: Captain Kirk, there are Klingon soldiers on this station. Now, I want you to keep that grain safe.

[Corridor]

KIRK: Mister Baris, I have guards around the grain. I have guards around the Klingons. The only reason those guards are there is because Starfleet wants them there. As for what you want (pauses at a look from Spock) It has been noted and logged. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: Captain, may I ask where you'll be? 
KIRK: Sickbay with a headache.

[Sickbay]

(There are eleven fluffy tribbles of various sizes and colour in a large container.) 
MCCOY: Hi, Jim. 
KIRK: Bones, what have you got for a headache? 
MCCOY: Let me guess. Klingons? Baris? 
KIRK: Both. How many of these did Uhura give you? 
MCCOY: Just one. 
KIRK: But you've got, er, eleven. 
MCCOY: You noticed that, huh? Here. This ought to take care of it. 
KIRK: How do they? How do they? 
MCCOY: I haven't figured that out yet, but I can tell you this much. Almost fifty percent of the creature's metabolism is geared for reproduction. Do you know what you get if you feed a tribble too much? 
KIRK: A fat tribble. 
MCCOY: No. You get a bunch of hungry little tribbles. 
KIRK: Well, Bones, all I can suggest is you open up a maternity ward.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: All you men going on shore leave to stay in groups. Avoid trouble with the Klingons. 
SCOTT: I'll tell them before they go, sir. 
KIRK: Aren't you going on shore leave, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Why, no, sir. 
KIRK: I want you to go on shore leave. Make sure that everybody stays out of trouble. 
SCOTT: But, Captain. Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, enjoy yourself.

[K7 Bar]

(Business is good. Scott, Chekov and Freeman take the last vacant table. Two security men leave and Jones enters, whistling.) 
JONES: Ah, friend. Can I offer you a charming little tribble? 
SCOTT: Uh, no, thanks. 
JONES: Oh. Perhaps one of you other gents? 
(No reply) 
JONES: Ah, friend Klingon. Can I interest you in a harmless tribble? 
(The tribble screeches.) 
KORAX: Get it away from me. 
JONES: I'm sorry. I can't understand it. I've never seen them act this way before. 
KORAX: Get out of here with that parasite. 
JONES: He's only a harmless little 
KORAX: Take it away! 
JONES: Yes. Ah, my good friend. How would you like to enter another little transaction? This time, a tribble for a spot 
BARMAN: A tribble. 
JONES: Indeed. 
BARMAN: (starts producing tribbles from all over the place and putting them on the bar) A tribble? 
(The pretty lady in yellow brings our group their drinks.) 
SCOTT: When are you going to get off that milk diet, lad? 
CHEKOV: This is vodka. 
SCOTT: Where I come from, that's soda pop. This is a drink for a man. 
CHEKOV: Scotch? 
SCOTT: Aye. 
CHEKOV: It was invented by a little old lady from Leningrad. 
(Korax goes over to the bar and shares his drink with Jones.) 
KORAX: The Earthers like those fuzzy things, don't they? 
JONES: Oh, yes. 
KLINGON: Frankly, I never liked Earthers. They remind me of Regulan blood worms. 
CHEKOV: That Cossack. 
SCOTT: Easy, lad. You ought to be more forgiving. 
KORAX: No. I just remembered. There is one Earthman who doesn't remind me of a Regulan blood worm. That's Kirk. A Regulan blood worm is soft and shapeless, but Kirk isn't soft. Kirk may be a swaggering, overbearing, tin-plated dictator with delusions of godhood, but he's not soft. 
(Chekov leaps to his feet) 
SCOTT: Take it easy, lad. Everybody's entitled to an opinion. 
KORAX: That's right, and if I think that Kirk is a Denebian slime devil, well that's my opinion too. 
SCOTT: Don't do it, mister, and that's an order. 
CHEKOV: You heard what he called the captain. 
SCOTT: Forget it. It's not worth fighting for. We're big enough to take a few insults. Now, drink your drink. 
(swaps Chekov's vodka for Freeman's red wine.) 
KORAX: Of course, I'd say that Captain Kirk deserves his ship. We like the Enterprise. We, we really do. That sagging old rust bucket is designed like a garbage scow. Half the quadrant knows it. That's why they're learning to speak Klingonese. 
CHEKOV: Mister Scott! 
SCOTT: Laddie, don't you think you should rephrase that? 
KORAX: You're right, I should. I didn't mean to say that the Enterprise should be hauling garbage. I meant to say that it should be hauled away as garbage. 
(There's a fight, of course. Scott's first right cross sends Korax flying over a table. After that, it's the Klingons versus Starfleet, with the barman beating a retreat and Jones taking the opportunity to help himself to drinks from the dispensing machine. Finally he decides to leave with his spoils and is about to enjoy his last glass when the Security guards rush in followed by the Barman, who takes the glass just before it reaches Jones' lips. So he takes another out of his pocket instead.)

Captain's Log, stardate 4525.6. A small disturbance between the Klingon crew and members of the Enterprise crew has broken out aboard Space Station K7. I am forced to cancel shore leave for both ships.

[Briefing room]

(Ten men are lined up. Chekov has a nice bruise on his cheek.) 
KIRK: I want to know who started it. I'm waiting. Freeman, who started the fight? 
FREEMAN: I don't know, sir. 
KIRK: All right. Chekov. I know you. You started it, didn't you? 
CHEKOV: No, sir, I didn't. 
KIRK: Who did? 
CHEKOV: I don't know, sir. 
KIRK: I don't know, sir. I want to know who threw the first punch. All right. You're all confined to quarters until I find out who started it. Dismissed. (the men file out) Scotty, not you. You were supposed to prevent trouble, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. 
KIRK: Who threw the first punch, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Um. 
KIRK: Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: I did, Captain. 
KIRK: You did, Mister Scott? What caused it, Scotty? 
SCOTT: They insulted us, sir. 
KIRK: Must have been some insult. 
SCOTT: Aye, it was. 
KIRK: You threw the first punch. 
SCOTT: Aye. Chekov wanted to, but I held him back. 
KIRK: You held? Why did Chekov want to start a fight? 
SCOTT: Well, the Klingon, sir. Is this off the record? 
KIRK: No, this is not off the record. 
SCOTT: Well, Captain, the Klingons called you, uh a tin-plated, overbearing, swaggering dictator with delusions of godhood. 
KIRK: Is that all? 
SCOTT: No, sir. They also compared you with a Denebian slime devil. 
KIRK: I see. 
SCOTT: And then they said you 
KIRK: I get the picture, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: After they said all this, that's when you hit the Klingons? 
SCOTT: No, sir. 
KIRK: No? 
SCOTT: No, I didn't. You told us to avoid trouble. 
KIRK: Oh, yes. 
SCOTT: And I didn't see that it was worth fighting about. After all, we're big enough to take a few insults. Aren't we? 
KIRK: What was it they said that started the fight? 
SCOTT: They called the Enterprise a garbage scow, sir. 
KIRK: I see. And that's when you hit the Klingons? 
SCOTT: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: You hit the Klingons because they insulted the Enterprise, not because they 
SCOTT: Well, sir, this was a matter of pride. 
KIRK: All right, Scotty. Dismissed. Scotty, you're restricted to quarters until further notice. 
SCOTT: (big grin) Yes, sir. Thank you, sir. That'll give me a chance to catch up on my technical journals.

[Sickbay]

(There are a lot more than eleven tribbles now.) 
MCCOY: What's the matter, Spock? 
SPOCK: There's something disquieting about these creatures. 
MCCOY: Don't tell me you've got a feeling. 
SPOCK: Don't be insulting, Doctor. They remind me of the lilies of the field. They toil not, neither do they spin. But they seem to eat a great deal. I see no practical use for them. 
MCCOY: Does everything have to have a practical use for you? They're nice, soft, and furry, and they make a pleasant sound. 
SPOCK: So would an ermine violin, but I see no advantage in having one. 
MCCOY: It's a human characteristic to love little animals, especially if they're attractive in some way. 
SPOCK: Doctor, I am well aware of human characteristics. I am frequently inundated by them, but I've trained myself to put up with practically anything. 
MCCOY: Spock, I don't know too much about these little tribbles yet, but there's one thing that I have discovered. 
SPOCK: What is that, Doctor? 
MCCOY: I like them better than I like you. 
SPOCK: Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes? 
SPOCK: They do have one redeeming characteristic. 
MCCOY: What's that? 
SPOCK: They do not talk too much. If you'll excuse me, sir.

[Bridge]

(Kirk walks to his chair, preoccupied by his last conversation. When he sits, there is a squeak. He has sat on a large tribble. Then he notices that there are fluffy balls everywhere.) 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy, would you mind coming up to the bridge? (he takes a walk around then) Lieutenant Uhura, how did all these tribbles get on the bridge? 
UHURA: I don't know, sir. They do seem to be all over the ship. 
(McCoy enters, stroking a tribble.) 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Yes? Did you want to see me, Jim? Don't look at me. It's the tribbles who are breeding. If we don't get them off this ship, we're going to be hip deep in them. 
KIRK: Explain that. 
MCCOY: The nearest thing I can figure out is they're born pregnant, which seems to be quite a time saver. 
KIRK: I know, but really 
MCCOY: And from my observations, it seems they're bisexual, reproducing at will. And, brother, have they got a lot of will. 
SPOCK: Captain, I am forced to agree with the doctor. I've been running computations on their rate of reproduction. The figures are taking an alarming direction. They're consuming our supplies and returning nothing. 
UHURA: But they do give us something, Mister Spock. They give us love. Well, Cyrano Jones says a tribble is the only love that money can buy. 
KIRK: Too much of anything, Lieutenant, even love, isn't necessarily a good thing. 
UHURA: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Get the maintenance crew to clean up the entire ship, and then contact Mister Lurry and tell him I'm beaming down. 
UHURA: Aye, aye. 
KIRK: Have him find Cyrano Jones and hold him. 
UHURA: Aye. 
KIRK: And get these tribbles off the bridge. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, Captain.

[Lurry's office]

JONES: Captain Kirk, I'm mystified at your tone of voice. I've done nothing to warrant such severe treatment. 
KIRK: Oh, really? 
SPOCK: Surely you must have realised what would happen if you removed the tribbles from their predator-filled environment into an environment where their natural multiplicative proclivities would have no restraining factors. 
JONES: Of course. What did you say? 
SPOCK: By removing the tribbles from their natural habitat, you have, so to speak, removed the cork from the bottle and allowed the genie to escape. 
JONES: If by that, you mean do they breed quickly? Of course, that's how I maintain my stock. Breeding animals is not against regulations, only breeding dangerous ones. And tribbles are not dangerous. 
KIRK: Just incredibly prolific. 
JONES: Precisely, and at six credits a head, well, that is, a body, it mounts up. Now if you'll excuse me. 
KIRK: You should sell an instruction and maintenance manual for this thing. 
JONES: If I did, what would happen to man's search for knowledge? Well, I must be tending my ship. Au revoir. 
(He meets Baris and Darvin at the door.) 
DARVIN: Go ahead, sir. Tell him. 
BARIS: Captain Kirk, I consider your security measures a disgrace. In my opinion, you have taken this important project far too lightly. 
KIRK: On the contrary, sir. I think of this project as very important. It is you I take lightly. 
BARIS: I am going to report fully to the proper authorities that you have given free and complete access to this station to a man who is quite probably a Klingon agent. 
KIRK: That's a serious charge. To whom are you referring? 
BARIS: To that man who just walked out of here. 
KIRK: Cyrano Jones, a Klingon agent? 
BARIS: You heard me. 
KIRK: I heard you. 
SPOCK: He simply could not believe his ears. 
KIRK: What evidence do you have against Mister Jones? 
BARIS: My assistant here has kept Mister Jones under close surveillance for quite some time, and his actions have been most suspicious. I believe he was involved in that little altercation between your men and the men from 
KIRK: Yes, yes. Go on. What else do you have? 
DARVIN: Well Captain, I've checked his ship's log, and it seems that he was within the Klingon's sphere of influence less than four months ago. 
BARIS: The man is an independent scout, Captain. It is quite possible he is also a Klingon spy. 
SPOCK: We have already checked on the background of Mister Cyrano Jones. He is a licensed asteroid locator and prospector. He's never broken the law, at least not severely. For the past seven years, with his one-man spaceship, he's obtained a marginal living by engaging in the buying and selling of rare merchandise, including, unfortunately, tribbles. 
BARIS: But he is after my grain! 
KIRK: Do you have any proof of that? 
DARVIN: You can't deny he's disrupted this station. 
KIRK: People have disrupted stations before without being Klingon agents. Sometimes, all they need is a title, Mister Baris. Unfortunately, disrupting a space station is not an offence. Now, if you'll excuse me, I have a ship to tend to. Au revoir.

[Rec room]

(There are tribbles on the walls, the floor, the tables, even as chess pieces. Kirk gets a tray from the food dispenser. It has tribbles on it.) 
KIRK: My chicken sandwich and coffee. This is my chicken sandwich and coffee. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: I want these off the ship. I don't care if it takes every man we've got, I want them off the ship. 
(Scott enters, carrying an armful of fluff.) 
SCOTT: They're into the machinery, all right, and they're probably in all the other food processors too. 
KIRK: How? 
SCOTT: Probably through one of the air vents. 
SPOCK: Captain, there are vents of that type on the space station. 
KIRK: And in the storage compartments. (goes to a table monitor) This is Kirk. Contact Manager Lurry and Nilz Baris. Have them meet us near the storage compartments. We're beaming down. Come on, Spock.

[Transporter room]

(The tribbles are all over the pads too. Kirk picks one up but there's nowhere else to put it.) 
KIRK: Energise. 

[Lurry's office]

LURRY: What's wrong? 
KIRK: Plenty, if what I think's happened has happened.

[Storage compartments]

KIRK: Is that door secure? 
GUARD: Yes, sir. Nothing could get in. 
KIRK: Good. Open it. 
GUARD: It's not working, sir. It seems to be stuck. 
KIRK: Here. Let me try it. 
(But he can't open it either, so he tried one of the overhead doors instead. That does open, and a whole load of tribbles fall out, burying the gallant Captain up to his shoulders. Spock examines one.) 
SPOCK: They seem to be gorged. 
BARIS: Gorged? On my grain? Kirk, I am going to hold you responsible. There must be thousands of them. 
KIRK: Hundreds of thousands. 
SPOCK: One million seven hundred seventy one thousand five hundred sixty one. That's assuming one tribble, multiplying with an average litter of ten, producing a new generation every twelve hours over a period of three days. 
KIRK: That's assuming they got here three days ago. 
SPOCK: And allowing for the amount of grain consumed and the volume of the storage compartment. 
BARIS: Kirk, you should have known. You are responsible for turning the development project into a total disaster. 
KIRK: Mister Baris 
BARIS: And I'm through being intimidated, Kirk. You have insulted me, you have ignored me, you've walked all over me. You have abused your authority, and you've rejected my requests. And this, this is the result. I'm going to hold you responsible. 
KIRK: Mister Baris, I'll hold you in irons if you don't shut up. 
MCCOY: Jim, I think I've got it. All we have to do is quit feeding them. We quit feeding them, they stop breeding. 
KIRK: Now he tells me. 
SPOCK: Captain this tribble is dead. And so are these. 
MCCOY: A lot of them are dead. A lot of them are alive, but they won't be for long. 
SPOCK: The logical assumption is that there is something in the grain. 
KIRK: Yes. Bones, I want the tribbles, the grain, everything analysed. I want to know what killed these tribbles. 
MCCOY: I haven't figured out what keeps them alive yet. All right, if I find out anything, I'll let you know. (leaves) 
BARIS: That isn't going to do you any good, Kirk. This project is ruined, and Starfleet is going to hear about it. And when they do, they will have a board of inquiry and they will roast you alive. And I am going to be there, Kirk, to enjoy every minute of it. 
KIRK: Until that inquiry, I'm still the captain. And as Captain, I want two things done. First, find Cyrano Jones, and second (as another tribble hits him on the head) close that door.

[Lurry's office]

(A security guard is picking up tribbles.) 
JONES: Really, Captain Kirk, I must protest this treatment. 
KIRK: Ah, Mister Jones, with an armful. A few questions. 
KOLOTH: Captain Kirk! 
KIRK: What do you want? 
KOLOTH: An official apology addressed to the Klingon High Command. I expect you to assume full responsibility for the persecution of Klingon nationals in this quadrant. 
KIRK: An apology? 
KOLOTH: Yes. You've harassed my men. You've treated them like criminals. You've been most uncourteous, Captain Kirk. If you wish to avoid a diplomatic incident 
BARIS: No, Kirk. You can't let him. That will give them the wedge they need to claim Sherman's Planet. 
SPOCK: I believe that more than the word of an aggrieved Klingon commander would be necessary for that, Mister Baris. 
KOLOTH: Mister Spock, as far as Sherman's Planet is concerned, Captain Kirk has already given it to us. 
KIRK: Well, we'll see about that, but before I take any official action, I'd like to know Just what happened. Who put the tribbles in the quadrotriticale? What was in the grain that killed them? 
KOLOTH: Captain Kirk, before you go on, may I make a request? 
KIRK: Yes. 
KOLOTH: Can you get those things out of here? 
(The guards take Jones' tribbles from him. They get to the door as Darvin enters, and the tribbles shriek.) 
SPOCK: Remarkable. 
KIRK: Hold on a minute. I thought you said tribbles liked everybody. 
JONES: They do. I can't understand it. The last time I saw one act this way was at the bar. 
KIRK: What was in the bar? 
JONES: Klingons. Him, for one. (points at Korax) 
(Kirk takes two tribbles from the guards and brings them near Korax. They shriek.) 
KIRK: You're right, Mister Jones. They don't like Klingons. (McCoy enters) But they do like Vulcans. I didn't know you had it in you. 
SPOCK: Obviously tribbles are very perceptive creatures, Captain. 
KIRK: Obviously. Mister Baris, they like you. Well, there's no accounting for taste. (and back to Darvin) They don't like you, Mister Darvin. I wonder why. Bones? 
MCCOY: (scanning him) Heartbeat is all wrong. His body temperature is. Jim, this man is a Klingon. 
BARIS: A Klingon? 
KIRK: I wonder what Starfleet Command will say about that. What about the grain, Bones? 
MCCOY: Oh, yes. It was poisoned. 
BARIS: Poisoned? 
MCCOY: Yes. It's been impregnated with a virus. The virus turns into an inert material in the bloodstream. The more the organism eats, the more inert matter is built up. So after two or three days, they reached a point where they couldn't take in enough nourishment to survive. 
KIRK: They starved to death. In a storage compartment full of grain, they starved to death. 
MCCOY: That is essentially it. 
KIRK: Mister Darvin, are you going to talk? 
DARVIN: I have nothing to say. (Kirk thrusts the tribbles into his face) All right, I poisoned the grain! Take them away. 
KIRK: And the tribbles had nothing to do with it? 
DARVIN: I don't know. I never saw one before in my life, and I hope I never see one of those fuzzy miserable things again. 
BARIS: I'm certain that can be arranged, Darvin. Guards? If you'll excuse me, Captain. 
(Baris leaves with the security guards and Darvin.) 
KIRK: Captain Koloth. About that apology. 
KOLOTH: Yes? 
KIRK: You have six hours to get your ship out of Federation territory. 
(The tribbles shriek, Koloth makes a hasty bow and practically runs out of the room with Korax.)
KIRK: You know, I think I could learn to like tribbles.

[K7 Bar]

(The face of an unhappy barman peers out from a pile of tribbles.) 
JONES: Well, Captain, I suppose I'm free to go now. 
KIRK: No, you're not. There's something I want to show you. You know what the penalty is for transporting an animal proven harmful to human life? 
JONES: Captain, one little tribble isn't harmful. Captain, you wouldn't do a thing like that to me, now would you? Would you? 
SPOCK: The penalty is twenty years in a rehabilitation colony. 
JONES: Captain Kirk. Friend. Friend Kirk. Surely we can come to some sort of mutual understanding. After all, my tribbles did put you wise to the poisoned grain, and they did help you to find the Klingon agent. You saved a lot of lives that way. 
KIRK: There is one thing you can do. 
JONES: Yes? 
KIRK: Pick up every tribble on the space station. If you do that, I'll speak to Mister Lurry about returning your spaceship. 
JONES: It would take years. 
SPOCK: Seventeen point nine, to be exact. 
JONES: Seventeen point nine years. 
KIRK: Consider it Job security. 
JONES: Captain, you're a hard man. All right! All right! 
KIRK: You'll do it?
SPOCK: He'll do it. 
JONES: I'll do it. 
(He starts stuffing tribbles into his many pockets.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain, Starfleet was able to divert that freighter. 
KIRK: Good. That means Sherman's Planet will get its quadrotriticale only a few weeks late. I don't see any tribbles around here. 
MCCOY: And you won't find a tribble on this entire ship. 
KIRK: Bones, how did you do it? 
MCCOY: I cannot take credit for another man's work. Scotty did it. 
KIRK: Scotty! Where are the tribbles? 
SCOTT: Oh, er, Captain, it was really Mister Spock's recommendation. 
KIRK: Of course. Spock. 
SPOCK: Based on computer analysis, of course, taking into account the possibilities of 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I don't want to interrupt this mutual admiration society, but I'd like to know where the tribbles are. 
MCCOY: Tell him, Spock. 
SPOCK: Well, it was Mister Scott who performed the actual engineering. 
KIRK: Mister Scott. Where are the tribbles? 
SCOTT: I used the transporter, Captain. 
KIRK: You used the transporter? 
SCOTT: Aye. 
KIRK: Where did you transport them? Scott, you didn't transport them into space, did you? 
SCOTT: Captain Kirk, that'd be inhuman. 
KIRK: Where are they? 
SCOTT: I gave them a good home, sir. 
KIRK: (shouting) Where? 
SCOTT: I gave them to the Klingons, sir. 
KIRK: (a whisper) You gave them to the Klingons? 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. Before they went into warp, I transported the whole kit and caboodle into their engine room, where they'll be no tribble at all.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Wolf In The Fold
Stardate: 3614.9
Original Airdate: 22 Dec, 1967

[Cafe]
(A woman is doing a belly-dance, complete with finger-cymbals, while the patrons lounge on cushions. The audience are appreciating the show.) 
SCOTT: Captain, I think I'm going to like Argelius. 
KIRK: Obviously a man of good taste. 
SCOTT: You mean to tell me all these women, that all this is 
KIRK: Yes, yes, yes. The Argelians think very highly of their pleasure. 
MCCOY: That's an understatement if I ever heard one. This is a completely hedonistic society. 
KIRK: Do you like her, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Aye. Why shouldn't I? 
KIRK: Good. I've invited her to join us at the table. I thought you might like to meet her. 
SCOTT: Now that's what I call a real Captain. Always thinking of his men. 
(The dancer comes over, bends over backwards then does a shimmy before returning to the small stage to finish. Scotty bangs on the table in applause.) 
KIRK: Scotty, Scotty. In Argelius they use the lights. 
SCOTT: Now no one has to tell an old Aberdeen pub-crawler how to applaud, Captain. 
(She comes over, but the man at the next table doesn't look too pleased with the situation.) 
KIRK: Have one of our pillows? 
(The man leaves as she sits.) 
SCOTT: 'Tis a fine foggy night tonight, and I doubt if anyone's ever told you of the marvellous fogs we have in Aberdeen. 
KARA: Never a word, but I'm dying to learn. 
SCOTT: Well then, why don't I show you? There's nothing like a walk in the fog with a bonny lass. 
KARA: Or a handsome gentleman. Why don't we? 
SCOTT: You don't mind, do you? I might even get back to the ship on time. 
KIRK: We won't leave without you, Scotty. Relax and enjoy yourself. (Scott and Kara leave) My work is never done. 
MCCOY: My work, Jim. This is prescription stuff. Don't forget, the explosion that threw Scotty against a bulkhead was caused by a woman. 
KIRK: Physically he's all right. Am I right in assuming that? 
MCCOY: Oh, yes, yes. As a matter of fact, considerable psychological damage could have been caused. For example, his total resentment toward women. 
KIRK: He seems he's overcoming his resentment. 
MCCOY: Of course, in my professional opinion, when he gets back to the ship, he's going to hate you for making him leave Argelius. But then he will have lost total resentment toward women. 
KIRK: Mission accomplished as far as Scotty is concerned. Bones, I know a little place across town where the women 
MCCOY: Oh yes. I know the place. Let's go.

[Street]

(The fog hangs very low on Argelius - somewhere just below knee level. Couples are meandering along lost in each other. Kirk works out which way to go, then suddenly - a scream splits the night. They run towards it and find the dancer on the ground.) 
MCCOY: She's dead, Jim. 
KIRK: Stabbed, a dozen times. 
(And standing by a wall, groaning, with a bloody knife in his hand, is Montgomery Scott.

Captain's log, stardate 3614.9. Planet Argelius Two. While on therapeutic shore leave, Mister Scott has fallen under suspicion of having brutally murdered an Argelian woman. The chief city administrator, Mister Hengist, has taken charge of the investigation, but has learned little of value.

[Cafe]

HENGIST: (a neat man in a suit) I don't know what to say, gentlemen. Argelius is the last planet in the galaxy I'd expect a thing like this to happen. 
KIRK: We're just as shocked as you are, Mister Hengist. 
HENGIST: If this was my home planet, Rigel Four, I'd have a dozen investigators working on the matter, but they don't exist here. 
MCCOY: You're not a native of Argelius, sir? 
HENGIST: Oh, no. Argelius hires its administrative officers from other planets. The Argelians aren't very efficient, you know. Gentle, harmless people. Mister Scott. Mister Scott? Now, are you sure you've never seen this before? (the knife) 
SCOTT: I, I don't remember. 
HENGIST: Really, sir. That is hardly helpful. 
KIRK: Scotty, you left the cafe with the girl. Do you remember that? What happened next? 
SCOTT: We were walking in the fog. I was up ahead trying to lead the way. I heard the girl scream. I remember starting to turn. I don't remember another thing. 
KIRK: Scotty, you've got to remember. 
MCCOY: Jim. (they move off a little way) If he says he can't remember, he probably doesn't. You know Scotty. 
KIRK: I know a murder's been committed. 
MCCOY: You don't think by any chance that Scotty 
KIRK: It doesn't make any difference what I think. 
MCCOY: But you don't just throw him to the wolves. 
KIRK: Bones, I have a diplomatic responsibility. This happened under Argelian jurisdiction. If they want to arrest him, try him, even convict him, I have to go along with it. 
MCCOY: But he's suffering from a severe concussion. 
KIRK: We'll do what we can. 
HENGIST: It's not promising, Captain. Mister Scott insists he remembers nothing, but my detector readings indicates that only his fingerprints are on the murder weapon. 
KIRK: Yes. Mister Hengist, there were other people in the cafe about the time of the murder. Several of them left just before Mister Scott and the girl did. 
HENGIST: So I've been informed by the staff. They're being located and we will question them. But the outlook for your friend is quite grim. 
KIRK: What's the law in these cases? 
JARIS: The law of Argelius is love. 
(An elegant grey-haired man enters, with a woman.) 
HENGIST: Gentlemen, our prefect, Jaris. Sir, Captain Kirk, Doctor McCoy. 
JARIS: And this is my wife, Sybo. 
HENGIST: And this man is Scott, the one I sent you the message about. 
JARIS: He does not look like a man capable of such an act. Still, it's been so long. Gentlemen, before our great awakening two hundred years ago, we had ways of learning the truth in such matters. We shall return to them. 
MCCOY: The Argelian empathic contact? 
JARIS: You know of this? 
KIRK: Yes, we've heard of it. I assumed it was a lost art. 
JARIS: My wife is a descendent of the ancient priestesses of our land. She has the ancestral gift. Gentlemen, I have come to invite you to my home. 
HENGIST: Prefect, don't you think this should be handled in an official manner through my office? 
JARIS: It shall be handled in an official manner, Mister Hengist, since I am the highest official. Gentlemen, let us proceed to my home where, with the aid of my wife, we shall learn the truth. Please.

[Jaris' home]

(The middle eastern theme continues with spiral columns, onion-dome arches, latticed windows and plenty of cushions.) 
KIRK: Depending on your wife's empathic abilities is all very well, Prefect, but there's only one way we can find out what it is Mister Scott cannot remember. Since you find it impossible to let us go back up to our ship, I can beam down a technician with a psycho-tricorder. 
MCCOY: Prefect, it will give us a detailed account of everything that's happened to Mister Scott in the last twenty four hours. 
HENGIST: Oh, I'd advise against it, Prefect. This is purely an Argelian matter. 
JARIS: My wife must meditate for a time before she's ready. I see no reason why we should not use that time to good advantage. Very well, Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Enterprise. Spock here.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: Mister Spock, beam down a technician with a psycho-tricorder, please. Use these co-ordinates.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Acknowledged. Co-ordinates received.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: Kirk out. 
MCCOY: Prefect, the psycho-tricorder will require privacy to be effective. 
JARIS: There is a small chamber below this room. Perhaps that will suffice. Captain, news of this frightful murder is spreading among my people. They're greatly disturbed. I have already heard talk of closing Argelius to space vehicles. 
KIRK: Well, that would be most unfortunate. Argelian hospitality is well-known, as well as its strategic importance as a space port. 
JARIS: Yes. I believe it's the only one in the quadrant. (hands out drinks) Captain. 
HENGIST: There are other people we should question. Perhaps I should go expedite their arrival here? 
JARIS: Yes, please do so, Mister Hengist. Anyone with any connection with this murder should be present at the ceremony. 
(A woman beams down as Hengist leaves.) 
KAREN: Lieutenant Karen Tracy reporting as ordered, Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, I want a twenty four hour regressive memory check made on Mister Scott. 
KAREN: Yes, Captain. Where shall I set up? 
JARIS: If you'll Just follow me, Lieutenant. 
(Jaris and Karen leave.) 
KIRK: Scotty, co-operate completely with Lieutenant Tracy. Maybe we'll clear this thing up. 
SCOTT: I certainly hope so, sir. I can't stand this not knowing. (leaves) 
MCCOY: Captain, under normal conditions, Scotty would have never done such a thing. 
KIRK: But that blow on the head. It could put all his previous behaviour patterns into the junk heap. 
MCCOY: Of course, there's another possibility. 
KIRK: Explain. 
MCCOY: Hysterical amnesia. When a man feels guilty about something, something too terrible to remember, he blots it out of his conscious memory. 
(Jaris returns and crosses to another doorway.) 
JARIS: Are you ready, Sybo? 
SYBO: I am ready. May I have the knife, please? 
JARIS: Certainly. Among other gifts, Sybo has the ability to receive impressions from inanimate objects. Do you have it, Captain? 
KIRK: The knife? No. 
JARIS: But I put it here when we arrived. It's gone. 
(A woman's scream fills the air.)

[Chamber]

(Karen Tracy is lying face down on the floor, and Scott is slumped unconscious in a chair.) 
KIRK: Scotty. 
MCCOY: She's dead, Jim. Just like the other one. 
KIRK: Stabbed over and over again.

[Jaris' home]

JARIS: (to Scott) Drink this. An Argelian stimulant, Doctor. Quite effective and quite harmless. 
MCCOY: Go ahead, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Lieutenant? Captain? Where's 
KIRK: Lieutenant Tracy is dead, Scott. You were found alone in the room. 
SCOTT: Dead? But I 
KIRK: What happened down there? 
SCOTT: I was sitting there. She was taking her readings, and now I'm sitting here. 
MCCOY: Is that all that happened? 
SCOTT: I tell you, I don't remember. I must have passed out. 
MCCOY: It could be, Jim. That head injury. 
KIRK: That head injury. Think, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Captain, I've been trying. I can't even believe this is really happening. 
KIRK: There's no way into that place from up here. Prefect, is there another entrance to that chamber? 
JARIS: Yes, there's a door that leads into the garden, but it's been locked for years. 
MCCOY: Locks can be picked, Jim. 
KIRK: Check it. 
(McCoy leaves and Hengist enters. He is accompanied by the man from the next table and one of the musicians.) 
HENGIST: Prefect, both of these men were at the cafe the night of the murder. 
KIRK: Where've they been during the past few minutes? 
HENGIST: Captain, if you don't mind please. 
KIRK: There's been another murder, Hengist. One of my crew. 
JARIS: The same as Kara. 
HENGIST: Why, that's terrible. (to the man from the next table) You, my men picked you up near there. What were you doing? 
MORLA: Please, I know nothing about it. I didn't kill anyone. 
HENGIST: Well, how was the girl killed? 
KIRK: Stabbed. And there's no sign of the weapon. 
HENGIST: If only I had facilities. 
KIRK: You. You were a musician at the cafe. You played for the murdered girl. 
TARK: Since she was a little girl, she danced for me. She was my daughter. Prefect, how could this thing have happened here? The man who did it must be found. He must be punished. 
KIRK: And you. You left the cafe before Scott and Kara. 
JARIS: Is this true? Who are you? 
MORLA: Morla of Cantaba Street, Prefect. I was there. I have nothing to hide. 
KIRK: Did you know Kara? 
TARK: Of course he knew her. They were to be married, but he behaved disgracefully. Unheard of. He was jealous of her. 
JARIS: That is very disquieting. 
MORLA: I know it was wrong, but I just couldn't help myself. I loved her, and when she went over to the table with these men, I could not stand to watch, so I left and went home. 
KIRK: Jealousy has often been a motive for murder. 
JARIS: Yes, I know. That is why the emotion is so strongly disapproved of here. 
MORLA: Prefect, I didn't kill anyone. I couldn't. 
JARIS: We shall see, Morla. 
MCCOY: Sorry, Jim. The lock may or may not have been picked. It would be hard to tell even with the tricorder. 
KIRK: Can you prove you went directly home? 
HENGIST: Captain, may I continue with the questions please? 
KIRK: Well get on with it, man. Just don't stand there. 
JARIS: Captain, Captain. You're behaving very much like a man who is desperately trying anything to save his friend. Would you be as desperate to save Argelius as a space port for your Starfleet? 
KIRK: Well of course I'm trying to save my friend, if he's innocent. And he hasn't been proven guilty. 
HENGIST: Need I remind you of the circumstances, Captain? In both cases, your friend Scott was discovered over the body and later claimed to remember nothing. 
SYBO: I am ready, Jaris. 
JARIS: Gentlemen, sit down please. 
(Everyone sits around the central brazier.) 
KIRK: On one condition, Prefect. That the room be sealed so that no one can leave or enter while the ceremony is going on. 
JARIS: (he flicks a row of switches and the doorways are closed) The room is sealed. 
SCOTT: Captain, you mean my neck is going to have to depend on some spooky mumbo jumbo? 
(Kirk's communicator beeps.) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain. May I have a word with you? 
KIRK: Yes. Excuse me, gentlemen. (moves away from the group) Yes, Mister Spock?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Concerning the situation you related to us. In my opinion, the Argelian empathic contact is an interesting phenomenon, but the technique is not sound enough to risk a man's life.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: What do you suggest, Mister Spock?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Simply that we beam Mister Scott on board the Enterprise and employ our computers to learn the truth.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: These are a proud people. They have their own customs, their own laws, and while we're here we're subject to them. It is absolutely imperative that this matter be resolved according to Argelian law. Is that clear?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Quite clear, Captain.

[Jaris' home]

KIRK: I don't like it any more than you do, Spock, but there's nothing we can do about it. Kirk out, 
(Everyone is holding hands around the brazier.) 
SYBO: Let us begin. Let the circle not be broken. Concentrate upon the flame which burns upon the altar of truth. 
Yes, there is something here. Something terrible. I feel its presence. Fear, anger, hatred. Anger feeds the flame. Oh! Oh! There is evil here. Monstrous, terrible evil. Consuming hunger. Hatred of all that lives. Hatred of women. A hunger that never dies. It is strong, overpowering. An ancient terror. It has a name. Beratis, Kesla, Redjac! Devouring all life, all light. A hunger that will never die! Redjac! Redjac! 
(The lights go out, and she screams. When the lights come on again, the flame has gone out. Scott is standing holding Sybo in his arms, then he lets her go and she falls forward across McCoy's lap. There is a knife in her back. 
Later...)
KIRK: Three murders, and Scotty the only possible answer each time. 
MCCOY: I don't care what the circumstances indicate, Jim. Scotty simply could not have done it. 
KIRK: Normally, no, but that blow on his head could 
SCOTT: No, Captain. 
KIRK Scotty, I'm sorry. You don't even remember whether you did it or not. 
HENGIST: I agree with you, Captain. I'm perfectly satisfied Mister Scott is guilty. 
KIRK: But not responsible. 
HENGIST: That is unproven, sir. 
KIRK: We can prove it, if he's insane. 
JARIS: Gentlemen, please. How could any man do such monstrous things? 
KIRK: That's what we hope to find out, sir. 
JARIS: Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Sir, I swear to you I did not kill your wife or the other ladies. 
HENGIST: By your own admission, you don't know whether you did or didn't. Your so-called failing memory 
KIRK: Mister Hengist. On the Enterprise, we can make a recording of the registrations of Mister Scott's conscious and subconscious mind. They will tell us what happened to him in the recent past. 
MCCOY: There would be no room for doubt. We would know. And after all, that's what we're after, isn't it, Prefect? To know? 
JARIS: You, sir, claim to remember nothing about the murders. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
JARIS: If this is so, you may have killed without knowing it. Will your machines tell us this? 
KIRK: No doubt will remain. 
JARIS: Very well. We will go to your ship, and he who is guilty will face the ancient penalties, barbaric and horrible though they may be. The ancient penalty for murder was death by slow torture. That law has never been changed. Do you understand that, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Aye. I understand.

Captain's log, stardate 3615.4. With Mister Scott in a technical state of arrest, we have beamed aboard the Enterprise to continue the investigation.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Each testifier will sit here, place his hand on this plate. Any deviation from factual truth will be immediately detected and relayed to this computer which will in turn notify us. Doctor McCoy has already fed the computer his medical reports. Our laboratory experts are examining the murder weapon and will give their data to the computers for analysis. Shall we begin? 
(Jaris nods.) 
KIRK: Mister Scott, will you take the stand? 
(Scott sits on the raised chair and puts his right hand on the sensor plate. Yet at no time does the camera let us see all his finger.) 
KIRK: Computer, identify verification. 
COMPUTER: Working. Lieutenant Commander Montgomery Scott. Serial number SE-19754-T. Verified. 
KIRK: Subject's present physical condition. 
COMPUTER: Working. Subject recently received severe blow on skull. Damage healing. Some peripheral abnormalities. 
KIRK: Sufficient abnormalities to account for periods of functional amnesia? 
COMPUTER: Working. Negative. 
MCCOY: Captain, I don't see how that can be. 
KIRK: Unless Scotty's lying about his loss of memory. 
SCOTT: I'm not lying, Captain. I don't remember a thing about the first two murders. 
KIRK: Computer, accuracy scan. 
COMPUTER: Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes. 
SCOTT: Captain? I didn't black out when Mister Jaris' wife was killed. 
KIRK: All right, Scotty, let's have it. 
SCOTT: We were holding hands. When the lights went out, the circle was broken. I heard the poor lady scream, and as I was near the head of the table anyway I went toward her. But there was something in my way. 
KIRK: Something? You mean someone. 
SCOTT: No, Captain, some thing. Cold, it was, like a stinking draught out of a slaughterhouse, but it wasn't really there. Like it. (lost for words) If you know what I mean. 
KIRK: Computer. 
COMPUTER: Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes. 
KIRK: All right. Let's hit it on the head. Scotty, did you kill Sybo? 
SCOTT: No, Captain. That I'm sure of. 
HENGIST: He's been saying that right along. It means no more now than it did before. 
KIRK: Scotty, lie to me. How old are you? 
SCOTT: Twenty two sir. 
COMPUTER: Inaccurate. Inaccurate. Data in error. 
KIRK: After the lights went out, Mister Scott, who was holding your hand? 
SCOTT: Morla on the one side and you on the other, sir. 
MORLA: But that doesn't mean anything, Captain, with a room that small. The lights were out. Anyone would've had time to kill the lady. 
HENGIST: But I remind you we found Mister Scott holding her in his arms, the knife still (to Jaris) I'm sorry, sir, but I must. The knife still in her back and blood on his hands. 
KIRK: The verifier showed that he was telling the truth when he said he didn't kill her. 
HENGIST: There were two other women murdered. 
KIRK: Mister Scott. Did you kill Kara? 
SCOTT: I don't remember. 
KIRK: Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy? 
SCOTT: I don't remember. 
KIRK: Computer, accuracy scan. 
COMPUTER: Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes. 
JARIS: All that proves is that he's telling the truth when he says he doesn't remember. 
HENGIST: This is a waste of time. 
KIRK: After we take the testimony here, we'll run a psycho-tricorder analysis of Mister Scott's memory, which is what we wanted to do on the surface. That will give us a complete record. Will that satisfy you, Mister Hengist? 
HENGIST: Well, if you can convince me that the machine is incapable of error, and if it shows he did not kill the women. 
KIRK: There will be no error. As for the rest of it, the readings will show. You can step down, Mister Scott, if there are no objections. 
HENGIST: I object to the entire procedure. 
JARIS: Mister Hengist, we are here on my authority. We will co-operate. 
HENGIST: Prefect, I know you mean well, but I've had experience 
JARIS: For the time being, we will accept Captain Kirk's explanation of the machine's accuracy as factual. I do, however, reserve to myself the right to make the final determination. 
KIRK: We can ask no more. Mister Morla, will you take the stand? 
(He does so.) 
KIRK: Where were you at the time that Kara was murdered? 
MORLA: I'm not sure. Walking home, I assume. I was angry. 
SPOCK: Anger is a relative state, sir. Were you angry enough to do violence? 
MORLA: I've never done violence in my life. I don't think I could. You've got to believe me. I wouldn't kill her. I couldn't. I loved her, and she loved me. 
TARK: That's not true! He might think she loved him, but she didn't. She told me. He was jealous. All the time. They fought constantly. 
KIRK: Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy? 
MORLA: No. 
KIRK: Did you kill Sybo? 
MORLA: No. 
KIRK: Computer, verification scan. 
COMPUTER: Subject relaying accurate account, though some statements subjective. No physiological changes. 
KIRK: All right, Mister Morla, I think you can step down now. Sybo spoke of a hunger that never dies. Something that thrives on fear, terror, death. Mister Spock, maybe we're going about it in the wrong way. Let's assume that Sybo was a sensitive. That she did sense something, something evil. 
SPOCK: Sensitivity of certain Argelian women is a documented fact, Captain. 
JARIS: My poor Sybo's talent was genuine, gentlemen. What she told you was true. 
KIRK: All right, then, what was it she said, exactly? A monstrous evil, ancient terror. 
MCCOY: That devours all life and light. 
KIRK: She said something else, words that didn't make sense. 
MCCOY: Yes. Redjac, Beratis and, er, Kesla. 
KIRK: Obscure, meaningless words. 
SPOCK: To us, perhaps, but to the computer? 
KIRK: Ah. Mister Spock, check them out. 
SPOCK: Computer, linguistic bank. Definition of following word. Redjac. 
COMPUTER: Working. Negative finding. 
SPOCK: There is no such word in the linguistics bank? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. 
SPOCK: Scan all other banks. 
COMPUTER: Working. Affirmative. A proper name. 
SPOCK: Define. 
COMPUTER: Redjac. Source Earth, nineteenth century. Language, English. Nickname for mass murderer of women. Other Earth synonym, Jack the Ripper. 
KIRK: Jack the Ripper? 
HENGIST: That's ridiculous. He lived hundreds of years ago. 
TARK: A man couldn't survive all these centuries. 
JARIS: Just before she died, my wife said, it is a hunger that never dies. 
TARK: But all men die. 
KIRK: Yes, all men die. And Jack the Ripper couldn't be alive if he were a man. But everything we've uncovered points to Jack the Ripper, which is an impossibility, isn't it? Or is it? 
SPOCK: Humans and humanoids make up only a small percentage of the life forms we know of. There are entities possessed of extremely long life spans, virtually immortal. 
KIRK: We know that someone or something killed three women. If it's impossible for it to be human, it has to be something else. Something driven to kill. 
MCCOY: Sybo said it feeds on death. 
SPOCK: In the strict scientific sense, Doctor, we all feed on death. Even vegetarians. 
MCCOY: Yes, but she said more than that. Not just death, but fear. She said it also feeds on fear. 
SPOCK: Which would tend to support the proposition that the murderer was not human. Deriving sustenance from emotion is not unknown in the galaxy, and fear is among the strongest and most violent of the emotions. 
HENGIST: Surely, Prefect, this has gone far enough. Someone, some man has killed three women. We have the prime suspect in our hands. Are we going to let him go and start chasing ghosts? 
KIRK: No, Mister Hengist, not ghosts. Possibly not human, but not ghosts. Mister Spock, check out the possibilities. 
SPOCK: Computer, digest log recordings for past five solar minutes. Correlate hypotheses. Compare with life forms register. Question. Could such an entity within discussed limits exist in this galaxy? 
COMPUTER: The Drella of Alpha Carinae Five derives nourishment from the emotion of love. There is sufficient precedent for existence of creature, nature unknown, which could exist on emotion of fear. 
SPOCK: Computer, extrapolate most likely composition of such entity. 
SPOCK: Working. To meet with specified requirements, entity would exist without form in conventional sense. Most probable mass of energy of highly cohesive electromagnetic field. 
KIRK: Computer, could the described entity assume physical form? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. Precedent, mellitus, cloud creature of Alpha Majoris One. 
HENGIST: Fairy tales. Ghosts and goblins. 
KIRK: No, I've seen the mellitus myself. In its natural state, it's gaseous. When it's at rest, it's solid. Mister Spock, let's assume the existence of this creature. 
SPOCK: I point out that Jack the Ripper slew at will in the heart of the most populous city of old Earth and was never identified. 
KIRK: Doesn't seem likely, does it? 
SPOCK: I suggest the possibility of a hypnotic screen, which blinds all but the victim to the presence of the killer. 
JARIS: Is that possible? 
MCCOY: Extremely possible There are many such examples that exist in nature. 
HENGIST: This is fantasy! We all know the murderer is sitting right here. You're trying to cloud the issue. I've got a mind to 
JARIS: I am satisfied the course of this investigation is valid enough. Please be seated, Mister Hengist. 
KIRK: All right, Mister Spock, what do we have? A creature without form, that feeds on horror and fear, that must assume a physical shape to kill. 
SPOCK: And I suspect preys on women because women are more easily and more deeply terrified, generating more sheer horror than the male of the species. 
KIRK: Computer. Criminological files. Cases of unsolved mass murders of women since Jack the Ripper. 
COMPUTER: Working. 1932. Shanghai, China, Earth. Seven women knifed to death. 1974, Kiev, USSR, Earth. Five women knifed to death. 2105. Martian colonies. Eight women knifed to death. 2156. Heliopolis, Alpha Eridani Two. Ten women knifed to death. There are additional examples. 
SPOCK: Captain, those places are aligned directly between Argelius and Earth. 
KIRK: Yes. When man moved out into the galaxy, that thing must've moved with him. Computer, identify the proper names Kesla and Beratis. 
COMPUTER: Working. Kesla. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Deneb Two. Beratis. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Rigel Four. Additional data. Murders on Rigel Four occurred one solar year ago. 
(All heads turn towards Mister Hengist) 
KIRK: You come from Rigel Four. 
HENGIST: Well, many people do. It's not a crime. 
KIRK: No, but what we're investigating is. Would you mind taking the stand, Mister Hengist? 
HENGIST: I will not. 
JARIS: Mister Hengist. 
HENGIST: Prefect, this has gone far enough. I will not take the stand. 
SPOCK: I can appreciate your position, sir. You are in charge of civil disturbances locally. If you are the entity for which we search, what better position from which to kill with impunity? 
MCCOY: Just after you left Jaris' house, we discovered the murder knife was missing. 
KIRK: And you were unaccounted for when Lieutenant Tracy was murdered. 
SPOCK: An entity which feeds on fear and terror would find a perfect hunting ground on Argelius, a planet without violence, where the inhabitants are as peaceful as sheep. The entity would be as a hungry wolf in that fold. 
HENGIST: Gentlemen, I know something of the law. You're engaging in sheer speculation. 
KIRK: Perhaps. Mister Spock. The murder weapon. 
SPOCK: Computer. Report on analysis of Exhibit A. 
COMPUTER: Working. Exhibit A on visual. Composition of blade, boridium. Composition of handle, murinite. Details of carving on handle conform to folk art forms, indicating place of origin. 
SPOCK: Specify. Point of origin. 
COMPUTER: Artefact produced by hill people of Argus River region, planet Rigel Four. 
KIRK: Now then, Mister Hengist 
(But Hengist tries to make a break for it, even landing a very good kick on Kirk, who repays him with an even better right cross. Hengist falls to the floor.) 
MCCOY: He's dead, Jim. 
KIRK: But that's impossible. 
(The lights dim eerily.) 
VOICE [OC]: Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! (maniacal laughter) 
(The lights come back.) 
SPOCK: The computer will not respond to these controls. The entity is unquestionably controlling it. 
KIRK: And the computer controls the ship. 
VOICE [OC]: Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! 
MCCOY: Scotty, give me a hand. (They prop Hengist up on a chair, leaning against the table.) 
SPOCK: It's no use, Captain. The bypass circuits are blocked. 
KIRK: Audio cut off, Spock. 
SCOTT: Captain! 
(The viewscreen has an image of hot swirling flames or lava. Anyway, it is fear-inducing.) 
TANKRIS: (a lady yeoman) What's happening, Captain? 
JARIS: What does it mean? 
KIRK: It means that thing can control the entire operation of the ship, including the life support systems. 
MORLA: You mean it could kill us all? 
SPOCK: Indeed, it will try, but not immediately. We know it feeds on fear and terror. There are nearly four hundred and forty humans aboard this ship. Surely it will try to breed fear and terror before it kills. 
KIRK: All hands, this is the captain. Stay at your posts. Remain calm. Captain out. Bones. What's the sedative situation? 
MCCOY: I've got some stuff that would tranquillise an active volcano. 
KIRK: Good. Start distribution immediately. The longer we can hold back that fear, the more time we'll have to get that thing out of the computer. Prefect, you'll all be safer here. Spock, come with me.

[Corridor]

KIRK: Spock, don't you have a compulsory scan unit built into the computer banks? 
SPOCK: Yes we do, Captain, but with the entity in control 
KIRK: Aren't there certain mathematical problems which simply cannot be solved? 
SPOCK: Indeed. If we could focus the attention of the computer on one of them. 
KIRK: That ought to do it.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Spock! 
(The door nearly closes before he is inside.) 
SPOCK: Apparently our friends learned very quickly. 
KIRK: Too quickly. Bridge. 
(But the lights indicate they are going down quickly, not up.) 
SPOCK: Freefall! 
KIRK: Out of control. Put it on manual. Bridge. 
(They start going up, then an alarm goes off.) 
KIRK: That was due to be next. Life-support malfunction. 
SPOCK: We don't have much time, Captain. 
KIRK: You said it yourself, Spock. It wants terror, not just death.

[Bridge]

SULU: Captain, the life-support system override jammed. 
KIRK: All right. Man your station, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
VOICE [OC]: Captain, you're wasting your time. 
KIRK: Cut that thing off. 
VOICE [OC]: You and all aboard your ship are about to die! 
KIRK: Try and cut that thing off. 
SULU: This is the first time I heard a malfunction threaten us. 
KIRK: Man your post, Mister Sulu. (to all the crew) Prepare your manual overrides. You may need them. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
(Kirk crouches down by Spock under the life-support station.) 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: Normal environmental levels have been restored, Captain, but it will not last long. A few hours at best. 
KIRK: That should be enough time. Let's get at it. 
SULU: What's going on, Captain? 
KIRK: Never mind, Mister Sulu. 
(A nurse enters.) 
KIRK: Tranquilliser? 
NURSE: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Everyone, including yourself. 
NURSE: Yes, sir. 
VOICE: You cannot stop me now, Captain. It will do you no good. I control all circuits. You cannot silence me. You cannot reach me. Your manual overrides are extremely limited in life. 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Proceeding, Captain, but I will need some time. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. 
VOICE [OC]: Soon all control will be restored to me! There is nothing you can do to prevent it! 
KIRK: If you destroy this ship, you destroy yourself. 
VOICE [OC]: I am without ending. I have existed from the dawn of time, and I shall I live beyond its end! In the meantime, I shall feed, and this time I do not need a knife. You will all die horribly in searing pain! 
SPOCK: It is attempting to generate terror, Captain. 
VOICE [OC]: I can cut off your oxygen and suffocate you! 
SULU: Captain? (gets his injection, and grins) Who ever he is, he sure talks gloomy. 
KIRK: Man your post, Mister. If any of the other systems go out, switch to manual override, and above all, don't be afraid. 
SULU: With an armful of this stuff, I wouldn't be afraid of a supernova. 
SPOCK: Ready. 
KIRK: Implement. 
SPOCK: Computer, this is a Class A compulsory directive. Compute to the last digit the value of pi. 
VOICE [OC]: No, no, no, no! No, no! 
SPOCK: As we know, the value of pi is a transcendental figure without resolution. The computer banks will work on this problem to the exclusion of all else until we order it to stop. 
KIRK: Yes, that should keep that thing busy for a while. The Argelians will be the first to panic. Let's get back to the briefing room. 
SULU: I wonder who it is we're not supposed to be afraid of.

[Briefing room]

(McCoy is in the process of inoculating the group. Scott feels no pain, that's for sure.) 
SCOTT: Well, sir? 
KIRK: I doubt very much whether the computers will be inhabited by more than a group of figures for a while. 
SPOCK: There is resistance, Captain, but the directive is succeeding. Bank after bank is turning to the problem. 
MCCOY: If you drive it out of the computers, it'll have to go somewhere else. 
KIRK: How are you doing? 
MCCOY: I'm almost finished. Just Jaris and me. 
(Maniacal laughter over the intercom.) 
SPOCK: Complete computer control, Captain. The entity has fled. 
KIRK: Yes, but where to? Bones, what would happen if that thing entered a tranquillised body? 
MCCOY: Well, it might take up knitting, but nothing more violent than that. 
KIRK: You say everyone's had a shot but you and Jaris? 
MCCOY: And you and Mister Spock, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, I'm willing to take a chance on Mister Spock. Better give yourself a shot, Doc. 
MCCOY: No, I don't think so. I think I ought to stay clear. 
KIRK: Do as I say. 
(McCoy injects himself.) 
KIRK: Extend your arm, Mister Jaris. 
JARIS: (grabs Kirk's throat) No, no, kill you all! Die! Make you suffer! 
(Spock administers a neck-pinch. Hengist comes back to life, snatches up the knife and grabs Yeoman Tankris.) 
HENGIST: Everybody keep back or I'll kill her! I'll kill her! Keep back! 
MCCOY: You'd better be careful. You're going to hurt somebody with that thing. 
(Hengist pushes his hostage at McCoy then tries to attack Kirk. He's easily defeated.) 
HENGIST: You'll suffer! You'll suffer. (Spock injects him) I'll kill all of you. 
KIRK: Let's get him to the Transporter Room, quick! 
HENGIST: You'll die, die, die. Everybody will die.

[Corridor]

(Kirk carries the giggling Hengist in a fireman's lift, while Spock follows.) 
HENGIST: Kill, kill, kill you all.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Deep space. Full power. Widest angle of dispersion. Maintain. 
KYLE: No need to get excited, Captain. I'll do it. 
(They lay Hengist on the pad.) 
KIRK: You do it, Spock. 
HENGIST: Everybody die. You'll all suffer. 
(He is beamed out.) 
KYLE: You didn't have to shove me, Mister Spock. I'd have gotten round to it. 
(McCoy and Scott enter, with big grins.) 
MCCOY: Well, Jaris is all right. 
SCOTT: What did you do with that thing, Captain? Did you send it back to the planet? 
KIRK: No. We beamed it out into open space, Scotty. Widest possible dispersion. 
MCCOY: That thing can't die. 
SPOCK: Possibly, Doctor. Its consciousness may continue for some time, consisting of billions of separate bits of energy, floating forever in space, powerless. 
KIRK: But it will die finally. You seem very happy about the whole thing. 
SCOTT: Why not? For a while there I didn't know whether I was innocent or guilty. 
KIRK: Bones, how long will it take for this tranquilliser to wear off? 
MCCOY: I don't know. Five or six hours. I gave them a pretty big shot, Jim. 
KIRK: Yes, I can see that. Well Mister Spock, for the next five or six hours, we're going to have the happiest crew in space. Of course, we won't get much work done. 
SPOCK: Captain, since you came to Argelius to rest, I suggest you take advantage of the opportunity. 
KIRK: That's a splendid idea, Mister Spock. I know a cafe where the women are so 
MCCOY: I know the place, Jim. 
SCOTT: Let's go see! 
KIRK: You, gentlemen? In your condition? Don't be ridiculous. Mister Spock, this cafe has women that are so. (met with a Look) No, I guess not. Alone? 
(Kirk goes to the door and gestures for everyone to leave.) 
KIRK: Gentlemen. 

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Obsession
Stardate: 3619.2
Original Airdate: 15 Dec, 1967

[Planet surface]
(Kirk and Spock are standing by a large purple boulder.) 
SPOCK: Our scanner survey was correct, Captain. There it is. Pure tritanium. 
KIRK: Fantastic. 20 times as hard as diamond. 
SPOCK: Twenty one point four times as hard, to be exact. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. (into communicator) Scotty, you can mark this vein as confirmed. Inform Starfleet I recommend that they dispatch a survey vessel immediately. 
(Unseen by the landing party, a cloud of smoke is coming out of another rock and heading for them.) 
SCOTT [OC]: Acknowledged, Captain. They'll send one fast enough for this rich a find. 
SPOCK: We won't be able to break it, Captain. I'll phaser off a specimen. 
(He does so, and the smoke retreats.) 
KIRK: Lesley. 
(He is handed a pair of tongs to pick up the sample with.) 
KIRK: Do you smell that? A sweet odour like honey. It was years ago, on another planet. A thing with a an odour like that. 
SPOCK: We're in the growing season in this hemisphere of this planet. There are doubtless many pollen aromas. 
KIRK: Rizzo. 
RIZZO: Yes, sir? 
KIRK: Take your men. Make a swing around our perimeter. Scan for dikironium in the atmosphere. Set your phasers on disrupter-B. If you see any gaseous cloud, fire immediately. You're on Red Alert. Make a sweep. 
SCOTT [OC]: Ready to beam back aboard, Captain? 
KIRK: Negative, Scotty. We're checking something out. 
SCOTT [OC]: The USS Yorktown is expecting to rendezvous with us in less than eight hours, Captain. That doesn't give us much time. 
KIRK: Acknowledged. Continue standing by. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: Captain, dikironium exists only in laboratory experiments. 
KIRK: It's gone. I could have been wrong. The last time I caught an odour like that was eleven years ago.

[Clearing]

(The three red-shirts have run into a clearing.) 
RIZZO: Seemed to read dikironium for a minute, and then I lost it. It's almost like something out there knows I'm scanning it. It kind of keeps changing itself into something different. That isn't possible. Nothing can do that. 
(All together now - It's Behind You! The other two security men fall to the ground, choking in the cloud. Rizzo can't get a clear shot.)
RIZZO: Captain?

[Boulder]

KIRK: Kirk here.

[Clearing]

RIZZO: Captain.

[Boulder]

RIZZO [OC]: There's a strange cloud, sir.

[Clearing]

(It reaches him and he starts choking too) 
RIZZO: Cloud, cloud.

[Boulder]

KIRK: Fire into it immediately! 
RIZZO [OC]: Help me. Help!

[Clearing]

(But by the time they get there, the cloud has gone.) 
KIRK: Spock. Dead. And you'll find every red corpuscle gone from their body. 
SPOCK: Rizzo's alive, barely. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, lock in on us. Medical emergency. 
SPOCK: You think you know what it was, Captain? 
KIRK: Something that can't possibly exist, but it does.

Captain's log, stardate 3619.2. With the mysterious death of two crewmen, all personnel on the planet have been evacuated back to the ship.

[McCoy's office]

CHAPEL: Autopsy report, Doctor. 
KIRK: How's Ensign Rizzo? 
CHAPEL: Still unconscious, sir. 
MCCOY: Transfusions? 
CHAPEL: Continuing as rapidly as possible. His blood count is still sixty percent less than normal. (leaves) 
KIRK: Kirk to bridge. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: Spock here. Ready to leave orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Hold your position. 
SCOTT [on monitor]: Cutting in if I may, Captain. The USS Yorktown is expecting to rendezvous with us in less than seven hours. 
KIRK: Then you'll inform them that we might be a little late. 
MCCOY: Jim, the Yorktown's ship surgeon will want to know how late. Those vaccines he's transferring to us are highly perishable. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: Spock again, Captain. Those medical supplies are badly needed on planet Theta Seven. They are expecting us to get them there on time. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, we are remaining in orbit until I find out more about those deaths, on my responsibility. I am perfectly aware that it might cost lives on Theta Seven. Kirk out. Autopsy report. 
MCCOY: You saw their colour. There wasn't a red corpuscle left in their bodies. 
KIRK: Marks, cuts, incisions of any kind? 
MCCOY: Not a one. What happened is medically impossible. 
KIRK: I suggest you look at the record tapes of past similar occurrences. You'll find the USS Farragut lists casualties eleven years ago from exactly the same impossible causes. 
MCCOY: Thank you, Captain. I'll check those tapes immediately. 
KIRK: First, can you bring Ensign Rizzo to consciousness for a moment? 
MCCOY: Yes, but it 
KIRK: Will it hurt him if you do so? 
MCCOY: In his present condition, I don't think it would make much difference. 
KIRK: Then do so.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Transfusion completed, sir. His pulse and respiration are still far below normal. 
MCCOY: Give him one cc of cordazine, nurse. 
CHAPEL: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Rizzo. This is the captain. Can you hear me? Do you remember what happened to you? 
RIZZO: Remember. I'm cold. I'm so cold. 
KIRK: You were attacked by something. When it happened, did you notice an odour of any kind? Rizzo. Rizzo! Do you remember a sickly sweet odour? Did you smell it? 
RIZZO: Yes. Yes. A smell. A strange smell. It was like being smothered in honey. 
KIRK: Did you feel a presence, an intelligence? 
RIZZO: It was trying to draw strength from us. I felt it. It was, it was, it was there. 
MCCOY: He's beginning to sleep again. I can't risk another shot. 
KIRK: He's already told me what I wanted to know. 
MCCOY: I wouldn't depend too much what he says in that half-conscious state. He could be dreaming, saying what he thought you wanted to hear. 
KIRK: You check those record tapes. I want your medical analysis as quickly as possible. (leaves) 
CHAPEL: What's with the captain? I've never seen him like that before. 
MCCOY: I intend to find out. I'll be in the medical record library.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Oh, Captain. Subspace message from Starfleet. They're inquiring 
KIRK: Not now. Have the security duty officer report to me immediately. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Continuing scanning. Still no readings of life forms on the planet. 
KIRK: Let's assume that it's something so completely different that our sensors wouldn't identify it as a life form. 
SPOCK: You mentioned dikironium, Captain. 
KIRK: Suppose it was composed of that rare element. A strange, gaseous creature. 
SPOCK: I've scanned for that element, Captain. There's no trace of dikironium on the planet surface or in the atmosphere. 
KIRK: Suppose it camouflaged itself. Let's assume that it's intelligent, that it knows we're looking for it. 
SPOCK: To hide from a sensor scan, it would have to be able to change its molecular structure, like gold changing itself to lead or wood changing itself to ivory. 
KIRK: You've just suggested something that never occurred to me. It may provide some answers to a tape record which I think you'll find Doctor McCoy is looking at this very moment. 
SPOCK: Chekov, take over on scanner. 
(As Spock steps into the turbolift, Garrovick steps out onto the bridge.) 
GARROVICK: Ensign Garrovick reporting, sir. 
KIRK: Are you the new security officer? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Was your father 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir, but I don't expect any special treatment on that account. 
KIRK: You'll get none aboard this ship, Mister. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
UHURA: Captain, I have a report on Ensign Rizzo. He's dead, sir. 
KIRK: You knew Rizzo? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. We were good friends, graduated the Academy together. 
KIRK: You'll get a crack at what killed him. Interested? 
GARROVICK: Yes, I am, sir. 
KIRK: I want four men armed with phaser two set for disrupter effect. Join me in the transporter room in five minutes. You'll accompany me to the planet surface. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir.

[Planet surface]

GARROVICK: Reading is changing, sir. 
KIRK: Spock was right. Notice the molecular shift? 
GARROVICK: Dikironium reading now, sir. Bearing ninety four mark seven, angle of elevation six degrees. Holding steady. 
KIRK: Over that rise. Take two men, circle around to the left. I'll take the other two and go the other way. That creature is dangerous. If you see it, fire full phasers. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Swensen, Bardoli come with me. 
(Garrovick and his group go into a clearing, and the cloud emerges. Garrovick fires at it after a slight hesitation.) 
KIRK: A phaser! Come on! (arriving at the scene) Garrovick, did you? 
(But then he sees the other two security men, lying on the ground, skin pale as snow.)

Captain's log, stardate 3619.6. One of the men in critical condition, the other is dead. And I, I am now even more convinced that this is not only an intelligent creature, but the same which decimated the crew of the USS Farragut eleven years ago in another part of the galaxy. Both Spock and McCoy are doubtful of this, and I sense they also doubt my decision to stay and fight the thing. Why am I keeping the ship here?

[Briefing room]

(Kirk is already there when Spock, McCoy and Garrovick enter.) 
KIRK: Mister Garrovick, we've studied your report. Mister Spock, begin. 
SPOCK: What was the size of the thing you saw, Ensign? 
GARROVICK: I'd say it measured from ten to sixty cubic metres, sir. It varied in size, fluctuated as it moved. 
SPOCK: Composition? 
GARROVICK: It was like a, a gaseous cloud. Parts of it I could see through. Other parts were more dense. 
MCCOY: Ensign, did you sense any intelligence in this gaseous cloud? 
GARROVICK: Did I what, sir? 
MCCOY: Did you get any subconscious impressions that this was a creature. A living, thinking thing, rather than just a strange cloud of chemical elements? 
GARROVICK: No, sir. 
KIRK: But you didn't come to actual contact with it, did you? 
GARROVICK: No, sir. I was furthest away from it. It seemed to come out of nowhere, hovered for a moment, then moved toward my men. It was fast, incredibly fast. 
KIRK: Did you say it hovered? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: You did fire at it, didn't you? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir, I did. 
KIRK: What distance were you from the creature? 
GARROVICK: About twenty yards, sir. 
KIRK: You fired at a large, hovering target at that distance and missed? 
GARROVICK: Yes. I, er, well, I didn't fire while it was hovering, sir. 
KIRK: You mean you froze? 
GARROVICK: No, sir. I didn't exactly freeze. 
KIRK: What exactly were you doing? 
GARROVICK: Well, I was startled for a second. And then by the time I fired, the thing was already moving. 
KIRK: Do you have any further information? 
GARROVICK: No, sir. 
KIRK: Do you gentlemen have any further questions? 
GARROVICK: I only hesitated for a moment, sir. I'm sorry. 
KIRK: Ensign, you're relieved of all duties and confined to quarters until further notice. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. (leaves) 
MCCOY: You were a little hard on the boy, Jim. 
KIRK: He froze. One man was killed. Another may die. 
SPOCK: Captain, scientifically 
KIRK: You'll both be filing reports. Make your comments and recommendations then.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain, while we're waiting I've taken the liberty of cleaning the radioactive disposal vent on number two impulse engine, but we'll be ready to leave orbit in under half an hour. 
KIRK: We're not leaving orbit, Mister Scott. Not that quickly. 
UHURA: Captain, the Yorktown requesting information on how soon we expect to rendezvous with them. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
SCOTT: The medicine for Theta Seven colony is not only needed desperately and has limited 
KIRK: I'm aware of the situation, Engineer, and I'm getting a little tired of my senior officers conspiring against me. Forgive me. Perhaps I shouldn't have used the word conspire. 
SCOTT: Agreed, sir. 
KIRK: Scanner readings? 
CHEKOV: Nothing, sir. Continuing to scan. 
KIRK: Are you aware it can change its molecular structure? 
CHEKOV: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Are you scanning for any unusual movement? 
CHEKOV: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Any type of gaseous cloud? 
CHEKOV: We've run a full scanner probe twice. 
KIRK: Then run it twenty times if that's what it takes!

[McCoy's office]

SPOCK: I hope I'm not disturbing you, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Interrupting another autopsy report is no disturbance, Mister Spock. It's a relief. 
SPOCK: I need your advice. 
MCCOY: Then I need a drink. 
SPOCK: I do not understand your reasoning. 
MCCOY: You need advice from me? You must be kidding. 
SPOCK: I do not joke, Doctor. Perhaps I should rephrase my statement. I require an opinion. There are many aspects of human irrationality I do not yet comprehend. obsession, for one. The persistent, single-minded fixation on one idea. 
MCCOY: Jim and his creature? 
SPOCK: Precisely. Have you studied the incident involving the USS Farragut? 
MCCOY: No. With all these deaths and injuries, I've only had a chance to scan the tapes. There are eight or ten hours of record tape there. 
SPOCK: Fortunately, I read somewhat faster. In brief, Doctor, nearly half the crew and the captain were annihilated. The captain's name was Garrovick. 
MCCOY: The same as our Ensign. 
SPOCK: His father. Among the survivors was a young officer on his first deep-space assignment, James T. Kirk. And there is still more. I suggest you study this.
(Spock hands over a record tape.)

[Kirk's quarters]

(The Captain is lying on his bed, staring at the ceiling) 
KIRK [OC]: Personal log, stardate 3620.7. Have I the right to jeopardise my crew, my ship for a feeling I can't even put into words? No man achieves Starfleet command without relying on intuition, but have I made a rational decision? Am I letting the horrors of the past distort my judgment of the present? 
MCCOY: Mind if I come in? 
(Kirk gets up and goes to his desk.) 
KIRK: Kirk to bridge. Scanning report. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Continued scanning, sir. No unusual readings. 
KIRK: Maintain search. Kirk out. It can't have just vanished. 
MCCOY: Sometimes they do, if we're lucky. Monsters come in many forms. You know the greatest monster of them all, Jim? Guilt. 
KIRK: Get to the point. 
MCCOY: Jim, When a young officer is exposed to unknown dangers for the first time, he's under tremendous emotional stress. Now we all know that. 
KIRK: Ensign Garrovick is a ship-command decision. You're straying out of your field, Doctor. 
(He returns to his bed.) 
MCCOY: Am I? I was speaking of Lieutenant James T. Kirk of the starship Farragut. Eleven years ago, you were the young officer at the phaser station when something attacked. According to the tapes, this young Lieutenant Kirk insisted upon blaming himself. 
KIRK: Because I delayed in firing at it. 
MCCOY: You had a normal emotion. You were startled. You delayed firing for a grand total of perhaps two seconds. 
KIRK: If I hadn't delayed, it would have been killed. 
MCCOY: The ship's exec didn't seem to think so. His log entry was quite clear on the subject. Lieutenant Kirk is a fine young officer who performed with uncommon bravery. 
KIRK: Don't you understand? It killed two hundred crewmen. 
MCCOY: Captain Garrovick was very important to you, wasn't he, Jim? 
KIRK: Yes. He was my commanding officer from the day I left the Academy. One of the finest men I ever knew. I could have killed that thing if I'd fired soon enough the first time. 
MCCOY: You don't know that, Jim. You don't know that any more than you know that Garrovick could have destroyed it. 
KIRK: I can't help how I feel. There's an intelligence about it, Bones. A malevolence. It's evil. It must be destroyed. 
MCCOY: To be so obsessed. 
KIRK: Obsessed? 
MCCOY: That you could destroy yourself, your career, a young boy who reminds you of yourself eleven years ago. 
KIRK: Don't push our friendship past the point where I have to take official 
MCCOY: I'm not, Jim. This is professional, Captain. I am preparing a medical log entry on my estimation of the physical and emotional condition of a starship captain. Which requires a witness of command grade. 
(McCoy goes to the door and opens it to admit Spock.) 
KIRK: Do I take it, Doctor, Commander, that both of you or either of you consider me unfit or incapacitated? 
SPOCK: Correctly phrased, Captain. As recommended in the manual. Our reply, also as recommended, is, sir, we have noted in your recent behaviour certain items, which, on the surface, seem unusual. We respectfully ask permission to inquire further 
KIRK: Blast it! Forget the manual! Ask your questions. 
SPOCK: Sir, the USS Yorktown is waiting now at the rendezvous point. It carries perishable drugs 
KIRK: Skip the recitation, Spock. I know the facts. 
MCCOY: They need those vaccines on Theta Seven, Captain. Now why are we delaying here? 
KIRK: Because I'm convinced that this is the same creature that attacked the Farragut eleven years ago. 
SPOCK: Creature, Captain? 
KIRK: My report is on the tapes. As it attacked us eleven years ago, as I lost consciousness, I could feel the intelligence of the thing. I could sense it thinking, planning. 
SPOCK: You say you could sense its intelligence, Captain? How did it communicate with you? 
MCCOY: You state that it happened just as you lost consciousness. A semiconscious mind is a very tricky thing. A man never knows how much is real or how much is imagination. 
KIRK: Whatever it is, Doctor, whatever it is, wouldn't you call it deadly? 
MCCOY: Yes, there's no doubt about that. 
KIRK: And what if it is the same creature that attacked eleven years ago from a planet over a thousand light years from here? 
SPOCK: Obviously, Captain, if it is an intelligent creature, if it is the same one, if it therefore is capable of space travel, it could pose a great threat to inhabited planets. 
KIRK: A lot of ifs, I agree, but in my command judgment, they out weigh other factors. Intuition, however illogical, Mister Spock, is recognized as a command prerogative. 
MCCOY: Jim, we're not trying to gang up on you. 
KIRK: And you haven't, Doctor. You've expressed the proper concern, you've asked the proper questions. You've both done your duty. Now may I ask what medical log entry you intend to make? 
MCCOY: At this point, my medical log remains open. 
KIRK: In that case, gentlemen 
CHEKOV [OC]: Bridge to Captain. Come in. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
CHEKOV: I have a reading on the whatever it is, Captain. Leaving the planet surface, heading into space. 
KIRK: All decks, Red Alert. Red alert. Prepare to leave orbit.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain, we can't maintain warp eight speed much longer. Pressures are approaching the critical point. 
KIRK: Range, Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV [OC]: Point zero four light years ahead. Our phasers won't reach it, sir. 
SPOCK: We are barely closing in on it, Captain. We could be pursuing it for days. 
KIRK: If necessary. Do what you can to increase our speed, Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Extreme magnification, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Magnification twelve. There, sir. Got it. 
KIRK: Spock, how do you read that? 
SPOCK: Conflicting data, Captain. It seems to be in a borderline state between matter and energy. Elements of both. It could possibly use gravitational fields for propulsion. 
KIRK: And you don't find that sophisticated, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Extremely efficient, Captain. Whether that indicates intelligence is another matter. 
CHEKOV: Open hatch on impulse engine number two. Mister Scott was doing an AID clean-up on it. 
KIRK: We won't be using the impulse engines. Turn the alarm off. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. 
SCOTT: Captain, we can't do it. If we keep this speed, we'll blow up any minute now. 
(Scott looks frantic, Spock almost concerned, everyone else is worried. Kirk looks as if he might burst into tears of frustration.) 
KIRK: Go to warp six.

[Garrovick's quarters]

CHAPEL: Hi. Everyone else is at alert station, so I brought you some dinner. 
GARROVICK: I'm not hungry. 
CHAPEL: Doctor's orders. 
GARROVICK: What's happening? 
CHAPEL: Are we still chasing that thing half way across the galaxy? Yes. Has the captain lost his sense of balance? Maybe. Is the entire crew about ready to explode? Positively. You're lucky you're out of it. 
GARROVICK: What do you mean, out of it? I caused it. You know that, too, don't you? If I'd fired my phaser quickly enough on Argus Ten, this wouldn't have happened. 
CHAPEL: You know, self-pity's a terrible first course. Why don't you try the soup instead? 
GARROVICK: I told you, Christine, I'm not hungry. 
CHAPEL: Doctor McCoy thought you might say something like that. This is his officially logged prescription for you. It has one word on it. Eat. Now if you don't follow his orders, Doctor McCoy could and possibly would have you hauled down to Sickbay and fed intravenously. 
(She leaves, carrying the record tape.)

[McCoy's office]

(Chapel puts the record tape in McCoy's in-tray.) 
MCCOY: What's that? 
CHAPEL: Hmm? (picks up the tape again) This? 
MCCOY: (reading) A survey on Cygnian Respiratory Diseases? I thought you took Garrovick some food. What were you doing with this? 
CHAPEL: Applying psychology.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: The creature is slowing. It's down to warp two. 
KIRK: Reduce speed. Approach slowly. 
CHEKOV: I don't understand. It was outrunning us. 
KIRK: Maybe it's decided to fight. Phasers ready? 
CHEKOV: Phasers show ready, sir.

[Garrovick's quarters]

(Garrovick takes the lid off his meal and throws it across the room. It knocks the switch on his ventilation filter to 'bypass'.) 
KIRK [OC]: Battle stations. All decks to battle stations. This is not a drill. All decks to battle stations. 
(Garrovick dashes out into the corridor.)

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: It's coming to a full halt, sir. Magnification one. 
KIRK: Move in closely, Mister Chekov. Sublight one quarter speed. 
GARROVICK: Captain, request permission to return to my post. 
(He is totally ignored.) 
CHEKOV: Within phaser range, sir. 
KIRK: Lock all phasers on target. 
CHEKOV: Locked on target. 
KIRK: Fire phasers, Mister Chekov. 
(The beams of deadly light go straight through the cloud.)
CHEKOV: Phasers ineffectual, sir. 
KIRK: Photon torpedoes. Minimum spread pattern. 
CHEKOV: Minimum pattern ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire photon torpedoes. 
(The ship is rocked by the blasts at such close quarters.) 
UHURA: There. It's coming, sir. 
KIRK: Deflectors up. 
CHEKOV: Deflectors up, sir. 
SPOCK: The deflectors will not stop it, Captain. 
SCOTT: That's impossible. 
SPOCK: I should have surmised this. For the creature to be able to use gravity as a propulsive force, it would have to have this capacity. 
CHEKOV: Five seconds to contact. All hatches and vents secure. All lights on the board show green. Sir! The number two impulse vent! we have a red light! 
KIRK: (over Chekov's speech) Lieutenant Uhura, all decks (rest of speech lost under Chekov's increasing volume) 
SCOTT: Captain, something's entered through the number two impulse vent. 
KIRK: Negative pressure in all ship's vents. Alert all decks.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Report. 
SCOTT: When it entered impulse engine number two's vent, it attacked two crewmen. It then got into the ventilating system, and now we have air for only two hours. 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: One man has a chance for survival. The other is dead. You can add that little price tag to your monster hunt. 
KIRK: That's enough, Bones. 
MCCOY: It's not enough! You didn't care as long as you could hang your trophy on the wall. Well, it's not on it, Captain, it's in it.
SPOCK: May I suggest that we no longer belabour the question of whether or not we should have gone after the creature. The matter has now been rendered academic. The creature is now after us. 
MCCOY: Creature, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: It turned and attacked, Doctor. Its method was well-considered and intelligent. 
KIRK: Yes, well, it could have been many light years away from us. Instead it chose to turn and attack here. Why? 
SPOCK: Impossible to tell, Captain, until I can make a closer survey of the creature. 
KIRK: Scotty, try flushing the radioactive waste into the ventilation system. See what effect that has. 
SCOTT: Aye. (leaves) 
MCCOY: I'm sorry, Jim. I was wrong. (leaves) 
SPOCK: Captain, the creature's ability to throw itself out of time sync makes it possible for it to be elsewhere in the instant the phaser hits. There is therefore no basis for your self-recrimination. If you had fired on time and on target eleven years ago, it would have made no more difference than it did an hour ago. Captain Garrovick would still be dead. The fault was not yours, Jim. In fact, there was no fault. 
KIRK: If you want to play analyst, Spock, use someone else, not me. My concern is with the ship and the crew.

[Garrovick's quarters]

GARROVICK: Come in. 
SPOCK: Ensign, am I correct in my assumption that you've been disturbed by what you consider to be a failure on your part? (a nod) I would like you to consider that the hesitation for which you are blaming yourself is an hereditary trait of your species. When suddenly faced by the unknown or imminent danger, the human will experience a split second of indecision. He hesitates. Do I have your attention, Ensign? 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: I know you would prefer to wallow in emotion rather than 
GARROVICK: Mister Spock, it's very kind of you to come here 
SPOCK: Kindness, Mr. Garrovick, is another human emotion, and I believe we have enough of that. I simply would like you to accept the fact that your reaction has its basis in physio. (suddenly stops and sniffs) Do you smell something? 
GARROVICK: Sir, it's coming through the vent. 
SPOCK: Get out of here! I'll attempt to seal it off. 
(Spock literally throws Garrovick out into the corridor. He then goes to the vent, but the damaged switch breaks off in his hand.)

[Corridor]

GARROVICK: (into intercom) Sir, the creature's in my cabin. It's got Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

KIRK: On my way, Garrovick. Security to three four one. Medical alert. Scotty, reverse cabin pressure three four one. 
(He does so, and the gas is sucked back into the vent.)

[Corridor]

KIRK: Security, hold it. Tricorder. 
MCCOY: Jim, Spock may be dying. 
KIRK: If we let that thing into the ship, he'll have a lot of company. 
GARROVICK: I must have jammed the vent control when I hit it. 
KIRK: See if the reverse pressure has pulled it back into the ventilation system. 
GARROVICK: He saved my life, Captain. I should be lying dead in there, not him. 
(The cabin door opens.) 
SPOCK: Fortunately, neither of us is dead, Ensign. The reverse pressure worked. The vent is closed. 
KIRK: Don't misunderstand my next question. Mister Spock, why aren't you dead? 
MCCOY: It's that green blood of his. 
SPOCK: My haemoglobin is based on copper, not iron. 
MCCOY: I'll bet he left a bad taste in the creature's mouth, too. 
SPOCK: Colloquially expressed, but essentially correct. 
KIRK: Yes. The scent is different. I think I understand something now. 
SPOCK: Do you believe you're in communication with the creature? 
KIRK: I don't know what it is, Mister Spock, but you remember I said the thing was alive. It may not be communication as we understand it, but I did know it was alive and intelligent, and I think I know something else now. 
SCOTT [OC]: Engineering to Captain Kirk. Engineering to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott, Captain. The creature's moving back toward the number two impulse vent. The radioactive flushing may be affecting it. 
KIRK: Open the vent. On my way to the bridge. Kirk out. Ensign Garrovick. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: You were on the bridge when we were attacked. 
GARROVICK: Yes, I'm sorry, sir. I know I was confined to quarters, but when the alert sounded 
KIRK: Very commendable, Ensign. What was your impression of the battle? 
GARROVICK: I don't understand, sir. 
KIRK: I'm asking for your military appraisal of the techniques used against the creature. 
GARROVICK: Ineffective, Captain. I realise, Captain, you did everything you could do. I know that. It's just that nothing works against a monster that can do the things that thing does. 
KIRK: And Ensign, what is your appraisal of your conduct on the planet? 
GARROVICK: I delayed firing. 
KIRK: If you hadn't delayed firing? No difference, Ensign. No weapon known would have made any difference. Then or eleven years ago. Report for duty, Ensign. 
GARROVICK: Yes, Captain. Thank you, sir.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Report, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Results positive, Captain. The creature has left the ship at high warp speed and is already nearly out of scanner range. The way that thing can move, Captain, I wouldn't believe it. 
KIRK: Direction, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: It was bearing one two seven mark nine, but I've lost it now. 
KIRK: (into intercom) Mister Scott, I'll need all the speed you can deliver. Keep at it until we begin to shake apart. Kirk out. I believe I know where it's going. 
SPOCK: It has changed course before to mislead us, Captain. Logic would dictate that 
KIRK: No, I'm playing intuition. Mister Chekov, compute a course for Tychos star system. 
CHEKOV: Computed and on the board. 
KIRK: Ahead full. 
CHEKOV: Ahead full, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, contact Starfleet and the USS Yorktown. 
UHURA: Frequency open and clear, sir. 
KIRK: Inform them that we are pursuing the creature to planet four of that system. That's the location of its attack on the USS Farragut eleven years ago. 
SPOCK: I do not understand, Captain. 
KIRK: In Garrovick's quarters, I said the scent of the creature was somehow different. Something in my mind said home. 
SPOCK: And you know where home is, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes, I think I do. I don't know how I know, but home is where it fought a starship once before. Ito Uhura) Inform them of our tactical situation and inform them I'm committing this vessel to the destruction of the creature. We will rendezvous. Round-trip time, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: One point seven days, sir. 
KIRK: We will rendezvous with the USS Yorktown in forty eight hours. 
(later) 
MCCOY: I assume that you now believe we should pursue the creature and destroy it. 
SPOCK: Precisely. 
KIRK: You don't agree with Mister Spock? 
MCCOY: It's the time factor that bothers me. Those drugs are perishable. 
SPOCK: Doctor, evidence indicates the creature is here to spawn. If so, it will reproduce by fission, not just into two parts, but thousands. 
KIRK: Antimatter seems our only possibility. 
SPOCK: An ounce should be sufficient. We can drain it from the ship's engines and transport it to the planet surface in a magnetic vacuum field. 
KIRK: Contact medical stores. I want as much haemoplasm as they can spare in the transporter room in fifteen minutes. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: I presume you intend to use that haemoplasm to attract the creature? 
KIRK: We must get it to the antimatter. It seems attracted to red blood cells. What better bait could we have? 
SPOCK: There is still one problem, Captain. 
KIRK: The blast, yes. 
SPOCK: Exactly. A matter-antimatter blast will rip away half the planet's atmosphere. If our vessel is in orbit and encounters those shock waves 
KIRK: A chance we'll have to take, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Also, we cannot be certain the transporter will operate under those conditions. If a man is beaming up when that hits, we may lose him. 
KIRK: That's exactly why I've decided to set the trap myself. 
SPOCK: Captain, there is so little hemoglobin in my green blood, the creature could not harm me extensively. It therefore seems logical for me to be the one 
KIRK: Negative, Mister Spock. In case this plan fails, I'll need you aboard the ship. In that event, we'll need another plan. 
SPOCK: It will require two men to transport the antimatter unit. 
GARROVICK: I'd like permission to go with you, sir. 
KIRK: I had you in mind, Mister Garrovick.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk, Garrovick and a blue ball under a floating carrying device beam down.) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain. 
KIRK: Proceed immediately to maximum orbit. 
SPOCK [OC]: Acknowledged. 
GARROVICK: Just think, Captain, less than one ounce of antimatter here is more powerful than ten thousand cobalt bombs. 
KIRK: Let's hope it's as powerful as man will ever get. Detonator. 
GARROVICK: Aye, sir. 
(He primes and sets it on the anti-grav unit.) 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Spock here, Captain. Holding at thirty thousand kilometres.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Antimatter container positioned and armed. I'll call you back when it's baited. Kirk out.
GARROVICK: Captain, look! 
(The cloud is already over the bottle of blood. Within moments it is empty.) 
GARROVICK: The haemoplasm. The bait's already taken. 
KIRK: We'll need something else for bait. 
GARROVICK: Sir, that thing only feeds on blood. 
KIRK: Garrovick, get back to the ship. Tell them to prepare to detonate. 
GARROVICK: Captain, you're not going to be the bait. 
KIRK: I said, get back to the ship. Ensign, I gave you an order. 
GARROVICK: Yes, sir. 
(A quick karate chop knocks Kirk down but not out. He lands a couple of punches on Garrovick.) 
KIRK: Consider yourself on report. This is no time for heroics. I have no intention of sacrificing myself, at least not yet. (into communicator) Spock? Spock? 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here. 
KIRK: Scan us and lock on to us. It's going to be close. Very, very close. Stand by. Stand by, Enterprise. 
(The cloud approaches.) 
GARROVICK: I can smell it, Captain. It's sickening. Honey sweet. 
KIRK: Stand by, Enterprise. (The cloud reaches them) Now! Energise and detonate! 
(BANG!)

[Transporter room]

(Spock and Scott are at the controls with McCoy watching.) 
SPOCK: Reset. Energise. 
CHEKOV [OC]: All decks, stand by. Shock waves. 
(The ship is shaken, and still nothing appears on the transporter pad.) 
MCCOY: Do something. 
SPOCK: We are, Doctor. Cross-circuiting to A. 
SCOTT: Got them. A piece of them, anyway. 
SPOCK: Cross-circuiting to B. 
MCCOY: Crazy way to travel, spreading a man's molecules all over the universe. 
(Finally the swirly bits solidify into two men.) 
SCOTT: Captain, thank heaven. 
SPOCK: Mister Scott, there was no deity involved. It was my cross-circuiting to B that recovered them. 
MCCOY: Well then, thank pitchforks and pointed ears. As long as it worked, Jim. 
KIRK: That's a fair statement, Bones. Now that the creature is dead, let's save some lives. We'll deliver your medicine. Bridge, this is Kirk. 
UHURA [OC]: Uhura here. 
KIRK: Have Mister Chekov lay in a course for a rendezvous with the Yorktown, maximum warp. 
UHURA [OC]: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Oh, Ensign, meet me in my quarters when you've cleaned up. I'd like to talk to you about your father. Several tall stories I think you'd like to hear. 
GARROVICK: Thank you, sir. I would.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Deadly Years
Stardate: 3478.2
Original Airdate: 8 Dec, 1967

[Settlement]
(Kirk, Spock, McCoy, Scott, Chekov and Galway beam down to a group of pre-fabricated buildings. The sky is orange.) 
KIRK: Where is everyone? 
MCCOY: Perhaps they weren't expecting us. 
SPOCK: Our arrival was scheduled well in advance, Doctor. The annual check of every scientific expedition is routine. 
KIRK: I had a subspace contact with a Robert Johnson, the leader of this expedition, an hour ago. 
MCCOY: Did he report anything wrong? 
KIRK: No, yet there was something wrong. I can't pin it down. His conversation was disjointed, his thoughts a little foggy, unrelated. Chekov, check that building. Mister Spock and I will check this one. The rest of you, take a look around. See if you can find anyone. 
(Chekov goes into the dark building - it has no windows - and the light comes on as he bumps up against a table bearing the body of a very old man. He panics and runs out again.) 
CHEKOV: Captain! Captain! Captain! Captain! 
KIRK: What is it? 
CHEKOV: A man, sir. In there. A dead man.

[Building]

(Again, the lights only come on when the party reaches the table in the middle of the room.) 
KIRK: Well? 
MCCOY: Exactly what it looks like. Death by natural causes. Old age. 
SPOCK: Quite impossible, Doctor. I ran a personnel check on this expedition before we beamed down. I assure you that none of them were 
(He is interrupted by the entrance of an old man and woman. ROBERT: (to the woman) They've come to pay their respects to Alvin. 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk of 
ROBERT: You'll have to speak louder. 
KIRK: I say I'm Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise. Who are you? 
ROBERT: I'm Robert Johnson. This is my wife, Elaine. 
KIRK: How old are you? How old are you? 
ROBERT: I'm, er, let me see. I am twenty nine, and Elaine is 
ELAINE: I'm twenty seven.

Captain's log, stardate 3478.2. On a routine mission to re-supply the experimental colony at Gamma Hydra Four, we discovered a most unusual phenomenon. Of the six members of the colony, none of whom were over thirty, we found four had died and two were dying of old age.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Mister Johnson, can you hear me? 
ROBERT: I can hear you. Not deaf yet, you know. Not yet. 
KIRK: Can you tell me what happened? 
ROBERT: What happened? 
KIRK: Did your instruments show anything? 
ROBERT: Elaine was so beautiful. So beautiful. So beautiful. 
MCCOY: He can hear you, Jim, but he doesn't understand. Let's let him rest. 
KIRK: (to nurse) If they seem lucid, I'll be in the briefing room.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Stay seated. Commodore Stocker, I've asked you to be part of this briefing because Gamma Hydra Four falls in your administrative area. 
STOCKER: I appreciate that, sir. 
KIRK: Doctor Wallace, as an expert in endocrinology, I'd appreciate you working very closely Doctor McCoy. 
WALLACE: (a young blonde woman in a pink dress) Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy, would you fill them in? 
MCCOY: The expedition is suffering from extreme old age, and they're growing older by the minute. Much older. My examinations have turned up absolutely nothing. In fact, I don't have a clue. 
KIRK: What about the atmosphere and environment, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Sensors reveal nothing which is inimical to human life. The atmosphere screens out the usual amount of harmful cosmic rays. 
KIRK: We're close to the neutral Zone between our Federation and the Romulan empire. It's possible the Romulans have a new weapon and are using this colony as guinea pigs. 
SPOCK: I have already begun investigation into that possibility, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. I want you all to check out everything in your own departments. No matter how remote, how far-fetched the notion, I want it run down. We'll stay in orbit until we have the answer. 
STOCKER: I'm sure you understand that I'm anxious to get to Starbase Ten to assume my new post. 
KIRK: Yes, Commodore. We'll do everything we can to make sure you make your duty. 
STOCKER: Thank you, sir. 
(Everyone leaves, but Doctor Wallace remains seated.) 
KIRK: Doctor, is there something I can do for you? 
WALLACE: Well, be a little less the cool, efficient Captain and a little more the old friend. 
KIRK: How long has it been? 
WALLACE: Six years, four months, and an odd number of days. You mean you don't know? 
KIRK: Well, it's been a long time. Things wouldn't change if it started all over again, would it? You have your job, I have my ship, and neither one of us will change. 
WALLACE: You said it. I didn't. In all those years, I only heard from you once. A stargram when my husband died. You know, you never asked me why I got married after we called it off. 
KIRK: Well, I supposed that you met someone you loved. 
WALLACE: I met a man I admired. A great man. 
KIRK: And in your field as you. You didn't give up a thing. 
WALLACE: No. Just you. 
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk, Mister Spock would like to see you on the Bridge. 
KIRK: I'm on my way.

[Bridge]

SULU: Standard orbit, Captain. 
KIRK: Maintain. 
SPOCK: I've rechecked the sensors, Captain. Gamma Hydra Four checks out as a Class M planet with a conventional oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere and normal mass. I can find nothing at all out of the ordinary. 
KIRK: What about the comet that astrophysics reported? 
SPOCK: We're checking it on it. I've reached no conclusions as yet. The comet was a rogue and has never been investigated. 
STOCKER: Captain Kirk? 
KIRK: Yes, Commodore. 
STOCKER: Facilities at Starbase Ten are much more complete than those on board ship. It seems to me that your investigations would be facilitated if we proceeded there. I assure you all co-operation. 
KIRK: Thank you. You're anxious to get to the base, but we have a few facilities of our own here. I think the Enterprise will do quite nicely. I'll be in engineering, Mister Spock. Maintain standard orbit, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: You already gave that command, sir. 
KIRK: Oh? Well, follow it.

[Sickbay]

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Lieutenant Galway. 
GALWAY: (a petite woman) Doctor, may I speak to you for a moment, please? 
MCCOY: Of course. Go right ahead. 
GALWAY: I know this is going to sound foolish, but I seem to be having a little trouble hearing. 
MCCOY: It's probably nothing important. 
GALWAY: I never had trouble before. 
MCCOY: Well, don't worry about it. Perhaps a little hypersonic treatment might clear it up. 
GALWAY: Thank you.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Progress report, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: All research lines negative, Captain. 
KIRK: Astronomical section reports that a comet recently passed by. Check into that. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: I'm doing that, Captain, as per your previous order. We discussed that earlier. 
KIRK: Oh, yes. Let me know what you come up with. I'll be in the Sickbay. 
SPOCK [on monitor]: Acknowledged. 
(Kirk turns to put on a clean shirt and jerks, putting a hand to his back.)

[Sickbay]

(McCoy and Chapel are putting a sheet over the face of a patient.) 
MCCOY: The last one. Robert Johnson. Cause of death, old age. 
KIRK: You did what you could. 
MCCOY: Which adds up to absolutely nothing.

[McCoy's office]

SCOTT [OC]: Doctor McCoy, this is Scott. May I come see you? 
MCCOY: All you need are vitamins, but you can come up anyhow. 
KIRK: Bones, I believe you're getting grey. 
MCCOY: You take over my job and see what happens to you. 
KIRK: I see what you mean. 
MCCOY: What's your problem, Jim? 
KIRK: Shoulder. Just a twinge. Probably muscular strain. 
MCCOY: You're probably right, Doctor. By the way, I don't like how you've been running this ship lately. 
KIRK: All right. Reprimand received. Go ahead. 
(McCoy scans his arm, then takes hold of a finger. Kirk pulls back in pain.) 
MCCOY: Jim, I think we better'd run a complete physical on you. 
KIRK: Why? Just muscular strain, isn't it? 
MCCOY: No, Jim. It's advanced arthritis, and it's spreading. 
KIRK: That's impossible. 
MCCOY: I can run it through again, but I'll come up with the same thing. 
(Scott enters, his hair light grey and his face deeply lined.) 
KIRK: Scotty!

Captain's log, stardate 3579.4. The Enterprise personnel who beamed down to the planet's surface, Doctor McCoy, Engineer Scott, Mister Spock, Lieutenant Galway, and myself are all showing definite signs of aging. Only Ensign Chekov appears to be normal.

[Sickbay]

(Chekov is on the stamina machine, Spock is on a bio-bed, Kirk and McCoy are definitely looking older. Chapel and Wallace are also present.) 
KIRK: Report, Bones. 
MCCOY: All of us who went down to the surface, with the exception of Chekov, are aging at various rates. Approximately thirty years for each day. I don't know what's causing it. A virus, a bacteria, or evil spirits, but I'm trying to find out. 
KIRK: Spock, could I ask for some figures? 
SPOCK: (looking about the same as usual) Based on what Doctor McCoy gave me, I estimate that physically we each have less than a week to live. Also, since our mental faculties are aging faster than our bodies, we will be little better than mental vegetables in considerably lesser time. 
KIRK: Total senility? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. In a very short time. 
KIRK: What a way to die. All right. I want all the research facilities, all the scientific technicians, to start round-the-clock research immediately. I want the answers, and I want the remedy. Let's start by finding out why Chekov hasn't been affected. 
MCCOY: I'm doing what I can. (to Spock) You're perfectly healthy. 
SPOCK: (sitting up) I must differ with you, Doctor. I'm having difficulty concentrating, which is most disturbing, my eye sight appears to be failing, and the normal temperature of the ship seems to me to be increasingly cold. 
MCCOY: I did not say you weren't affected, Mister Spock. You are perfectly healthy, that is, for any normal Vulcan on the high side of a hundred. 
SCOTT: Captain, can I go back to my station? 
KIRK: You feel up to it? 
SCOTT: Of course I do. I just need a wee bit of rest, that's all. 
(He leaves, with Spock giving him a hand.) 
MCCOY: You can leave, too, Lieutenant Galway. Lieutenant Galway? 
GALWAY: What? You spoke to me, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes, I spoke to you. I said that you could leave, too. Now why don't you go down to your quarters and get some sleep. 
GALWAY: No. I don't want to sleep. Can't you understand? If I sleep, what will I find when I wake up? 
(Camera finally pans over to show us an old woman with a dowagers hump.) 
KIRK: Lieutenant Galway, assume your position. Start your duties. 
GALWAY: Thank you, sir. (on her way out) What a stupid place to hang a mirror. 
KIRK: She's ten years younger than I am, and she looks, 
MCCOY: People age normally at different speeds, Jim. 
KIRK: Why hasn't he aged? 
MCCOY: I don't know. 
KIRK: Well I want to know! Is it his youth, his blood type, his heritage, his glands, his genes? 
MCCOY: His genes. All right, nurse. Prepare Chekov for another complete physical. 
CHAPEL: Come along, Ensign. This won't hurt. Much. 
CHEKOV: Promises.

[McCoy's office]

WALLACE: A few years ago on Aldebaran Three, my husband and I tried various carbohydrate compounds to slow down the degeneration of plant life. 
MCCOY: Then try that, Doctor Wallace. Try anything, but do it quickly. 
WALLACE: Yes, sir. (leaves) 
KIRK: I'll be on the Bridge. Keep me posted as to Chekov.

[Corridor]

(Doctor Wallace is waiting for Kirk.) 
KIRK: I thought you were on your way to the biochemistry lab, Doctor. 
WALLACE: We both go in the same direction. 
KIRK: So we do. 
WALLACE: Look, we know the problem. We know the progress of the affliction. Therefore, once we find the proper line of research, it's only logical we find the solution. 
KIRK: You sound like my first officer. 
WALLACE: No problem is insoluble. Not even ours. 
KIRK: That didn't spring from logic. 
WALLACE: Our situation doesn't have its roots in logic. The heart is not a logical organ. When I married Theodore Wallace, I thought I was over you. I was wrong. 
KIRK: When did you realise that? Today? 
WALLACE: What? 
KIRK: How much older was your husband than you? 
WALLACE: What difference does that make? 
KIRK: Answer me. 
WALLACE: Twenty six years. 
KIRK: That's quite a difference. 
WALLACE: Jim, he was a brilliant man. We were stationed on a lonely outpost. We were working together. I don't want to talk about him. I want to talk about us. 
KIRK: Look at me. Look at me. What do you see? 
WALLACE: I see Captain James Kirk, a man of morality, decency, handsome, and strong. 
KIRK: And old. And rapidly growing older. 
WALLACE: Jim, please. 
KIRK: What are you offering me, Jan? Love, or a going away present?

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Give us some more blood, Chekov. The needle won't hurt, Chekov. Take off your shirt, Chekov. Roll over, Chekov. Breathe deeply, Chekov. Blood sample, Chekov. Marrow sample, Chekov. Skin sample, Chekov. If I live long enough, I'm going to run out of samples. 
SULU: You'll live. 
CHEKOV: Oh, yes. I'll live, but I won't enjoy it. 
SULU: Maintaining standard orbit, Captain. 
(Kirk enters.) 
KIRK: Increase orbit to twenty thousand perigee, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
ATKINS: (a blonde yeoman) Will you sign this, sir? 
(He drops the pen, she starts to stoop to pick it up.) 
KIRK: Yeoman. (picks the pen up) You have a reason for being on the Bridge, Commodore Stocker? 
STOCKER: I'd hoped for a few words with you at your convenience. 
KIRK: I have very little time. 
STOCKER: If I may say so sir, we have a due date at Starbase Ten. 
KIRK: We're going to be late. I don't intend to leave this area until we've found the solution for this problem. 
STOCKER: Captain, I'm watching four very valuable and one almost irreplaceable members of the Starfleet failing before my eyes. I want to do something to help. 
KIRK: Yes, yes. If you're so concerned, I'll send a message to Starbase Ten. 
SPOCK: Captain, you sent such a message this morning. 
KIRK: Yeoman? Where's that 
ATKINS: Sir? 
KIRK: Fuel consumption report? 
ATKINS: I gave it to you. You signed it. 
KIRK: If I'd signed it, I wouldn't have asked for it, now would l? 
ATKINS: Your signature, Captain. 
(Later, everyone is tip-toeing around an obviously sleeping Captain in his comfy chair. Spock enters, unaware.) 
SPOCK: Captain, I believe (notices, and wakes him gently) Captain. Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. I was just thinking. 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. Quite understandable. 
KIRK: You have something to report? 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. We have the cause of the affliction. 
KIRK: What is it? 
SPOCK: The orbit of Gamma Hydra Four carried the planet directly through the comet's trail. On conventional radiation settings, we discovered nothing. On resetting our sensors to the extreme lower range of the scale, undetected radiation appeared. Below normal radiation levels but definitely present, and undoubtedly residue from the comet. 
KIRK: Good, Spock. Well done. Let's get this to Doctor McCoy immediately. Oh. Lieutenant, take a message to Starfleet Command. Due to the proximity of the Romulans, you'd better use Code two. 
UHURA: But, Captain, the Romulans have broken Code two. If you remember the last bulletin 
KIRK: Then use Code three. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. Code three. 
KIRK: Message. Key to affliction may be comet which passed by Gamma Hydra Four. Said comet is now, 
SPOCK: (consulting PADD) Quadrant four four eight, sir. 
KIRK: Quadrant. All units are to be alerted for complete analysis of radiation and means found to neutralise it. Comet is highly dangerous. Kirk, commanding Enterprise. Immediately, Lieutenant. Let's go. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Oh, Mister Sulu. Increase orbit to twenty thousand mile perigee. 
SULU: You mean another twenty thousand, Captain? 
KIRK: I fail to understand why each one of my commands is being questioned. Now do as you're told, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, what is our present position? 
SULU: Orbiting at twenty thousand, sir. 
KIRK: Maintain. 
SULU: Maintaining, sir.

[Biochemistry lab]

MCCOY: Radiation? That's as good an answer as any, but why didn't we know about it earlier? 
SPOCK: Possibly, Doctor, because my thinking processes are not as efficient as before. 
MCCOY: (to Wallace) Run this through, Doctor. 
KIRK: All right, Bones, I'm going up to the Bridge. Keep me posted. Spock? 
SPOCK: I have a question for the doctor. (Kirk leaves) Doctor, the ship's temperature is increasingly uncomfortable for me. I've adjusted the environment in my quarters to one hundred twenty five degrees, which is at least tolerable. However, I 
MCCOY: Well, I see I'm not going to be making any house calls on you. 
SPOCK: I wondered if perhaps there was something which could lower my sensitivity to cold. 
MCCOY: I'm not a magician, Spock, just an old country doctor. 
SPOCK: Yes. As I always suspected. (leaves) 
WALLACE: Doctor McCoy, none of our usual radiation therapies will have any effect on this radiation sickness. 
MCCOY: Well, then we just start over, that's all. We work harder, faster, and we start completely from scratch if we have to. But we find something.

[Corridor]

STOCKER: Spock, can I have a word with you? 
SPOCK: Commodore? 
STOCKER: Mister Spock, a starship can function with a Chief Engineer, a Chief Medical Officer, even a First Officer under physical par. But it's disastrous to have a commanding officer whose condition is any less than perfection. 
SPOCK: I am aware of that. 
STOCKER: Please understand me. My admiration for Captain Kirk is unbounded. He is a great officer. But Mister Spock, I need your help and your co-operation. 
SPOCK: For what, sir? 
STOCKER: I would like you to take over command of the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: On what grounds, Commodore? 
STOCKER: On the grounds that the captain, because of his affliction, is unable to perform his duties. 
SPOCK: Need I remind you, sir, that I too have contracted the same affliction? 
STOCKER: Yes, but you're a Vulcan. You have a much greater life span. You show the affects to a much smaller degree. 
SPOCK: I'm half human, sir. My physical reflexes are down, my mental capacity is reduced. I tire easily. No, sir. I am not fit for command. 
STOCKER: Well, if you are not, with your Vulcan physique, then obviously Captain Kirk cannot be. 
SPOCK: Sir, I do have duties to perform. 
STOCKER: Mister Spock. I do not like what I'm about to say but regulations demand it. And as a Starfleet flag officer, I must follow regulations. As second in command of the Enterprise, you must convene an extraordinary competency hearing. 
SPOCK: I resist that suggestion, Commodore. 
STOCKER: It's not a matter of choice. When a captain is unfit, physically or mentally, a competency hearing is mandatory. Please don't make me quote a regulation which you know as well as I do. 
SPOCK: Very well, sir. The hearing shall convene at fourteen hundred hours.

[Sickbay]

(Chekov is back on the biobed.) 
MCCOY: Now this isn't going to hurt a bit. 
CHEKOV: That's what you said the last time. 
MCCOY: Did it hurt? 
CHEKOV: Yes. 
GALWAY: Doctor. 
(She collapses in Kirk's arms.) 
KIRK: Bones. 
MCCOY: She's dead. Her metabolism caused her to age more rapidly than the rest of us, but the same thing's going to happen to us unless 
KIRK: How long have we got, Bones? 
MCCOY: Oh, a matter of days. Perhaps hours.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Let it read that this competency hearing was ordered by Commodore Stocker and reluctantly called by myself. 
KIRK: Let it also read that I consider it invalid. 
STOCKER: Mister Spock, may I make a statement? I have had to resort to these legal grounds in order to save the lives of some very valuable members of the Starfleet. I have tried to convince Captain Kirk of the necessity of proceeding to Starbase Ten, but I've been overruled in each case. The responsibility of this hearing is mine. 
SPOCK: On the contrary, Commodore. As presiding officer and as second in command of the Enterprise, the responsibility is mine. Captain Kirk, would you like to make a statement? 
KIRK: Yes, I would like to make a statement. I am the captain of this ship and am totally capable of commanding her. Let's call this whole thing off and get back to work. 
SPOCK: It is quite impossible, Captain. The regulations are quite specific. You are entitled to direct examination of all witnesses immediately after the board has questioned them. 
KIRK: Very kind of you, Spock. 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, how long have you served with Captain Kirk? 
SULU: Two years, sir. 
SPOCK: To your knowledge, has he ever had any difficulty making decisions? 
SULU: No, sir. 
SPOCK: Did he order you to maintain standard orbit around Gamma Hydra Four? 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Did he not, several minutes later, repeat that order? 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Did he order you to increase orbit? 
SULU: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Did he not several minutes later repeat that order? 
KIRK: He did not. When I give an order, I expect it to be obeyed. I don't have to repeat myself. 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, please answer the question. 
SULU: Yes, sir. Captain Kirk repeated his order. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Mister Sulu. Yeoman Atkins, you handed Captain Kirk a fuel consumption report in the presence of witnesses, which he read and signed. Is that correct? 
ATKINS: Sir, he had more important things on his mind. 
SPOCK: Yeoman, you will simply answer the question. 
ATKINS: I, I guess he forgot he'd signed it. 
SPOCK: You guess? 
ATKINS: He'd forgot he'd signed it. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Yeoman. You may leave. Lieutenant Uhura. I have here a bulletin from Starfleet Command which states that the Romulans have broken Code two. Are these your initials which appear at the bottom? 
UHURA: They are. 
SPOCK: And whose initials are those which appear directly below yours? 
UHURA: Those of Captain Kirk. 
SPOCK: Did Captain Kirk ask you to send a message about the comet which passed Gamma Hydra Four? 
UHURA: He did. 
SPOCK: Using Code two. 
UHURA: Oh, yes, but he changed it to Code three. 
SPOCK: After you reminded him that the Romulans had broken Code two. 
UHURA: Yes. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Lieutenant. Doctor McCoy, Doctor McCoy! 
MCCOY: (waking up) Yes, Spock? What is it? 
SPOCK: Several hours ago, at the request of this board, you ran a complete physical examination of Captain Kirk. 
MCCOY: I did. 
SPOCK: Medical banks, compute described subject's physical age, using established norms as comparative base. 
COMPUTER: Working. Subject's physical age based on physiological profile, between sixty and seventy two. Aging rapidly. 
KIRK: No, I'm thirty four. I'm thirty four years old. 
STOCKER: The computer differs with you, Captain. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Yes. 
SPOCK: Will you give us your professional evaluation of Captain Kirk's present physical condition. 
MCCOY: Captain Kirk is suffering from a, a peculiar physical degeneration which strongly resembles aging. 
SPOCK: Is not his mental capacity degenerating even more rapidly? 
MCCOY: Yes, yes, but he's a better man right now 
SPOCK: Doctor, you heard the computer's analysis of Captain Kirk's physical age. Do you agree with it? 
MCCOY: It's a blasted machine, Spock! You can't argue with a machine. 
SPOCK: Do you agree with it, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes. Yes, I do, agree. And I am sorry, Jim. 
SPOCK: This board has no further questions. Unless you, Commodore Stocker, have something that you would like to add. 
STOCKER: No. I am quite satisfied, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Do you wish to call any witnesses, Captain Kirk? 
KIRK: I am perfectly capable of speaking in my own defence, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Captain, I would suggest 
KIRK: No, no, no. It's all right, Spock. It's all right. There's only one reason, and one reason alone, for having this, hearing. I refused to leave Gamma Hydra Two 
SPOCK: Gamma Hydra Four, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes. A slip of the tongue. 
SPOCK: You're inability to remember having given commands, reading and signing important orders and then forgetting them, your physical analysis as compiled by our own chief surgeon. All these things would appear to be irrefutable proof of failing physical and mental conditions. 
KIRK: So I'm a little confused. Who wouldn't be at a time like this? My ship's in trouble, my senior officers are ill. And this nonsense about a competency hearing is enough to mix up any man. Trying to relieve a captain of his command is, well, that's, that's. Spock, I wouldn't have believed it of you. Go ahead. Ask me questions. I'll show you what I'm capable of. There's nothing wrong with my memory. Go ahead! Ask me anything! We're in orbit around Gamma Hydra Two, right? Anyhow, it doesn't matter. There's a lot more to running a starship than answering a lot of fool questions. A lot more. Go ahead. Ask me questions. 
SPOCK: We have no more questions, Captain. 
KIRK: Ask me anything. Anything. 
SPOCK: There'll be no more questions, Captain. If you would leave the room so the board can vote 
KIRK: Good idea. Get this stupid voting over with so I can get back to running the ship. The most fool thing I ever heard of. Competency hearing when there's work to be done. I'll be in my quarters, awaiting your decision. (leaves) 
STOCKER: Well, since the senior officers are incapable and I am of flag rank, I am forced by regulations to assume command. 
SPOCK: Sir, you have never commanded a starship. 
STOCKER: What would you have, a junior officer with far less experience than I have? 
SPOCK: The danger from the Romulans 
STOCKER: Mister Spock, we have to save these people. Mister Sulu, set a direct course for Starbase Ten. Warp five. 
SULU: Across the Neutral Zone? 
STOCKER: Immediately, Mister Sulu. All officers are to return to their posts.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Wallace and Spock enter.) 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: So, I've been relieved. 
SPOCK: I'm sorry, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes. You should've been a prosecuting attorney. 
SPOCK: Regulations require 
KIRK: Regulations. Don't give me regulations. You've wanted command all along. First little excuse you get 
SPOCK: Captain, I have not assumed command. 
KIRK: I hope you're proud of. What do you mean, you've not assumed command? 
SPOCK: I suffer the same affliction as you, sir. 
KIRK: If you're not in command, who is? 
SPOCK: Commodore Stocker. 
KIRK: Stocker? Are you crazy? He's never had a field command. 
SPOCK: Mister Scott was unfit for command. Commodore Stocker is ranking officer 
KIRK: No! Don't talk to me about rank! The man's a chair-bound paper-pusher. I order you to take command. 
SPOCK: I cannot, Captain. 
KIRK: Are you refusing a direct order? 
SPOCK: No, sir. Only Commodore Stocker can give a command order onboard this ship. 
KIRK: You traitorous, disloyal, you stab me in the back the first chance you get? Spock. Get out. I never want to have to look at you again. 
(Spock leaves.) 
KIRK: Jan, Jan. 
WALLACE: Oh, Jim. I'm sorry. Truly I am. 
KIRK: I made a fool of myself in there. I shouldn't have let them confuse me, rattle me. 
WALLACE: Everybody understood. 
KIRK: But I'm not old, Jan. I'm not. A few muscular aches doesn't make a man old. And you don't run a starship with your arms. You run it with your head. My brain's as sharp as it ever was. A simple case of radiation poisoning, and they relieve me of my command. I admit I'm getting a little grey, but radiation will do that to you. 
WALLACE: Oh, Jim, will you forgive me? I have work to do. 
KIRK: Jan, you know me. Look at me closely. Tell me. Am I getting old?

[Doctor's office]

KIRK: What are you doing here? 
SPOCK: It would seem to be the place where I can be of the most use. 
KIRK: Maybe you'd like to relieve Doctor McCoy. What about Chekov? 
MCCOY: Nothing. Absolutely nothing. 
KIRK: Bones, there has to be. There has to be. We beamed down together. We were on the surface together. The same spot. We were together all the time. 
SPOCK: No, not all the time. Captain, he left us for a few moments. 
KIRK: He left us? He left us. He went into the building. Spock, something happened. 
SPOCK: Yes. Yes, indeed, Captain. Doctor, you remember 
KIRK: He was scared! He saw the dead body and he ran out of the building and he was scared to death. 
MCCOY: Yes, yes. Now that could be. Right. Scared. Heart beats faster, breathe gets short, and there's cold sweats and adrenaline flows. Adrenal activity. Now hold on Just a minute. There was something that I read once. It was ancient history, just after the atomic age. Used for radiation sickness. Adrenaline. 
WALLACE: Doctor, hyronalin is the specific accepted for all radiation sickness. 
MCCOY: Yes, yes. Now. But before, adrenaline. Highly promising. Early research, but they abandoned it when hyronalin was discovered. 
SPOCK: Quite possible, Doctor. Perhaps a sufficiently efficacious compound could be developed. 
MCCOY: Don't just stand there jawing, Spock. You and Doctor Wallace get cracking.

[Bridge]

SULU: Entering Romulan Neutral Zone, sir. All sensors on maximum. 
STOCKER: Thank you, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant Uhura, let me know if we contact any Romulan. 
(The ship is shaken by an impact.) 
UHURA: I think we just made contact, sir. 
SULU: Romulans approaching from both sides. We're bracketed, sir. 
UHURA: Engineering wants instructions, sir. 
CHEKOV: Commodore Stocker, what are your orders? Commodore! (But he is transfixed by the sight of another weapon blast heading for them on the viewscreen.)

[Doctor's office]

KIRK: I'm going up to the bridge. 
MCCOY: No, Jim. You can't do it. 
KIRK: I have to go to the bridge. We're under attack. 
MCCOY: Nurse? Doctor Wallace! 
KIRK: Let me go. 
MCCOY: Nurse. 
WALLACE: Jim. 
CHAPEL: Easy, Captain. 
KIRK: We're under attack. I have to go to the Bridge. I've got to go to the bridge. 
(But they bustle him into the ward instead.)

[Bridge]

STOCKER: Keep trying to raise the Romulans. 
UHURA: I'm trying, Commodore. 
STOCKER: If I could talk to them, explain to them why we violated the Neutral Zone. 
UHURA: The Romulans are notorious for not listening to explanations. 
SULU: Lieutenant Uhura is right, sir. We've tangled with them before.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Greenhorn, up there ruining my ship. 
WALLACE: Jim, if I have to give you a shot 
MCCOY: Jim-boy, you just lay quiet. You can't do no good. We're both through. 
KIRK: No. No. My ship. My ship. 
(Spock totters in carrying a small beaker.) 
SPOCK: Doctor, I made the necessary computations and produced this serum. It is crude and dangerous, but we have no time for refinements. 
MCCOY: All right. Let's, let's go. 
SPOCK: It could cure or kill, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Don't give me any Vulcan details. Just give me the shot. 
KIRK: No. I'll take the first shot. 
MCCOY: You can't. 
KIRK: How long do you think this ship can take the pounding? I've got to get up there. 
WALLACE: Jim, it could kill you. 
KIRK: I'll die anyway. Do it. 
SPOCK: Doctor Wallace, give him the shot. 
KIRK: Quickly. Quickly. 
(She does, and he goes into convulsions. Fortunately he is already strapped down.)

[Bridge]

SULU: Sir, they've fired another.

[Sickbay]

(As the Enterprise continues to be battered, Kirk is writhing and groaning.) 
MCCOY: Well, well, what's happening? 
WALLACE: The ageing process has stopped. His bodily functions are getting stronger.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Sir, I've tried all known hailing frequencies. They simply ignore us. 
STOCKER: Opinion, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: They know they have us. They know our shields will give out. 
STOCKER: Well then, we have no alternative but to surrender. 
CHEKOV: Sir, the Romulans do not take captives. 
SULU: We're losing power, sir. 
STOCKER: What am I going to do? I've got to do something. 
KIRK: Report, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: We're surrounded by Romulan vessels. Maximum of ten. Range fifty to a hundred thousand kilometres. 
KIRK: Engineering, this is the captain. I want full emergency power. I want everything within about two minutes. I want the warp drive engines on full standby. Kirk out. Open up a special channel to Starfleet Command. Code two. 
UHURA: But, Captain, Code 
KIRK: That's an order, Lieutenant. Code two. 
UHURA: Yes, Captain. Code two. 
KIRK: Message. From Enterprise to Starfleet Command this sector. Have inadvertently encroached upon Romulan Neutral Zone. Surrounded and under heavy Romulan attack. Escape impossible, shields failing. Will implement destruct order using corbomite device recently installed. Since this will result in the destruction of the Enterprise and all matter in a two hundred thousand kilometre diameter and establish a corresponding dead zone, all Federation ships will avoid this area for the next four solar years. Explosion will take place in one minute. Kirk, commanding Enterprise, out. Mister Sulu, course one eight eight degrees, mark fourteen. Speed, warp factor eight. Stand by. 
SULU: Standing by, sir. 
SPOCK: Romulans giving ground, Captain. Obviously, they tapped in as you expected them to. 
KIRK: A logical assumption, Mister Spock. Are they still retreating? 
SPOCK: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Good. All hands, stand by. Warp factor eight, now. 
SPOCK: The Romulans were caught off guard, Captain. They're falling behind. 
KIRK: Are we out of range, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Yes, sir. And out of the Neutral Zone. 
KIRK: Secure from Red Alert. Adjust a new course, two five seven degrees, mark three. Heading for Starbase Ten. 
SULU: Two five seven degrees, mark three. 
STOCKER: Captain, I just wanted to assure you that I did what I thought best to save you and the men. 
KIRK: Noted. You should know, however, that there's very little a Starbase can do that a starship can't. 
STOCKER: If I may say so, Captain, I am now quite aware of what a starship can do with the right man at the helm. 
(McCoy enters) 
KIRK: You're looking good, Doc. 
MCCOY: Feeling fine. So is Scotty. The serum worked. He pulled a muscle during the reaction, but otherwise he's feeling fine. 
KIRK: And yourself? 
MCCOY: Oh, very well. A few bruises here and there. Oh. Anytime you're ready, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: I am quite ready now, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Because of your Vulcan physique, I have prepared an extremely potent shot for you. However, you might like to know I've removed all the breakables from Sickbay. 
SPOCK: That is very considerate of you, Doctor. 
MCCOY: I thought you'd be pleased to hear that. 
(Spock, McCoy and Stocker leave as Wallace enters.) 
KIRK: Well, gentlemen, all and all, an experience we'll remember in our old age. Which won't be for some while, I hope. Take over, Mister Sulu. Steady as she goes. 
SULU: Steady as she goes, Captain. 
KIRK: I thought I said that.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Friday's Child
Stardate: 3497.2
Original Airdate: 1 Dec, 1967

[Briefing room]
MCCOY: They're quite large. Seven feet tall is not unusual. They're extremely fast and strong. Lieutenant? 
(Uhura turns on a monitor) Make no mistake. They can be highly dangerous. The Capellans' basic weapon, the kligat. At any distance up to a hundred yards, they can make it almost as effective against a man as a phaser. 
(On the monitor, we see McCoy being given a demonstration in which a small sapling is cut in half by one of these hand-thrown objects.) 
MCCOY: In addition, an assortment of swords and knives. 
UHURA: Call from the bridge, Captain. 
SULU [OC]: Bridge, Helm, sir. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Sulu. Report. 
SULU [on monitor]: Now in standard orbit, sir. I've pinpointed their encampment below. 
KIRK: Very good. Have the transporter room stand by. 
SULU [on monitor]: Aye, sir. 
SCOTT: How long were you stationed on the planet, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Only a few months. We found them totally uninterested in medical aid or hospitals. They believe only the strong should survive. 
KIRK: Analysis, gentlemen. 
SPOCK: Ordinarily, under these circumstances, I would recommend a large, well-armed landing party. 
KIRK: Yes, but in this case, with the more people we take down, the greater chance we have of violating one of their taboos. 
MCCOY: Agreed. Once they've got it into their heads we're showing force, you can forget them signing any mining treaty. 
KIRK: Very well. Scotty, you're in command. Bear in mind that the Klingons have been sighted in this sector. While we're negotiating down there, we don't want the Enterprise to become an incident up here. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. We'll keep on our toes.

[Settlement]

(Kirk, Spock, McCoy and one security guard beam down.) 
MAAB: Halt! You are of the Earth vessel? 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk. 
MCCOY: We come with open hearts and hands. 
GRANT: A Klingon! 
KIRK: Grant, no! 
(Too late. A Capellan kills him with a kligat.) 
MCCOY: Don't move a muscle.

Captain's log, stardate 3497.2. Planet Capella Four. The rare mineral topaline, vital to the life-support systems of planetoid colonies, has been discovered in abundance here. Our mission, obtain a mining agreement. But we've discovered a Klingon agent has preceded us to the planet. A discovery which has cost the life of one of my crewmen.

[Settlement]

KRAS: I am unaware of any state of war between our peoples, Captain. 
MCCOY: Jim! 
KRAS: Or is it your policy to kill Klingons on sight? 
KIRK: He was young, and inexperienced. 
MCCOY: Does Maab know that the Klingons are our sworn enemies by their own words? 
MAAB: We understand only that he also offers things of value for our rocks, and he has freely handed us his weapons and other devices. Will you do the same? 
KIRK: Let me call my ship and inform them 
KRAS: To bring down an attack upon their village? It is as I told you, Maab. Earthmen fear to bargain honestly. 
MAAB: Will you hand us your weapons? 
(Phasers and communicators are thrown down at Maab's feet.)

[Tent]

(Traces of bedouin-style, with low furniture, plenty of furs and a metal brazier providing warmth and light. There are two guards outside.) 
KIRK: So they keep their word scrupulously. They're unusually honest. Is that what I heard you say, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes, I mentioned that. 
SPOCK: He also mentioned that they can be highly dangerous. 
KIRK: Dangerous if lied to, if their customs are violated. We lied to no one, Doctor. We violated no customs. Perhaps you'll explain to me why one of my men is dead. 
MCCOY: Because he was drawing a weapon on another of their guests. 
KIRK: Grant looked up, saw a Klingon, made a purely instinctive defensive move. What's a Klingon doing down here among your scrupulously honest friends anyway? 
MCCOY: Look, Jim. I know what it means to you to lose a crewman. 
KIRK: That's only one down, Doctor. There's over four hundred more up there in orbit. And if there's a Klingon down here, there might be a Klingon ship up there somewhere.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Mister Scott. I'm picking up something on the sensors, sir. Seems to be another ship. 
SCOTT: Well, let's put it on the screen. 
(A small dot on the monitor above the science station.) 
CHEKOV: It's just at the edge of our sensor range, sir. Hard to get an exact reading. 
SULU: You think it's a Klingon ship? 
SCOTT: Who else would be playing cat and mouse with a starship? Well, they can't hurt us much out there, bobbing about like that. No need to call the captain yet.

[Tent]

KIRK: Bones. 
MCCOY: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: I shouldn't have chewed you out. I'm sorry. 
MCCOY: I understand. 
SPOCK: Inefficient, however. Emotion, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, you're quite right, Mister Spock. Inefficient and illogical. 
(A woman enters with a large bowl of fruit.) 
MCCOY: You've shown friendship by handing over our weapons. She's making a gesture in return. 
(She offers Kirk a piece.) 
MCCOY: Jim! You touch it, her nearest male relative will have to try to kill you. They're offering you a chance for combat. They consider it more pleasurable than love. 
MAN: Chur-ah. 
SPOCK: It would appear, Captain, that he finds you a disappointment.

[Teer's tent]

(A middle-aged man sits on a throne, surrounded by his guards.) 
AKAAR: I am the teer Akaar. I lead the Ten Tribes of Capella. 
(A heavily pregnant woman enters and sits.) 
AKAAR: And this is Eleen, a young wife to give an old man a son to rule these tribes. 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk. First of all, I must protest the killing of my crewman. 
AKAAR: If it was your man, wasn't it his privilege to die for you? I do not understand. 
MAAB: Their customs are different, Teer. 
KRAS: And different from those of my people, too, Teer. The sight of death frightens them. 
MCCOY: Let me take this, Jim. What Maab has said is true. Our customs are different. What the Klingon has said is unimportant, and we do not hear his words. I just called the Klingon a liar. 
MAAB: Laughter, Teer? Is not the Klingon an honoured guest also? 
AKAAR: It was the Earth people who first bargained for our rocks. 
MAAB: Is it not best to have two who bargain for the same goods? 
AKAAR: It is I who speak for the tribe, Maab. 
MAAB: I speak for many, Teer. Hear the words of the Klingon. 
KRAS: What do Earth men offer you? What have you obtained from them in the past? Powders and liquids for the sick? We Klingons believe as you do. The sick should die. Only the strong should live. Earthmen have promised to teach the youth of your tribes many things. What? What things? Cleverness against enemies? The use of weapons? 
ELEEN: The Klingon speaks the truth, Akaar. 
KIRK: The Earth Federation offers one other thing, Akaar. Our laws. And the highest of all our laws states that your world is yours and will always remain yours. This differs us from the Klingons. Their empire is made up of conquered worlds. They take what they want by arms and force. 
MAAB: Good, good. Let the Klingons and the Earthmen offer us amusement. Capellans welcome this. 
AKAAR: The Earth men have different customs, but never have they lied to our people. 
MAAB: There are those of us who won't bargain with Earthmen, Akaar. 
AKAAR: Do you say you will fight me, Maab? 
MAAB: Let that be your choice, Teer. 
(Maab, Kras and the Orange man leave.) 
KIRK: We need our communicators, those devices on our belts. If there's a Klingon ship somewhere 
AKAAR: The sky does not interest me. I must consider the words I have heard. 
ELEEN: Leave him.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: The ship's disappeared, sir. Gone out of range. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, I'm getting a call from a vessel. It's so faint I can't make it out. 
SCOTT: Put a booster on it, Lieutenant. Try to pull it in. 
UHURA: I've lost it. It sounded like a distress signal from an Earth vessel.

[Settlement]

(There is a big fight going on, and Kirk joins in when a Capellan comes to their tent. Maab and Akaar's factions are fighting each other. Kras takes the opportunity to search the landing party's tent.)

[Tent]

KIRK: Klingon! Communicators, weapons. 
KRAS: I have no quarrel with you, Captain. I wish merely to return to my vessel. 
(He grabs a knife and lunges at Kirk, who throws him easily and turns the weapon on the Klingon.) 
KIRK: Type of vessel. Location. 
KRAS: A small scout ship, Captain. We need the mineral, too. I was sent to negotiate. 
MAAB: Release him. (Kirk does so.) Akaar is dead. I am the teer. 
KRAS: Kill them now. 
KIRK: Wait. If you lead these people now, be certain you make the right decisions. 
KRAS: Is the new leader of the Ten Tribes afraid? Let me kill him for you. 
KIRK: Or let the Klingon and me fight. It might amuse you. 
MAAB: Perhaps to be a teer is to see in new ways. I begin to like you, Earthman, and I saw fear in the Klingon's eye. 
KRAS: We had an agreement. 
MAAB: That too may change, Klingon.

[Bridge]

UHURA: I have the signal clear now, Mister Scott. It is a distress call. It's from the SS Dierdre. 
SCOTT: Dierdre? That's a freighter. 
UHURA: Reporting they're under attack. They're running, trying to manoeuvre. It's a Klingon vessel attacking. 
SCOTT: Helm? 
SULU: Picking it up, sir. Taking a fix. 
SCOTT: Try the captain. 
UHURA: Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain.

[Teer's tent]

(Eleen is brought in. One of Maab's guards trips her with his sword, and she burns her hand the brazier. Kirk moves to help, but) 
MCCOY: Captain, careful. 
MAAB: You carry a child who would be teer. 
ELEEN: I must die. 
(Maab raises his knife, and Kirk pulls her away. 
KIRK: No! 
(There's a fight. Starfleet loses.) 
MAAB: No man may touch the wife of a teer. 
KRAS: She was prepared to die, Earthman. 
ELEEN: I was proud to obey the laws. Kill him first. He laid hands upon me. It is my right to see him die.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Enterprise to Mister Spock. Doctor McCoy, come in please. 
CHEKOV: I have it on the sensors, sir. Tie into my channel, Lieutenant. 
VOICE [OC]: Commanding. We are under heavy attack by Klingon vessels. Two convoy ships are already damaged. We must have help. Enterprise, acknowledge. Please acknowledge. Repeat 
SULU: Interception course computed and laid in, sir. 
SCOTT: Prepare to take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
UHURA: Scotty, the captain. 
SCOTT: We have a distress call from a Federation ship under attack. That's where our duty lies. Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Ahead warp five.

Captain's log, stardate 3498.9. Lieutenant Commander Scott in temporary command.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We were forced to leave Capella to aid a Federation vessel under attack by a Klingon vessel. We were unable to contact our landing party before we were forced to answer the distress signal. Our inability to reach the landing party is strange and I am concerned.

[Tent]

(Eleen is with the three men, and the guards are now inside the doorway.) 
SPOCK: Our check-in signal is one hour, twelve minutes overdue. Since no reconnaissance party has appeared, and since Mister Scott is notably efficient in such matters 
KIRK: I must assume that something's keeping them busy up there. The Klingon ship. 
SPOCK: That would seem a logical conclusion. 
MCCOY: Captain, I'm going to fix that woman's arm. They can only kill me once for touching her. 
KIRK: That's a very good idea, Bones. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain, an excellent idea. 
MCCOY: Let me see that arm. 
ELEEN: You will not touch me. 
(The guards are distracted by McCoy and Eleen, so Kirk and Spock overpower them while McCoy keeps her quiet.) 
KIRK: (knife at her throat) You said you're prepared to die. Does that mean you'd prefer to die? I think we can get you safely to the ship. Your choice. Bones. 
ELEEN: To live is always desirable. 
KIRK: All right. Let's go.

[Settlement]

(Maab is sitting on his throne out in the fresh air as Kras paces near him.) 
MAAB: Klingon. There's nothing to concern you there. 
KRAS: We made an agreement, Maab. I have a right to my weapons. 
MAAB: (taking a disrupter from under his cloak) We have them well cared for, Klingon. Your weapon will be returned when our business is completed. That was our agreement.

[Bridge]

SULU: Approaching the freighter's last reported position, sir. 
SCOTT: Sensor report, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Negative, sir. No debris, no residual particles, no traces. 
SCOTT: Mister Sulu, begin a standard search pattern. All scanners full intensity, Mister Chekov. (to Uhura) No signal at all? 
UHURA: Negative, sir. 
CHEKOV: It should be on our screens by now. 
SULU: At best, a freighter might travel warp two. 
SCOTT: I'm well aware of a freighter's maximum speed, Mister Sulu.

Captain's log, stardate 3499.1. Before leaving the Capellan encampment, we managed to retrieve our communicators. Our phasers were not to be found. We've fled into the hills, yet we know the Capellans will eventually find us by scent alone, if necessary. And we've learned one thing more. The girl, Eleen, hates the unborn child she is carrying.

[Hillside]

(It is, of course, a place with plenty of rocks and cliff faces.) 
KIRK: Stay with her, Bones. Nice place to get trapped in. 
SPOCK: But a defensible entrance, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, I see. Scout up the trail that way. See what we have in the way of an exit. I'll take a look around. 
MCCOY: Now listen, you may be a Capellan woman and the widow of a high teer, but I'm a doctor, and it's my tradition to care for the sick and injured. Now, let me see that arm. 
(She does, and he treats the burn. Meanwhile, Kirk spots the posse coming after them.) 
(McCoy scans Eleen's belly, then puts his hand on it.) 
ELEEN: You will not touch me in that manner. 
MCCOY: You listen to me, young woman. I'll touch you in any way or manner that my professional judgment indicates. 
(She slaps his face, twice, so he slaps her in return.) 
MCCOY: Just as I thought. It can come anytime now. 
ELEEN: How do you know? 
MCCOY: Because I'm a doctor, that's how I know. 
ELEEN: Even the women of our village cannot tell so much with a touch. Strange hand. Very soft. 
(Spock and Kirk meet up.) 
SPOCK: The walls get higher and narrower, but there is a way out. 
KIRK: Good. If we could block off that entrance, hold them off, it'd give us more time. They'd have to go around these hills. 
SPOCK: There is enough loose rock and shale. 
KIRK: Do you think we could create a sonic disruption with two of our communicators? 
SPOCK: Only a very slight chance it would work. 
KIRK: Well, if you don't think we can, maybe we shouldn't try. 
SPOCK: Captain, I didn't say that exactly. 
(The Capellans are getting close to the canyon entrance.) 
SPOCK: The sound beams should produce a sympathetic vibration on the weak area of that slide. 
(The party is led by Maab, who senses something is wrong but keeps coming forward until the rock face explodes. Kras hides but other Capellans are crushed by the falling boulders. When the dust starts to clear, Kras takes the Federation phasers from a wounded Capellan then kills him with his own knife. The remaining members of the posse move on.) 
KIRK: Worried about the delivery? 
MCCOY: Capellans aren't human, Jim. They're humanoid. There's certain internal differences. I don't have equipment to handle an emergency. 
KIRK: Well, if you don't think you can handle it 
MCCOY: Forget it. I can do it. The last thing I want around is a ham-handed ship's captain. 
(They continue their climb up the canyon. It is steep and Eleen is struggling. Kirk goes to help.) 
ELEEN: No! Only McCoy. 
KIRK: There's a cave in there. Probably the only shelter around here. 
MCCOY: I'll need help getting her in there. 
ELEEN: No! 
MCCOY: Look, I'm a doctor, not an escalator! Spock, give me a hand! 
ELEEN: No! I will allow only your touch.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: A vessel doesn't just disappear. 
UHURA: There's nothing, Mister Scott. All channels and frequencies are clear. 
SCOTT: Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV: Nothing, sir. If it were destroyed, I'd pick up debris readings of some sort. 
SULU: It couldn't have run away from us, sir. Not a freighter. 
SCOTT: Mister Chekov, pull the microtape on that distress call. I want it replayed. 
VOICE [OC]: Commanding. We are under heavy attack by Klingon vessels. Two convoy ships are already damaged. We must have help. 
Enterprise, acknowledge. Please acknowledge. 
SCOTT: Did you hear it? They called us by name. Not a general distress signal, but one aimed right at us. 
SULU: Wouldn't they normally call for the nearest starship? 
SCOTT: How would a freighter know we were ordered into this sector? 
SULU: A trap. We were diverted from the planet. 
UHURA: Or it could be an authentic distress call. 
SCOTT: We'll stay long enough to make certain. Continue search pattern. 
SULU: Yes, sir. Continuing.

[Cave]

(Dark, with convenient flat-topped rocks studding the smooth floor.) 
KIRK: Bones, you've got one of those magnesite-nitron tablets in your kit. Give me one. 
MCCOY: Just a minute. Let me get her on the rock. There you go. 
(Kirk puts the tablet on a rock and hits it with his knife. It bursts into flame and the whole cave is illuminated. Eleen is in pain.) 
ELEEN: No, no. Pain is here. 
KIRK: How did you arrange to touch her, Bones, give her a happy pill? 
MCCOY: No a right cross. 
KIRK: Never seen that in a medical book. 
MCCOY: It's in mine from now on. 
ELEEN: No, no. It's there. The The pain is there.

[Cave entrance]

KIRK: Vegetation, Captain. Evidently there's water nearby. 
KIRK: Good, but we need weapons just as much as we need water, Spock. 
SPOCK: There would seem to be little weapon potential at hand. 
KIRK: Follow me.

[Cave]

ELEEN: No! McCoy! 
MCCOY: Easy, easy. I'm here. Now you must want the child! 
ELEEN: No. Here, child belongs to husband. 
MCCOY: So they take all the credit here. Poppycock! Answer me. Do you want my help? Answer me. Do you want my help? (she nods) All right. Say to yourself, The child is mine. The child is mine. It is mine! 
ELEEN: Yes, it's yours. 
MCCOY: No, no. You've got it all wrong. 
ELEEN: Yes, McCoy. It's yours. 
MCCOY: No. Say to yourself, The child is mine. It is mine. It is 
(But she has made up her mind, and the child is coming anyway.)

[Cave entrance]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. 
(He gives up and tests a bow they have made.) 
SPOCK: Fortunately, this bark has suitable tensile cohesion. 
KIRK: You mean it makes a good bowstring. 
SPOCK: I believe I said that. 
(A baby cries offscreen.) 
KIRK: That's more like it. Since the Capellans never developed the bow, this may come as big a surprise as gunpowder was on Earth. 
(A beaming McCoy comes to summon the men back indoors.)

[Cave]

(The new-born is proudly shown off by the Doctor, then handed to Spock, who has no idea how to cradle it.) 
MCCOY: No, no, Mister Spock. You place this arm under here to support its back, and this hand here to support its head. 
SPOCK: I would rather, I would rather not. Thank you. 
ELEEN: McCoy. Bring our child. 
KIRK: Our child? 
MCCOY: I'll explain later. 
SPOCK: That should prove very interesting.

[Bridge]

SULU: Still negative, Mister Scott. All sweeps. 
SCOTT: Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV: Nothing. 
SCOTT: We're turning back. Warp five, Helm. 
SULU: Warp five, sir. On course for Capella Four. 
SCOTT: Warp 6 as soon as she'll take it, Mister Sulu. The captain could be in trouble back there. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, another distress call from the USS Carolina. 
SCOTT: Ignore it. 
UHURA: The Carolina is registered in this sector. 
SCOTT: Ignore it, Lieutenant. Log it as my order, my responsibility. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SULU: Scotty, if it should turn out to be real 
SCOTT: There's an old, old saying on Earth, Mister Sulu. Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me. 
CHEKOV: I know this saying. It was invented in Russia. (he smirks to himself)

[Cave]

(Eleen knocks out the sleeping McCoy and leaves.)

[Cave entrance]

(Atop the rocks, Kirk and Spock are keeping lookout for the Capellans when McCoy wakes.) 
MCCOY: Jim! Spock! Jim! Spock! 
KIRK: What happened, Bones? 
MCCOY: My patient spattered me with a rock. She's gone. 
SPOCK: The child? 
MCCOY: It's all right. It's in there. I guess I'll forget psychiatry, stick with surgery. I really thought she'd learned to want it. 
SPOCK: Virtue is a relative term, Doctor. She'll head straight to the warriors. 
MCCOY: I'll go with you. 
KIRK: Bones, you took a medical oath long before you signed aboard my ship. That small patient in there needs you.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Estimating to planet? 
SULU: Thirty one minutes, sir. 
CHEKOV: Mister Scott? Sensors picking up a vessel ahead, cutting across our path. 
SCOTT: Sub-light one half. 
SULU: Reversing to sub-light, one half. 
CHEKOV: It's an alien, sir. By configuration a Klingon warship. Taking position directly in our path. 
SCOTT: Mister Sulu, sound battle stations. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
UHURA: This is the USS Enterprise calling unidentified Klingon vessel. Come in. USS Enterprise calling Klingon vessel. Acknowledge, please. 
SULU: I have it on the viewscreen now, sir. Still distant. Holding a position dead ahead, sir. 
SCOTT: Drawing a line, daring us to step over it. 
SULU: Still closing. The alien's directly in our line of flight. 
SCOTT: This is the commander of the USS Enterprise. Identify yourself and your intention. Acknowledge. Close out the frequency, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Phaser banks are ready, sir. 
SCOTT: And we'll go right down their throat, if necessary. Let's see if they have the belly for it.

[Hillside]

(Kirk and Spock are lying in wait for the Capellans, who are travelling single file. Maab stops the column and sends a scout ahead.) 
KEEL: Behind the rocks up there. 
MAAB: The Earthmen make excellent game. Their cleverness has surprised me. 
KRAS: (slightly out of breath) They must die. That is your law. 
MAAB: We will honour our law, and our word to you, Klingon. 
KEEL: Maab. 
ELEEN: The child is dead, Maab. Do as you will with me. 
KEEL: The Earthmen? 
ELEEN: Dead. I killed them as they slept. 
KRAS: If true, take us to them. 
ELEEN: Do you doubt my word, Klingon? I'm the wife of a teer. I will die in my own tent. 
MAAB: It is in order. She is the wife of a teer. (Kras runs off.) No! 
KRAS: First, we'll verify her story. 
MAAB: Is this what your sworn word means, Klingon? 
(Kirk shoots an arrow into Kras' knee. A kligat is thrown, and Spock shoots the thrower. Kirk downs another. Eleen runs for the Klingon's phaser but he picks it up first and uses it to blast at Spock's hiding place.) 
KIRK: Spock. Spock! 
SPOCK: Here, Captain. Over here, Captain. (into communicator as Kirk joins him.) Spock to Enterprise. 
KIRK: The cavalry doesn't come over the hill in the nick of time anymore. 
SPOCK: If by that you mean we can't expect help from the Enterprise, I must agree. 
MAAB: Naam. 
(But Kras disintegrates him before he can throw his kligat) 
KIRK: There's just one thing I want. 
SPOCK: The Klingon? 
KIRK: One of us must get him. 
SPOCK: Revenge, Captain? 
KIRK: Why not? 
KRAS: The next man who raises a weapon destroys all of you. You and your primitive knives and your weapons, I'll teach you what killing really means. 
KIRK: Klingon! 
ELEEN: Fight! Are you warriors or children? Maab, I will flee. When the Klingon turns to fire, I'll 
MAAB: (drawing his knife) As teer of the Ten Tribes, I give you back your life. Mine is now forfeit. Keel, stand ready. 
(Maab walks forward, arms out to the side.) 
MAAB: Klingon! 
(Kras disintegrates him, and Keel throws his kligat, killing Kras. The two factions gather at the body. Then a bunch of red-shirts run around the corner.)
SCOTT: Hold it there. Drop your weapons. 
(McCoy arrives carrying the baby, and Eleen goes to him.) 
KIRK: We missed you, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Well sir, we had a wee bit of a run-in with a Klingon vessel, but he had no stomach for fighting. We checked the encampment, found out you were here, and had no trouble at all in tracking you down. I could 
(He is interrupted by the baby crying.) 
MCCOY: No, that's not the way to handle it. Here, like this. Here, take his little head like that. There, arm in a. That's it. See how easy? Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. 
SPOCK: Oochy-woochy coochy-coo, Captain? 
KIRK: An obscure Earth dialect, Mister Spock. Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. If you're curious, consult linguistics. 
SPOCK: Well, at any rate, this should prove interesting. 
KIRK: Interesting? 
SPOCK: When the woman starts explaining how the new high teer is actually Doctor McCoy's child. 
SCOTT: What's that again, Mister Spock? 
KIRK: We don't actually understand it ourselves, Mister Scott. 
SPOCK: Nor does Doctor McCoy. 
Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. Oochy-woochy coochy-coo.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Contact Starfleet. Inform them the Federation mining rights on Capella have been secured by treaty, documents signed by the young high chief's regent. Report follows. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: The child's regent? 
KIRK: Yes, Eleen. Remarkable young lady. 
MCCOY: Representing the high teer, Leonard James Akaar. 
SPOCK: The child was named Leonard James Akaar? 
MCCOY: Has a kind of a ring to it, don't you think, James? 
KIRK: Yes. I think it's a name destined to go down in galactic history, Leonard. What do you think, Spock? 
SPOCK: I think you're both going to be insufferably pleased with yourselves for at least a month, sir. 
KIRK: Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Ahead warp factor one.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Journey to Babel
Stardate: 3842.3
Original Airdate: 17 Nov, 1967

[Kirk's quarters]
(Enterprise is orbiting a very red planet, and Kirk is checking his appearance in a mirror.) 
MCCOY: Dress uniforms, spit and polish. I don't know how much longer I'm going to be able to stand this. I feel like my neck's in a sling. 
KIRK: The Vulcans are the last delegates we have to pick up. As soon as we get them aboard, we'll be able to relax. 
(They leave.)

[Corridor]

MCCOY: Sure. A formal reception tonight, a hundred and fourteen delegates aboard for two weeks, thirty two of them ambassadors, (Spock joins them) half of them mad at the other half, and the whole lot touchier than a raw antimatter pile over this Coridan question. 
(Intercom whistles) 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Shuttlecraft approaching with Ambassador Sarek's party. Estimate arrival one minute. 
KIRK: Bring them aboard, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Standby to recover shuttlecraft. Honour guard to the hangar deck.

[Hangar deck]

(As the NCC1701/7 arrives, the honour guard smarted themselves up outside.) 
VOICE [OC]: Clear hangar deck. Clear hangar deck. Depressurising. Recovering shuttlecraft. Hangar deck pressurising. 
(The guard line up, holding phasers with arms crossed.) 
MCCOY: How does that Vulcan salute go? 
(Spock demonstrates - right hand with the fingers separated into a V-sign.) 
MCCOY: That hurts worse than the uniform. 
(A couple are escorted from the shuttlecraft.) 
KIRK: Captain James Kirk. 
SAREK: Captain. 
KIRK: My First Officer, Commander Spock. 
SPOCK: Vulcan honours us with your presence. We come to serve. 
SAREK: Your service honours us, Captain. 
KIRK: Thank you. Chief Medical Officer Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Ambassador. 
SAREK: Doctor. My aides and she who is my wife. 
(He holds out his right hand with two fingers extended, and a human woman steps forward to touch them.) 
AMANDA: Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Our pleasure, madam. As soon as you're settled I'll arrange a tour of the ship. Mister Spock will conduct you. 
SAREK: I'd prefer another guide, Captain. 
KIRK: As you wish, Ambassador. Mister Spock, we'll leave orbit in two hours. Would you care to beam down and visit your parents? 
SPOCK: Captain, Ambassador Sarek and his wife are my parents.

Captain's log, Stardate 3842.3. We have departed Vulcan for the neutral planetoid code-named Babel. Since it is in our sector, the Enterprise has been assigned to transport ambassadors of Federation planets to this vitally important council. The issues of the council are politically complex, the passengers explosive.

[Engineering]

(Kirk is conducting Sarek and Amanda's tour himself. Spock is doing something in Engineering when they enter.) 
KIRK: This is the engineering section. There are a number of emergency back-up systems for the main controls. Over here are a number of control computers. 
(Amanda lags behind to talk with her son.) 
AMANDA: After all these years among humans, you still haven't learned to smile. 
SPOCK: Humans smile with so little provocation. 
AMANDA: And you haven't come to see us in four years, either. 
SPOCK: The situation between my father and myself has not changed. 
SAREK: My wife, attend. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. A moment, if you please. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: Explain the computer components. 
SAREK: I gave Spock his first instruction in computers, Captain. He chose to devote his knowledge to Starfleet instead of the Vulcan Science Academy. 
SPOCK: If you will excuse me, Captain. (leaves) 
KIRK: I'm sorry, Ambassador. I did not mean to offend. I thought that 
SAREK: Offence is a human emotion. I'm returning to my quarters. Continue, my wife. (leaves) 
KIRK: Mrs. Sarek, I just don't understand. 
AMANDA: Amanda. I'm afraid you couldn't pronounce the Vulcan name. 
KIRK: Can you? 
AMANDA: After a fashion, and after many years of practice. Shall we continue the tour? My husband did request it. 
KIRK: It sounded more like a command. 
AMANDA: Of course. He's a Vulcan. I'm his wife. 
KIRK: And Spock is his son. 
AMANDA: You don't understand the Vulcan way, Captain. It's logical. It's a better way than ours. But it's not easy. It has kept Spock and Sarek from speaking as father and son for eighteen years. 
KIRK: Spock is my best officer, and my friend. 
AMANDA: I'm glad he has such a friend. It hasn't been easy on Spock. Neither human nor Vulcan. At home nowhere except Starfleet. 
KIRK: I take it that Spock disagreed with his father on a choice of career. 
AMANDA: My husband has nothing against Starfleet. But Vulcans believe that peace should not depend on force. 
KIRK: Starfleet force is used only as a last resort. We're an instrument of civilisation. And it's a better opportunity for a scientist to study the universe than he can get at the Vulcan Science Academy. 
AMANDA: Perhaps. But Sarek wanted Spock to follow his teachings, as Sarek followed the teachings of his own father. 
KIRK: They are both stubborn. 
AMANDA: A human trait, Captain? 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Excuse me. Kirk here. 
UHURA [on monitor]: Captain, I've picked up some sort of signal. Just a few symbols. Nothing intelligible. 
KIRK: Source? 
UHURA [on monitor]: That's what bothers me, sir. Impossible to locate. There wasn't enough of it. Sensors show nothing in the area, but it was a strong signal, as though it was very close. 
KIRK: Go to alert status four. Begin long-range scanning. Kirk out.

Captain's log, Stardate 3842.4. The interplanetary conference will consider the petition of the Coridan planets to be admitted to the Federation. The Coridan system has been claimed by some of the races now aboard our ship as delegates, races who have strong personal reasons for keeping Coridan out of the Federation. The most pressing problem aboard the Enterprise is to make sure open warfare doesn't break out among the delegates before the conference begins.

[Lounge]

(People of all shapes, sizes and colours are helping themselves to drinks and nibbles from buffet tables.) 
MCCOY: Mister Ambassador, I understand you had retired before this conference was called. Forgive my curiosity, but as a doctor, I'm interested in Vulcan physiology. Isn't it unusual for a Vulcan to retire at your age? After all, you're only a hundred and two. 
SAREK: One hundred two point four three seven precisely, Doctor, measured in your years. I had other concerns. 
KIRK: Ambassador. 
GAV: (a stout chap with a porcine nose) Sarek of Vulcan, do you vote to admit Coridan to the Federation? 
SAREK: The vote will not be taken here, Ambassador Gav. My government's instructions will be heard in the council chambers on Babel. 
GAV: No! You! How do you vote, Sarek of Vulcan? 
SHRAS: (thin and blue, with two antennae) Why must you know, Tellarite? 
GAV: In council, his vote carries others. I will know where he stands and why. 
SAREK: Tellarites do not argue for reasons. They simply argue. 
GAV: No. You 
KIRK: Gentlemen. Ambassador Sarek is quite correct when he points out this is not the council chamber of Babel. I'm fully aware that the admission of Coridan is a highly debatable issue, but you won't solve it here. 
SAREK: You are correct, Captain. Quite logical. 
SHRAS: My apologies, Captain. 
GAV: You will excuse me. (stalks away) 
SHRAS: Have you met Gav before, Ambassador? 
SAREK: We debated during my last council session. Ambassador. 
AMANDA: Ambassador Gav lost. 
MCCOY: Spock, I've always suspected that you were a little more human than you let on. Mrs. Sarek, I know about the rigorous training of the Vulcan youth, but tell me, did he ever run and play like the human children, even in secret? 
AMANDA: Well, he, he did have a pet sehlat he was very fond of. 
MCCOY: Sehlat? 
AMANDA: It's sort of a fat teddy bear. 
MCCOY: A teddy bear? 
SAREK: Excuse me, Doctor. It has been a rather long day for my wife. Captain. 
KIRK: Ambassador. 
(Sarek leads Amanda away.) 
MCCOY: A teddy bear. 
SPOCK: Not precisely, Doctor. On Vulcan, the teddy bears are alive, and they have six-inch fangs. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Bridge to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
CHEKOV [OC]: Captain, sensors are registering an unidentified vessel pacing us. 
KIRK: On my way. All duty personnel on Yellow Alert. Don't alarm the passengers. Kirk out.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Report. 
CHEKOV: A small ship, Captain. It's been there five minutes, remaining outside phaser range at extreme limit of sensors. 
KIRK: Identification, Spock? 
SPOCK: Sensors indicate the size of a scout ship, but the configuration is unfamiliar. Most unusual. 
KIRK: Does she answer a hail? 
UHURA: I've tried all frequencies and hooked in the universal translator. No response, sir. 
KIRK; Maintain translator broadcast. Check records for authorised ships. 
SPOCK: Starfleet records no authorised vessel in this quadrant except ours. 
KIRK: Care to guess what she is? 
SPOCK: Guess, Captain? I shall need more data for my estimate. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, plot course to intercept that vessel. I want to see what she looks like close up. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir.

[Sarek's quarters]

SAREK: You embarrassed Spock this evening. Not even a mother may do that. He is a Vulcan. 
AMANDA: He's also human. 
SAREK: He's a Starfleet officer. 
AMANDA: I thought you didn't approve of Starfleet. 
SAREK: It is not a question of approval. The fact exists. He is in Starfleet. He must command respect if he is to function. 
AMANDA: Sarek, you're proud of him, aren't you? You're showing almost human pride in your son. 
SAREK: It does not require pride to ask that Spock be given the respect which is his due. Not as my son, but as Spock. Do you understand? 
AMANDA: Not really, but it doesn't matter. I love you anyway. I know. It isn't logical.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Vessel changing course, heading toward us at high warp speed. 
KIRK: Ready main phasers. 
CHEKOV: Phasers armed and ready, sir. 
(The bright dot on the viewscreen whizzes past them.) 
SPOCK: Interesting. They were travelling at approximately warp ten. 
KIRK: Back on original course, Mister Chekov. Report on intruder's movements. 
UHURA: Captain, Starfleet acknowledges report on our situation and confirms no authorised Federation vessel in this quadrant. 
CHEKOV: Back on original heading, Captain. The intruder changed course immediately after we did. It's paralleling us again. 
KIRK: Well, we have a shadow. Faster, more manoeuvrable and unidentified. Mister Spock, full analysis of sensor readings. I want to know who that intruder is.

[Lounge]

(Sarek enters, and surreptitiously takes a tablet with a drink.) 
GAV: Vulcan, I would speak to you. 
SAREK: It does seem unavoidable. 
GAV: How do you vote on the Coridan admission? 
SAREK: You seem unwilling to wait for the council meeting, Ambassador. No matter. We favour admission. 
GAV: You favour? Why? 
(The room goes silent.) 
SAREK: Under Federation law, Coridan can be protected and its wealth administered for the benefit of its people. 
GAV: That's well for you. Vulcan has no mining interest. 
SAREK: Coridan has nearly unlimited wealth of dilithium crystals, but it is under-populated and unprotected. This invites illegal mining operations. 
GAV: Illegal? You accuse us? 
SAREK: Some of your ships have been carrying Coridan dilithium crystals. 
GAV: You call us thieves? 
(Gav attacks Sarek, who shrugs him off easily.) 
KIRK: Gentlemen. Gentlemen. Whatever arguments you have between yourselves is your business. My business is running the ship. As long as I command, there will be order. 
SAREK: Of course, Captain. 
GAV: Understood. There will be payment for your slander, Sarek. 
SAREK: Threats are illogical. And payment is usually expensive. 
(Gav leaves.)

[Corridor]

(The Tellarite is hanging upside down from a Jefferies tube. He is not doing spine stretching exercises.) 
JOSEPH: Security to Captain Kirk.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Kirk here. 
JOSEPH [OC]: Lieutenant Joseph, sir. I'm on deck eleven, section A3. I've just found one of the Tellarites murdered. I think it's the ambassador himself, sir.

[Corridor]

KIRK: How was he killed? 
MCCOY: His neck was broken. By an expert. 
KIRK: Explain. 
MCCOY: Well, from the nature and location of the break, I'd say the killer knew exactly where to apply pressure to snap the neck instantly. 
KIRK: Who aboard would have that knowledge? 
SPOCK: Vulcans. On Vulcan, the method is called tal-shaya. It was considered a merciful form of execution in ancient times. 
KIRK: Spock. A short time ago, I broke up an argument between Gav and your father. 
SPOCK: Indeed, Captain? Interesting. 
MCCOY: Interesting? Spock, do you realise that makes your father the most likely suspect? 
SPOCK: Vulcans do not approve of violence. 
KIRK: You're saying he couldn't have done it? 
SPOCK: No, Captain. I'm merely saying it would be illogical to kill without reason. 
KIRK: But if he had a reason, could he have done it? 
SPOCK: If there were a reason, my father is quite capable of killing. Logically and efficiently.

[Sarek's quarters]

KIRK: Mrs. Sarek, I'm sorry to disturb you. I must speak to your husband. 
AMANDA: He's been gone for some time. It's his habit to meditate in private before retiring. What's wrong? Spock? 
SAREK: You want something of me, Captain? 
KIRK: Ambassador, the Tellarite. Gav has been murdered. 
MCCOY: His neck was broken, Mister Ambassador, by what Spock describes as tal-shaya. 
SAREK: Indeed? Interesting. 
KIRK: Yes. Ambassador, where were you during the past hour? 
AMANDA: Captain, you're not accusing him? 
SPOCK: Mother. If only on circumstantial evidence, he is a logical suspect. 
SAREK: I quite agree. 
KIRK: Then where were you during the hour? 
SAREK: In private meditation, Captain. Spock will tell you that such meditation is a personal experience, not to be discussed. especially not with Earthmen. 
KIRK: That's a very convenient excuse, Ambassador. 
(Sarek suddenly collapses.) 
AMANDA: Sarek. Sarek. What's wrong? 
MCCOY: It's difficult to say with Vulcan physiology, but I believe it's something to do with his cardiovascular system. 
KIRK: Can you help him? 
MCCOY: I don't know that yet either.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain. I get sensor readings of tri-tritanium from the alien ship's hull. 
KIRK: I'm sorry about your father. 
SPOCK: Yes, it could adversely affect our mission. 
KIRK: Aren't you worried about him? 
SPOCK: Worry is a human emotion, Captain. I accept what has happened. The ship's hull seems to have a high density level or is cloaked against sensor probes. It is manned, but sensors cannot make out specifics. 
KIRK: I see. Well, the Romulans have nothing like it. Certainly not the Federation or the neutral planets. What about the Klingons? 
SPOCK: I think it unlikely it is one of theirs. 
KIRK: Who, then? 
UHURA: Captain? I picked up the last part of a transmission. Just like that other one. I put the recorder and the directional locator on it immediately. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, directional locator indicates source bearing twenty seven, mark eight. 
CHEKOV: It's the intruder ship, sir. 
KIRK: Switch recorder to Mister Spock's station for decode, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Sir, the directional locator indicates reception point somewhere within the body of this ship. 
KIRK: A personal receiver? Somebody on board is in contact with that vessel? 
SPOCK: Possibly, Captain. But I cannot decode this transmission. 
KIRK: Why not? 
SPOCK: It is in no known code. There's no detectable pattern. No standard references apply. 
KIRK: Are any conclusions possible from the information? 
SPOCK: Only negative. It fits none of our computer records, and it is alien. 
KIRK: Murder? Someone out there playing tag? Lieutenant, you've got your sensor locator on a wide beam. You've established a receiver on board this vessel. Tighten your field to the interior of the ship. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: If that alien vessel starts transmitting again, I want to know who on board the Enterprise is receiving.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Bones, how is he? 
MCCOY: As far as I can tell from instrument readings, our prime suspect has a malfunction in one of the heart valve. It's similar to a heart attack in a human. But with Vulcan physiology, it's impossible to tell without an operation. Mrs. Sarek, has he had any previous attacks? 
AMANDA: No. 
SAREK: Yes. There were three others. My physician prescribed Benjisidrine for the condition. 
AMANDA: Why didn't you tell me? 
SAREK: There was nothing you could have done. 
KIRK: Ambassador, when did you have these attacks? 
SAREK: Two before we left Vulcan, the third a few hours ago. I was on the observation deck. When the Tellarite was murdered, I was quite incapacitated. 
KIRK: There were no witnesses? 
SAREK: None. 
SPOCK: Doctor, do you propose surgery for the heart defect? 
MCCOY: I'm not sure. It's tough enough on a human. On a Vulcan, an ordinary operation's out of the question. 
KIRK: Why? 
SAREK: Because of the construction of the Vulcan heart. 
SPOCK: I suggest that a cryogenic open-heart procedure would be the logical approach. 
SAREK: Yes, unquestionably. 
KIRK: Bones, what about it? 
MCCOY: Well, I'm glad somebody's asking me something around here. Well, the procedure they're discussing would require tremendous amounts of blood for the patient. 
CHAPEL: Doctor? 
MCCOY: Yes. 
CHAPEL: I've checked the blood bank. There isn't enough Vulcan blood and plasma to even begin such an operation of this type. 
KIRK: There are other Vulcans aboard. 
SAREK: My blood type is T-negative. Somewhat rare, even for a Vulcan. 
MCCOY: Yes, I'd say that's rare. 
SPOCK: My blood is T-negative, Doctor. 
CHAPEL: We've run a number of blood tests on Mister Spock. It isn't true Vulcan blood either. It has human blood elements in it. 
SPOCK: It should be possible to filter out the human factors. 
MCCOY: Even you couldn't give that much blood, Spock. It would kill you. 
KIRK: Bones. 
MCCOY: Mrs. Sarek, you must understand the chances are extremely small to find a way to produce sufficient T-negative blood. 
SPOCK: Indeed. I would estimate the odds 
AMANDA: Please don't.

[McCoy's office]

SPOCK: Doctor. 
MCCOY: I see it, Spock, but that was a Rigelian. 
SPOCK: Rigelian physiology is very similar to Vulcan. 
MCCOY: Similar is not good enough. It's still experimental. 
SPOCK: But it does look promising. 
MCCOY: Spock, we would need such great amounts of blood that, even if the drug worked on the Vulcans as well as a Rigelian, which I'm doubtful, it would still drain Sarek to a critical level. 
SPOCK: I consider the safety factor low, but acceptable. 
MCCOY: Plus the fact I've never operated on a Vulcan before. Oh, I've studied the anatomical types. I know where all the organs are. But that's a lot different from actual surgical experience. So if I don't kill him with the operation, the drug probably will. 
AMANDA: What drug, Doctor? My husband is asleep. What drug? 
MCCOY: A chemical stimulant to speed up reproduction and replacement of blood in the body. It's only experimental. 
SPOCK: It has been used successfully on test subjects on Rigel Five. 
MCCOY: It places a tremendous strain on the spleen and the liver. In Sarek's condition, the stimulant would kill him. 
SPOCK: Miss Chapel? I underwent a physical examination last week. Would you pull those records, please? 
CHAPEL: Already pulled. You're perfectly healthy, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: What has that got 
AMANDA: You're going to use it on yourself. A transfusion from you to your father. 
SPOCK: It would seem the only answer. 
MCCOY: It could damage you internally. It could kill you. I'm sorry, Spock. I can't sanction it. 
AMANDA: And I refuse to permit it. I won't risk both of you. 
SPOCK: Then you automatically condemn Sarek to death. And you, Doctor, have no logical alternative either. If you do not operate, Sarek will die. You now have the means to perform the operation. I am volunteering myself as the blood donor. I'll be at my station until you require me.

[Corridor]

(Kirk is in the middle of a vigorous fight with an Andorian (the blue people with antennae). The Andorian pulls a knife and stabs Kirk before getting kicked unconscious.) 
KIRK: Bridge. Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Spock here.

[Corridor]

KIRK: I'm on deck five, near my quarters. I've been attacked by an Andorian. Security. Security team. 
(He passes out.) SPOCK [OC]: Captain? Captain? Captain?

Captain's log, stardate 3843.4. First Officer Spock in temporary command. The captain has been critically wounded by one of the delegates to the Babel conference. The ship is on alert status. We are still being followed by the intruder vessel.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: It's a bad wound. Punctured left lung. A centimetre or so lower, it'd have gone through the heart. 
SPOCK: I'll be in the brig questioning the Andorian prisoner. 
CHAPEL: (monitoring Sarek) Doctor, the K2 factor is dropping. 
MCCOY: Spock, your father is much worse. There's no longer a choice. I have to operate immediately. We can begin as soon as you're prepared. 
SPOCK: No, Doctor. 
MCCOY: What? 
SPOCK: My first responsibility is to the ship. Our passengers' safety is by Starfleet order of first importance. We are being followed by an alien, possibly hostile, vessel. I cannot relinquish command under these circumstances. 
MCCOY: You can turn command over to Scotty. 
SPOCK: On what grounds, Doctor? Command requirements do not recognise personal privilege. I'll be in the brig interrogating the Andorian.

[Brig]

SHRAS: He is Thelev, a minor member of my staff. I know nothing of him except that he has served adequately. 
SPOCK: He has been subjected to questioning under verifier scan and truth drug. He reveals nothing. I suggest his mind has been so conditioned as part of a preconceived plan. 
SHRAS: My people are a violent race, but we've no quarrel with Captain Kirk. 
SPOCK: Apparently Thelev did. 
SHRAS: You suggest a plot. How could it profit us to harm the captain? 
SPOCK: I do not know. There is no logic in Thelev's attack upon the captain. There is no logic in Gav's murder. 
SHRAS: Perhaps you should forget logic and devote yourself to motivations of passion or gain. Those are reasons for murder.

[Spock's quarters]

(The doorbell rings impatiently.) 
SPOCK: Come in. 
AMANDA: Spock, you must turn command over to somebody else. 
SPOCK: Mother, when I was commissioned, I took an oath to carry out responsibilities which were clearly and exactly specified. 
AMANDA: Any competent officer can command this ship. Only you can give your father the blood transfusions that he needs to live. 
SPOCK: Any competent officer can command this ship under normal circumstances. The circumstances are not normal. We're carrying over one hundred valuable Federation passengers. We're being pursued by an alien ship. We're subject to possible attack. There has been murder and attempted murder on board. I cannot dismiss my duties. 
AMANDA: Duty? Your duty is to your father. 
SPOCK: I know, but this must take precedence. If I could give the transfusion without loss of time or efficiency, I would. Sarek understands my reason. 
AMANDA: Well, I don't. It's not human. That's not a dirty word. You're human, too. Let that part of you come through. Your father's dying. 
SPOCK: Mother, how can you have lived on Vulcan so long, married a Vulcan, raised a son on Vulcan, without understanding what it means to be a Vulcan? 
AMANDA: If this is what it means, I don't want to know. 
SPOCK: It means to adopt a philosophy, a way of life, which is logical and beneficial. We cannot disregard that philosophy merely for personal gain, no matter how important that gain might be. 
AMANDA: Nothing is as important as your father's life. 
SPOCK: Can you imagine what my father would say if I were to agree, if I were to give up command of this vessel, jeopardise hundreds of lives, risk interplanetary war, all for the life of one person? 
AMANDA: When you were five years old and came home stiff-lipped, anguished, because the other boys tormented you saying that you weren't really Vulcan. I watched you, knowing that inside that the human part of you was crying and I cried, too. There must be some part of me in you, some part that I still can reach. If being Vulcan is more important to you, then you'll stand there speaking rules and regulations from Starfleet and Vulcan philosophy, and let your father die. And I'll hate you for the rest of my life. 
SPOCK: Mother 
AMANDA: Oh, go to him. Now. Please. 
SPOCK: I cannot. 
(She slaps his face and storms out.)

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Doctor McCoy? 
KIRK: I'd like to get my hands on the guy with the sledgehammer. 
CHAPEL: The one who hit you? 
KIRK: No, the one inside my head. How long have I 
(Tries to sit up and fails.) 
MCCOY: Now let that be a lesson to you. Just lie there and be happy you're still alive. 
KIRK: How's Sarek? 
MCCOY: Not good. If I could only operate. 
KIRK: What's stopping you? I thought you were all ready. 
MCCOY: I was. When you became injured, Spock assumed command. He's going to stay there until you're back on your feet, even if it costs Sarek his life. Regulations. 
KIRK: I can't damn him for his loyalty, for doing his duty, but I'm not going to let him commit patricide. 
MCCOY: Jim, if you stand, you could start to bleed again. 
KIRK: Bones, Sarek will die without that operation, and you can't operate without transfusions from Spock. I'll convince Spock I'm all right and order him to report here. As soon as he leaves the bridge, I'll turn command over to Scotty and report to my quarters. Will that fill your prescription?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: I'll take over, Mister Spock. You report to Sickbay with Doctor McCoy. 
SPOCK: Captain, are you quite all right? 
MCCOY: I've certified him physically fit, Mister Spock. Now since I have an operation to perform and both of us are required 
KIRK: Get out, Spock. Chekov, what's the status of the intruder? 
CHEKOV: No change, sir. Maintaining its distance. 
KIRK: Any further transmissions, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: None, sir. 
(The turbolift doors close on Spock and McCoy.) 
KIRK: Call Mister Scott to the bridge. 
CHEKOV: Captain, the alien vessel is moving closer. 
KIRK: Belay that order. I'll stay here. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm picking up the alien signal again, but it's coming from inside the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Specific origin? 
UHURA: From the brig, sir. 
KIRK: Security? Security to the brig. Search the prisoner immediately.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Readings, Nurse. 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock's blood reproduction rate is up over two hundred percent. Sarek's heartbeat has risen to three hundred and twenty four. Blood pressure ninety over forty, dropping. 
MCCOY: I wish I knew whether that was good or bad. Initiate sterile field. 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock. 
(Spock is starting to get up.)
MCCOY: Where do you think you're going? 
SPOCK: I must see the captain. 
MCCOY: My patients don't walk out in the middle of an operation. 
SPOCK: The alien ship. I've just realised that if their power utilisation curve is not the norm, it should be possible to identify them this way. Very important. 
(Chapel gives him a hypo to put him to sleep.) 
MCCOY: So is your father's life.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk here. 
JOSEPH [OC]: Security here. We had to stun the Andorian. He had some sort of transceiver. It was hidden in his antenna. 
CHEKOV: Captain, the alien ship has changed course and speed. Moving directly toward us at warp eight. 
KIRK: Bring the prisoner to the bridge. Deflectors on. Red Alert. Phasers stand by to fire on my order. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. Shields on. Phasers manned and ready, sir. 
KIRK: Chekov, take over Spock's scanners. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. 
(The little light flashes past and the Enterprise rocks.) 
KIRK: Target, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Moving away. Turning now. He's coming around again. 
KIRK: Fire as he passes, Ensign. 
CHEKOV: A clean miss, sir. 
KIRK: Report on his weaponry, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Sensors record standard phasers, sir. 
KIRK: Standard phasers. Good. They may have more speed, but they're not giants. 
UHURA: Captain, the intercoms are jammed. All the ambassadors are asking what's going on. 
KIRK: Tell them to take a good guess, but clear that board, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
CHEKOV: He's coming around again.
(Another hit and jolt.)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: One more like that, and I'm going to lose both these men.
(Spock is awake again.)

[Bridge]

(Another attack.) 
CHEKOV: Fire control locked into the computers, Captain. 
KIRK: On my order, fire photon torpedoes two, four and six. Widest possible scatter. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
CHEKOV: Full spread missed, sir. They're moving too fast for us.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: Doctor, his heart's stopped. 
MCCOY: Cardio-stimulate. 
(Another jolt.) 
CHAPEL: The systems are off. 
MCCOY: Then get me that old portable cardio-stimulator. 
(She fetches a hand-sized device from a trolley.) 
MCCOY: Call engineering and have sickbay systems put on priority.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Number four shield has buckled, sir. 
KIRK: Auxiliary power. 
CHEKOV: Switching over. Shields firming up. Number four is still weak, sir. If they hit us there again, it'll go altogether. 
(Sickbay gets its power back.) 
(Thelev is brought to the Bridge.) 
KIRK: Your friends out there are good. They'll have to destroy this ship to win. 
THELEV: That was intended from the beginning, Captain. 
KIRK: You're not Andorian. Who are you? 
UHURA: Damage reports coming in, Captain. Every deck. 
KIRK: Damage control procedures, all decks. That ship out there has phasers. At least our weapons are alike. 
CHEKOV: Number two shield is gone. 
KIRK: Engineering, this is the Captain. Cut power on port side except for phaser banks. At my signal, cut starboard power. Kirk out. Who are you? 
THELEV: Find your own answers, Captain. You haven't long to live. 
KIRK: You're a spy, surgically altered to pass as an Andorian. Planted in the ambassador's party to use terror and murder to disrupt us and prepare for this attack. 
THELEV: Speculation, Captain. 
KIRK: Engineering, cut power on starboard side. Maintain until further orders. Chekov. 
(In the darkened ship, Chekov takes back his usual station.) 
THELEV: What are you doing? 
KIRK: You speculate. 
CHEKOV: We're starting to drift, sir. Shall I hold her on course? 
KIRK: No. Stand by your phasers, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Aye, sir. Phasers standing by. He's just hovering out there, sir. 
KIRK: Looking us over. We're dead as far as he knows. 
THELEV: You're baiting him. You're trying to lure him in. 
CHEKOV: Here he comes. Range decreasing. Speed dropping close to sublight. 
KIRK: Hold your fire, Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: Phasers locked on target. Range closing. Seventy five thousand kilometres. 
KIRK: Fire. 
(There's a satisfying flare on the viewscreen.) 
CHEKOV: Got him! 
KIRK: Secure from general quarters. Lieutenant, open the hailing frequency. If they wish to surrender 
(A very big flare makes everyone shield their eyes.) 
THELEV: They could not surrender, Captain. They had orders to self-destruct. 
(While in Sickbay, Sarek's vital signs are strengthening.) 
KIRK: Lieutenant, relay to Starfleet command. Tell them we have a prisoner. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
THELEV: Only temporarily, Captain. You see, I had orders to self-destruct, too. Slow poison. Quite painless, actually, but there's no known antidote. I anticipate another ten minutes of life. 
KIRK: Take him to Sickbay. 
THELEV: I seem to have miscalculated. 
(He dies with the security guards holding his arms.) 
KIRK: So did they. Mister Chekov, take over.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: Are you quite through shaking the ship around? 
KIRK: Spock, Sarek how are they? 
MCCOY: I don't mind telling you, you sure make it difficult for a surgeon trying 
KIRK: Bones! 
AMANDA: Captain, come in. 
(They go through to the ward.) 
MCCOY: That pig-headed Vulcan stamina. I couldn't have pulled them through without it. 
KIRK: Some doctors have all the luck. 
SPOCK: Captain, I believe you'll find the alien 
KIRK: We damaged their ship. They destroyed themselves to avoid capture. Bones, Thelev's body will be brought to your lab. I want an autopsy performed as soon as possible. 
SPOCK: I think you'll find he's an Orion, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Orion? 
SPOCK: Intelligence reports that Orion smugglers have been raiding the Coridan system. 
KIRK: But what would they gain by an attack on Starfleet? 
SAREK: Mutual suspicion and interplanetary war. 
KIRK: Yes, of course. With Orion carefully neutral, they'd clean up supplying dilithium to both sides and continue to raid Coridan. 
SPOCK: The thing that confused me was the power utilisation curve. It made them seem more powerful than a starship or anything known to us. That ship was constructed for a suicide mission. Since they never intended to return to their home base, they could use one hundred percent power on their attacks. The thing I don't understand is why I didn't think of it earlier. 
KIRK: You might have had something else on your mind. 
SPOCK: That hardly seems likely. 
KIRK: No, but thank you anyway. 
AMANDA: And you, Sarek. Would you also say thank you to your son? 
SAREK: I don't understand. 
AMANDA: For saving your life. 
SAREK: Spock acted in the only logical manner open to him. One does not thank logic, Amanda. 
AMANDA: Logic, logic! I'm sick to death of logic. Do you want to know how I feel about your logic? 
SPOCK: Emotional, isn't she? 
SAREK: She has always been that way. 
SPOCK: Indeed? Why did you marry her? 
SAREK: At the time, it seemed the logical thing to do. 
KIRK: Bones. (starts to collapse.) No, no, I'm all right 
(McCoy helps him onto a bed.) 
MCCOY: If you keep arguing with your kindly family doctor, you're going to spend your next ten days right here. If you co-operate, you'll be out in two. 
SPOCK: Doctor, I'll return to my station now. 
MCCOY: You are at your station, Mister Spock. 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy, I believe you're enjoying all this. 
SPOCK: Indeed, Captain. I've never seen him look so happy. 
MCCOY: Shut up. (to Kirk) Shh. Shh! (to camera) Well, what do you know? I finally got the last word.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Metamorphosis
Stardate: Unknown
Original Airdate: 10 Nov, 1967

[Shuttlecraft]
(Enterprise shuttlecraft NCC1701/7 is being piloted by Kirk, assisted by Spock. McCoy is tending to a lady in a green dress and headscarf.) 
SPOCK: We have reached projected point three, Captain. Adjust to new course two oh one mark one five. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. 
MCCOY: (offering a drink) Jim. 
KIRK: How is she, Doc? 
MCCOY: No change. 
NANCY: Small thanks to the Starfleet. 
MCCOY: Now really, Commissioner, you can't blame the Starfleet. 
NANCY: I should've received the proper inoculations ahead of time. 
MCCOY: Sakuro's disease is extremely rare. The chances of anyone contracting it are literally billions to one. 
NANCY: I was sent to Epsilon Canaris Three to prevent a war, Doctor. Thanks to the inefficiency of the medical branch of the Starfleet, I've been forced to leave before my job was done. 
KIRK: Commissioner, I can assure you that once we reach the Enterprise, with its medical facilities, we'll have you back to your job in time for you to prevent that war. 
NANCY: How soon will we rendezvous with that ship of yours, Captain? 
KIRK: In exactly four hours, twenty one minutes, Commissioner. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: Yes? 
SPOCK: Will you check your automatic scanner, please? 
KIRK: That's odd. I've never seen anything like that before. 
SPOCK: Nor have I. 
(They lower the central shutter to view the approaching swirly flashing thing.)
SPOCK: Heading directly toward us at warp speed. 
KIRK: Staying right with us. Sensor readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Vaguely like a cloud of ionised hydrogen, but with strong erratic electrical impulses. 
(Sounds of electrical shorts. The lights flicker.) 
KIRK: We've got it. 
SPOCK: Helm does not answer, Captain. 
KIRK: Neither do the pods. Communications are dead. Building overload. Cut all power relays. 
SPOCK: Cut, Captain. 
NANCY: What's happening? I demand to know. 
KIRK: You already know as much as we do, Miss Hedford. Whatever that thing is outside, it's yanked us off course from the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: Now on course nine eight mark one two, heading directly toward Gamma Canaris region. 
MCCOY: Jim, we've got to get Miss Hedford to the Enterprise. Her condition. 
KIRK: I know, Bones, but there's nothing I can do about it. 
NANCY: I insist you make your scheduled rendezvous with the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Miss Hedford, we'll do what we can, when we can. At the moment, we're helpless. You might as well sit back and enjoy the ride.

[Shuttlecraft]

(The shuttlecraft has landed on a blue and purple planet. It is surrounded by lots of very high cliffs.) 
KIRK: Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please, come in. Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please. It's no good. We're not transmitting. Bones? 
MCCOY: Oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere. Some krypton, argon, neon. Temperature seventy five degrees Fahrenheit. Practically identical to Earth atmosphere. 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Gravity is similar to Earth. Most unusual in view of its size. The bulk of the body seems to be iron and nickel. More than an asteroid. Like a small planetoid, I should say. Possibly a remnant of a planet breakup. Totally suitable for human life. 
KIRK: All right, we get out and get up. Issue phasers. Bones, maintain full alert. Commissioner, you'll stay inside. 
NANCY: Just how long am I supposed to stay inside, Captain? 
KIRK: That's a very good question. I wish I could answer it. All right. Let's go.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Take a look around, Bones. 
(Spock checks the shuttlecraft for damage.) 
SPOCK: Most unusual. Unlikely. In fact, Captain, I would say quite impossible. 
KIRK: Nothing wrong and nothing works. 
SPOCK: Precisely. 
KIRK: There must be a reason. 
SPOCK: Obviously. 
KIRK: Let's look a little further. 
(Nancy comes out of the shuttlecraft.) 
MCCOY: Jim, I just took a tricording sweep, and I got the same readings almost as Spock got when we were pulled off course. 
SPOCK: The ionised cloud. 
MCCOY: I think so, only it reads here on the surface with us. It's in that direction, and it doesn't read solid. It's more unstable, tenuous, like a collection of gases. 
COCHRANE [OC]: Hello! Hello! 
(A figure in an orange jumpsuit waves and runs towards them.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: Bones, get a physiological reading on that, whatever it is. 
COCHRANE: Hello! Are you real? I mean, I'm not imagining you, am I? 
KIRK: We're real enough. 
COCHRANE: You speak English. Earth people? 
KIRK: From the Federation. 
COCHRANE: The F? Well, it doesn't matter. I'm Cochrane. I've been marooned here who knows how long. If you only knew how good it is to see you. And a woman. A beautiful one at that. 
KIRK: I'm Captain James T. Kirk, commanding the starship Enterprise. (they shake hands) This is my first officer Mister Spock. 
COCHRANE: You're a Vulcan, aren't you? 
SPOCK: Correct. 
KIRK: Chief Surgeon Leonard McCoy. 
COCHRANE: Doctor. 
MCCOY: Pleasure. 
KIRK: Oh, and excuse me, Assistant Federation Commissioner Hedford. 
COCHRANE: Ma'am. You're food to a starving man. All of you. Hey, that's a nice ship. Simple and clean. Been trying to get her to go again? Well, forget it. It won't work. 
MCCOY: He's human, Jim. Everything checks out perfectly. 
KIRK: Mister Cochrane. We were forced off our course and taken here by some force we couldn't identify. 
SPOCK: Which seems to be on the surface of this body at the moment. 
COCHRANE: Well, I wouldn't know anything about that. 
SPOCK: You say we'll be unable to get the ship to function again? 
COCHRANE: Not a chance. There's some sort of dampening field down here. Power systems don't work. Take my word for it. 
SPOCK: You don't mind if we continue to try? 
COCHRANE: Go right ahead. You've got plenty of time. 
KIRK: What about you, Cochrane? How did you get here? 
COCHRANE: Marooned, I told you. Look, we'll have lots of time to learn about each other. I have a small place over that way. All the comforts of home. I can even offer you a hot bath. 
NANCY: How perceptive of you to notice I needed one. 
KIRK: If you don't mind, Mister Cochrane, I'd like more than just a statement that you were marooned here. It's a long way off the beaten path. 
COCHRANE: That's right. That's why I'm so glad to see you. Look, I'll tell you everything you want to know, but not here. Your ship is sure a beauty. 
KIRK: Yes, she is. And you've been out of circulation quite a while. The principles may be new to you. Mister Spock, why don't you explain our methods of propulsion to Mister Cochrane? 
(Spock and Cochrane go to the other side of the shuttlecraft.) 
MCCOY: Talks a lot, but he doesn't say much. 
KIRK: I've noticed something else. 
MCCOY: What's that? 
KIRK: He looks familiar. 
MCCOY: Familiar? Now that you mention it, he does. 
KIRK: I can't quite place him, but. What about Miss Hedford? 
MCCOY: No temperature yet, but we've got to get under way soon, Jim. I guarantee you, it will develop. What are we going to do? 
KIRK: Take Cochrane up on his offer.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

(Not a true vertical in the building, and palms in the garden. It looks quite nice and avant-garde.) 
SPOCK: You built this, Mister Cochrane? 
COCHRANE: Yes. I had tools and supplies left over from my crash. 
SPOCK: Not bad. 
COCHRANE: Not Earth, but it's livable. I grow vegetables in the fields over that next ridge. Come on in.

[Cochrane's home]

KIRK: All the comforts of home indeed, Mister Cochrane. Where'd you get the antiques? 
COCHRANE: You mean my instruments? I imagine things have changed a lot since I crashed. 
KIRK: Not that much. 
(Hands a piece over to Spock to examine.) 
NANCY: Must you keep it so terribly hot in here? 
COCHRANE: The temperature's a constant seventy two degrees. Let me get you something cool to drink. 
MCCOY: Do you feel hot? 
NANCY: I feel infuriated, deeply put upon, and absolutely outraged. 
MCCOY: It was quite a hike here. You're tired. Just take it easy for a while. 
NANCY: I'll rest later, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Temperature, Captain. First sign. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. It means we're running out of time. 
SPOCK: Captain, Doctor. 
(From the doorway, the three see a swirly thing which then disappears. Cochrane comes in with a tray of drinks.) 
KIRK: What was that? 
COCHRANE: Well, sometimes the light plays tricks on you. You'd be surprised what I've imagined I've seen around here sometimes. 
SPOCK: We imagined nothing, Mister Cochrane. There was an entity out there and I suspect it was the same entity which brought us here. Please explain. 
COCHRANE: There's nothing to explain. 
(He hands a drink to Nancy.) 
NANCY: Thank you. 
KIRK: You'll find I have a very low tolerance level where the safety of my people are concerned. We find you out here, where no human has any business being. We were virtually hijacked in space and brought here. Now I'm not just requesting an explanation, Mister. I'm demanding one. 
COCHRANE: All right. It was the Companion. 
KIRK: The what? 
COCHRANE: That's what I call it. As a matter of fact, Captain, I didn't crash here. I was brought here in my disabled ship. I was almost dead. The Companion saved my life. 
SPOCK: You were injured? 
COCHRANE: I was dying, Mister Spock. 
KIRK: You seem perfectly all right now. What was the matter? 
COCHRANE: I was an old man. 
KIRK: You were what? 
COCHRANE: Well, I don't know how it did it, but the Companion rejuvenated me, made me young again, like I am now. 
SPOCK: I prefer to reserve judgment on that part of your story, sir. Meanwhile, would you please explain exactly what this Companion of yours is? 
COCHRANE: I told you, I don't know what it is. It exists, it lives, and I can communicate with it. 
MCCOY: That's a pretty far out story. 
KIRK: Mister Cochrane, do you have a first name? 
COCHRANE: Zefram. 
KIRK: Zefram Cochrane of Alpha Centuri, the discoverer of the space warp? 
COCHRANE: That's right, Captain. 
MCCOY: But that's impossible. Zefram Cochrane died a hundred and fifty years ago. 
SPOCK: The name of Zefram Cochrane is revered throughout the known galaxy. Planets were named after him. Great universities, cities. 
KIRK: Isn't your story a little improbable, Mister Cochrane? 
COCHRANE: No, it's true. I was eighty seven years old when I came here. 
KIRK: You say this Companion found you and rejuvenated you? What were you doing in space at the age of eighty seven? 
COCHRANE: I was tired, Captain. I was going to die, and I wanted to die in space. That's all. 
SPOCK: True, his body was never found. 
COCHRANE: You're looking at it, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: If so, you wear your age very well. 
MCCOY: How do you feel? 
NANCY: Terrible. How should I feel? 
MCCOY: You're running a little temperature. Perhaps you should lie down. 
NANCY: Doctor, will you please just leave me alone. It's the heat. 
MCCOY: All right. Try to relax. Jim, it's started, the fever. It's over a hundred, and it's climbing. 
KIRK: How long do we have? 
MCCOY: A matter of hours, that's all. 
KIRK: Mister Cochrane, you say you were brought here a hundred and fifty years ago? You don't look over thirty five. 
COCHRANE: I haven't aged. The Companion sees to that. 
SPOCK: Captain. These instruments, they date from the time indicated. From your ship, Mister Cochrane? 
COCHRANE: I cannibalised it. The food, water, gardens, everything else I need the Companion gives me. Apparently, it creates it out of the native elements. 
KIRK: You say you can communicate with it. Perhaps you can find out what we're doing here. 
COCHRANE: I already know. 
KIRK: You wouldn't mind telling us? 
COCHRANE: You won't like it. 
KIRK: I already don't like it. 
COCHRANE: You're here to keep me company. 
KIRK: You mean you brought us here? 
COCHRANE: No, the Companion did. I told it I'd die of loneliness. I thought it would release me. Instead, it brought you here. 
NANCY: No! No! No! That's disgusting! We're not animals! No! Oh, no! It's inhuman! No! No! 
(Kirk and McCoy take her to a bed and lie her down. McCoy gives her an injection.) 
KIRK: Spock, run additional tricorder readings. Learn anything you can. Find me a weapon to use against this thing. 
SPOCK: You ask me to find a weapon. Do you intend to destroy it? 
KIRK: I intend to do whatever's necessary to get us off this planet and Commissioner Hedford to the hospital. If the Companion stands in the way, then we push it out of the way. Clear, Spock? 
SPOCK: Quite clear, Captain. 
KIRK: Very well. You have your orders. (Spock leaves) Mister Cochrane, if you left here, what would happen to you? 
COCHRANE: I'd begin to age again, normally. 
KIRK: Do you want to leave here? 
COCHRANE: Believe me, Captain, immortality consists largely of boredom. What's it like out there in the galaxy? 
KIRK: We're on a thousand planets and spreading out. We cross fantastic distances and everything's alive, Cochrane. Life everywhere. We estimate there are millions of planets with intelligent life. We haven't begun to map them. Interesting? 
COCHRANE: How would you like to sleep for a hundred and fifty years and wake up in a new world? 
KIRK: It's all out there waiting for you, but we'll need your help to get away. 
COCHRANE: You've got it.

[Outside the shuttlecraft]

(Spock is working when the Companion appears next to him. He reaches to touch it, and then is flung away. The electrics in the shuttlecraft all burn out.)

[Cochrane's home]

KIRK: You seem to think this Companion of yours can do almost anything. 
COCHRANE: I said it was very powerful. 
KIRK: Could it cure her? 
COCHRANE: I don't know. 
KIRK: How do you communicate with it? 
COCHRANE: It's on a non-verbal level, but I usually get my message across. 
KIRK: We've got to try. We're helpless. See if it can do something.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: How do you do it? 
COCHRANE: I just sort of clear my mind and it comes. 
(He walks to the edge of the garden then stands with his eyes closed. The Companion appears, then moves to envelope him.) 
KIRK: Bones, what do you make of that? 
MCCOY: Almost a symbiosis of some kind, a sort of joining. 
KIRK: Exactly what I think. Not exactly like a pet owner speaking to a beloved animal, would you say? 
MCCOY: No, it's more than that. 
KIRK: Agreed. More like love. 
(The Companion vanishes, so Kirk and McCoy go over to Cochrane.) 
MCCOY: Are you all right? 
COCHRANE: Yes. It kind of drains me a little, but I'm all right. 
KIRK: Well? 
COCHRANE: The Companion can't do anything to help Miss Hedford. 
KIRK: Then she'll die. 
COCHRANE: If there's anything I could do to help, I would, and I will, but we can expect nothing from the Companion.

[Outside the shuttlecraft]

MCCOY: Spock! Are you all right? 
SPOCK: Yes. Quite all right, Doctor. A most fascinating thing happened. Apparently, the Companion imparted to me a rather quaint, old-fashioned electric shock of respectable voltage. 
MCCOY: It attacked you? 
SPOCK: Evidently. Unquestionably, a large part of its substance is simple electricity. 
MCCOY: Oh, yes. I'm not a scientist or a physicist, Mister Spock, but am I correct in assuming that anything that generates electricity can be shorted out? 
SPOCK: Quite correct, Doctor.

[Cochrane's home]

(Spock is demonstrating the device he has put on the table.) 
SPOCK: Put this in the proximity of the Companion, throw this switch, and it will scramble every electrical impulse the creature can produce. It cannot fail. 
KIRK: It troubles you, Cochrane? 
COCHRANE: The Companion saved my life. It's taken care of me all these years. We've been very close in a way that's hard to explain. I suppose I even have an affection for it. 
KIRK: It's also keeping you prisoner. 
COCHRANE: I don't want it killed. 
SPOCK: We may simply render it powerless. 
COCHRANE: But you don't know. You could kill it. I won't stand for that. 
KIRK: We're getting out of here, Cochrane. Face up to it. I'll do anything I have to to save all of our lives. 
COCHRANE: I suppose from your point of view, you're right. 
MCCOY: We understand how you feel, Mister Cochrane, but it has to be done. 
COCHRANE: All right. You want me to contact it? 
KIRK: Please. Outside. 
COCHRANE: What was it they used to call it? The Judas goat? (leaves) 
SPOCK: There is some risk, Captain. We do not know the extent of its powers. 
KIRK: Nor it ours.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

(Cochrane 'calls' and the Companion comes just as before. When it has enveloped him, Kirk gives the word.) 
KIRK: Now. 
(The jolt knocks Cochrane out and the Companion comes towards the dwelling, apparently angry.)

[Cochrane's home]

(It enters, blows up Spock's contraption then attacks Kirk and Spock. They are rolling around on the floor inside the sparkly thing, clutching their throats.) 
MCCOY: Stop it! You're killing them! Stop it, please! Stop it! You're choking them! Let them go. You're choking them! Stop it! 
(Outside, Cochrane hears McCoy's shouts, and somehow calms the Companion. It vanishes.) 
MCCOY: You all right, Jim? 
KIRK: Yeah. 
MCCOY: Spock? 
SPOCK: All right. 
(They go to the doorway and see the Companion with Cochrane again.) 
KIRK: Cochrane got it off of us, but I don't know whether he did us a favour or not. 
MCCOY: What kind of talk is that? 
KIRK: How do you fight a thing like that? I've got a ship up there somewhere, responsibility for four lives here, one of them dying because of me. 
MCCOY: It isn't your fault. 
KIRK: I'm in command, Bones. It makes it my fault. How do you fight a thing like that? 
MCCOY: Maybe you're a soldier so often that you forget you're also trained to be a diplomat. Why not try a carrot instead of a stick? 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: The universal translator on the shuttlecraft. We can try that, talk to that thing. 
SPOCK: The translator is for use with more congruent life forms. 
KIRK: Adjust it, change it. The trouble with immortality is it's boring. Adjusting the translator will give you something to do. 
SPOCK: It is possible. If I could widen its pattern of reception 
KIRK: Right down your alley, Spock. Get it here and get to work. That thing is still out there. Better go that way. 
(Spock leaves, passing Nancy's bed) 
KIRK: Any change? 
MCCOY: Yes, for the worse.

Ship's Log. Stardate 3219.8. Lieutenant Commander Scott recording in the absence of Captain Kirk. A shuttlecraft bearing the Captain, the first officer, Chief Surgeon McCoy, and Assistant Federation Commissioner Hedford is now definitely overdue for a rendezvous with the Enterprise. We are attempting to backtrack it.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Mister Scott. Computer central reports that we're coming up on the co-ordinates of the last established position of the shuttlecraft. 
SCOTT: Thank you, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Steady. No, Mister Scott, bearing three ten mark thirty five just cleared. No antimatter residue. 
SCOTT: All scanners, spherical sweep. Range, maximum. They'll have to pick it up. 
UHURA: If the shuttlecraft powered away, Mister Scott, but if it were just towed? 
SCOTT: There'd still be traces of residual matter floating around, Lieutenant. 
SULU: Bearing two ten mark forty. Strong particle concentration. We're on it, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Lay on that course. Maintain scanning. 
SULU: Course laid in, sir. Particle density decreasing. Gone, sir. No readings. 
SCOTT: Steady as she goes, Mister Sulu. 
UHURA: What do you think it means, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: The shuttlecraft was on schedule until it was shy five hours of rendezvous. Then something happened. 
UHURA: Well, I'd feel a lot better if it were a little more definite. 
SCOTT: It didn't wreck. There was no debris. There's no trace of expelled internal atmosphere, no residual radioactivity. Ah, it's. Something took over. Tractor beams maybe. Something. They dragged it away on the heading we're now on. 
UHURA: If there are no further traces, how are we going to follow them? 
SCOTT: We stay on this course, see what comes up. 
UHURA: It's a big galaxy, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Aye.

[Cochrane's home]

(Spock is working on the Universal Translator. It is basically a metal tube nearly a foot long, that can be held in the hand.) 
COCHRANE: What's the theory behind this device? 
KIRK: There are certain universal ideas and concepts common to all intelligent life. This device instantaneously compares the frequency of brainwave patterns, selects those ideas and concepts it recognises, and then provides the necessary grammar. 
SPOCK: Then it translates its findings into English. 
COCHRANE: You mean it speaks? 
KIRK: With a voice or the approximation of whatever the creature is on the sending end. Not one hundred percent efficient, but nothing ever is. Ready, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Quite ready, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Cochrane, call the Companion.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

(Cochrane summons the Companion.) 
KIRK: Companion. (It leaves Cochrane) We wish to talk to you. 
COMPANION: How can we communicate? My thoughts, you are hearing them. This is interesting. 
KIRK: Feminine. No doubt about it. 
SPOCK: Yes. The matter of gender could change the entire situation. 
KIRK: I'm way ahead of you. 
SPOCK: Then it is not a zookeeper. 
KIRK: No. A lover. Companion. It is wrong to keep us here against our will. 
COMPANION: A man needs the company of his own kind, or he will cease to exist. He felt it to me. 
KIRK: One of us will cease to exist if we don't get her to a place where we can care for her. 
COMPANION: The man needs others of his species. That is why you are here. The man must continue. 
KIRK: Companion, try to understand. It is the nature of our species to be free, just as it is your nature to stay here. We will cease to exist in captivity. 
COMPANION: Your bodies have stopped their peculiar degeneration. There will be nothing to harm you. You will continue, and the man will continue. This is necessary. 
SPOCK: This is a marvellous opportunity to add to our knowledge. Ask it about its nature, its history. 
KIRK: This isn't a classroom. I'm trying to get us out of here. 
SPOCK: A chance like this may never come again. It could tell us so much. 
KIRK: This isn't the time. Companion, what you offer us is not continuation. It is non=existence. We will cease to exist. Even the man will cease to exist. 
COMPANION : Your impulses are illogical. This communication is useless. The man must continue. Therefore, you will continue. It is necessary. 
(She vanishes, and they all head back indoors.)

[Cochrane's home]

COCHRANE: Captain, why did you build that translator with a feminine voice? 
KIRK: We didn't. 
COCHRANE: But I heard 
KIRK: The idea of male and female are universal constants, Cochrane. There's no doubt about it. The Companion is female. 
COCHRANE: I don't understand. 
MCCOY: You don't? A blind man could see it with a cane. You're not a pet. You're not a specimen kept in a cage. You're a lover. 
COCHRANE: I'm a what? 
SPOCK: Her attitude when she approaches you is profoundly different than when she contacts us. Her appearance is soft, gentle. Her voice is melodic, pleasing. I do not totally understand the emotion, but it obviously exists. The Companion loves you. 
COCHRANE: Do you know what you're saying? For all these years, I've let something as alien as that crawl around inside me, into my mind, my feelings. 
KIRK: What are you complaining about? It kept you alive. 
COCHRANE: That thing fed on me. It used me. It's disgusting. 
MCCOY: There's nothing disgusting about it. It's just another life form, that's all. You get used to those things. 
COCHRANE: You're as bad as it is. 
SPOCK: Your highly emotional reaction is most illogical. Your relationship with the Companion has for one hundred and fifty years been emotionally satisfying, eminently practical, and totally harmless. It may indeed have been quite beneficial. 
COCHRANE: Is this what the future holds? Men who have no notion of decency or morality? Maybe I'm a hundred and fifty years out of style, but I'm not going to be fodder for any inhuman monster. (leaves) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. A totally parochial attitude. 
NANCY: Doctor. Doctor. 
MCCOY: Right here, Miss Hedford. 
NANCY: I heard him. He was loved and he resents it. 
MCCOY: You just rest. 
NANCY: No. I don't want to die. I've been good at my job, but I've never been loved. Never. What kind of life is that? Not to be loved, never to have shown love? And he runs away from love. (cries)

Ship's log, stardate 3220.3. Lieutenant Commander Scott reporting in lieu of the Captain and the first officer. We are continuing our search for the missing shuttlecraft.

[Bridge]

SULU: Approaching what seems to be an asteroid belt, sir. Scanners report approximately seven thousand bodies of sizes running from types A to N. 
SCOTT: Atmosphere count? 
SULU: Approximately thirty four percent of the bodies of atmospherian types H to M. 
SCOTT: All right, then. We'll do it the hard way. All sensors set for life form registration. Automatic selection. 
UHURA: Mister Scott, there are thousands of them out there they could be on, if they're on any of them at all. 
SCOTT: That's right, Lieutenant. Thousands. And we'll look them over one by one.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

(Another contact session is in progress.) 
KIRK: Companion, do you love the man? 
COMPANION: I do not understand. 
KIRK: Is he important to you, more important than anything? Is he as though he were a part of you? 
COMPANION: He is part of me. The man must continue. 
KIRK: He will not continue. He will cease to exist. By your feeling for him, you are condemning him to an existence he will find unbearable. He will cease to exist. 
COMPANION: He does not age. He remains forever. 
KIRK: You speak of his body. I speak of his spirit. Companion, inside the shelter, a female of our species is dying. She will not continue. That is what will happen to the man unless you release all of us. 
COMPANION: I do not understand. 
KIRK: Our species can only survive if we have obstacles to overcome. You take away all obstacles. Without them to strengthen us, we will weaken and die. You regard the man only as a toy. You amuse yourself with him. 
COMPANION: You are wrong. The man is the centre of all things. I care for him. 
KIRK: But you can't really love him. You haven't the slightest knowledge of love, the total union of two people. You are the Companion. He is the man. You are two different things. You can't join. You can't love. You may keep him here forever, but you will always be separate, apart from him. 
COMPANION: If I were human there can be love? (vanishes) 
MCCOY: What did you hope to gain by that, Jim? 
KIRK: Try to convince her of the hopelessness of it. Love sometimes expresses itself in sacrifice. I thought maybe if she loved him, she'd let him go. 
SPOCK: But she or it is inhuman, Captain. You cannot expect her to react like a human. 
KIRK: I tried. 
COCHRANE: It's useless. I know. 
NANCY: (standing in the doorway) Zefram Cochrane. 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: I don't understand it. She's not sick at all. 
NANCY: We understand. 
COCHRANE: It's her. 
KIRK: What? 
COCHRANE: Don't you understand? It's the Companion. 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: She's perfectly healthy. Heart like a hammer, respiration normal, blood pressure normal. This is medically impossible. 
NANCY: We are here. 
KIRK: We? 
NANCY: Both of us. Those you knew as the Commissioner and the Companion. We are both here. 
SPOCK: Companion, you do not have the power to create life. 
NANCY: That is for the Maker of all things. 
SPOCK: Commissioner Hedford was dying. 
NANCY: That part of us was too weak to hold on. In a moment, there would have been no continuing. Now we're together. 
SPOCK: Then you are both here, in the one body? 
NANCY: We are one. 
(She goes to Cochrane, who takes a step back.) 
NANCY: Zefram, we frighten you. We've never frightened you before. Loneliness. This is loneliness. Oh, what a bitter thing. Oh, Zefram, it's so sad. How do you bear it, this loneliness? 
KIRK: Spock, check out the shuttlecraft. Engine, communications, everything. 
NANCY: That will not be necessary, Captain. Your vehicle will operate as before, so will the communications device. 
COCHRANE: You're letting us go? 
NANCY: We could do nothing now to stop you. You said we would not know love because we were not human. Now we are human. We'll know the change of days. We will know death. But to touch the hand of man, nothing is as important. 
COCHRANE: You're very beautiful. 
NANCY: Part of me understands. Part does not. But it pleases me. 
COCHRANE: I could explain many things. 
NANCY: Oh, let me walk, Zefram. Let me feel the earth against my feet. Let me feel the warmth of the sun on my face. You beside me. Let me feel these things. 
KIRK: Go ahead, Cochrane We have a few things to do. 
(Cochrane and Nancy walk off hand in hand.)

[Bridge]

UHURA: Mister Scott, it's the Captain. 
SCOTT: Put him on. Lock on to his co-ordinates. Captain, this is Scotty. Are you all right?

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: Perfectly all right. Can you get a fix on us.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: The helm is computing your position now, Captain. 
SULU: Course two twenty four mark twelve. ETA fifty seven minutes. 
SCOTT: We'll be there in 57 minutes, sir.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: Very good. I'll continue transmitting. Assume standard orbit when you arrive. We'll transport up in the shuttlecraft.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: What happened, Captain?

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: Interesting story, Scotty. I can't tell you now because, quite frankly, I don't know how it's going to end. Kirk out. 
(Somewhere in the vicinity, Nancy is holding up her scarf to mimic how she saw Cochrane when she was a swirly thing.) 
COCHRANE: Everything will be an eye-opener to you. There's a thousand planets out there, a thousand races, and I'll show everything to you, soon as I learn my way around again. Maybe I can make up a little for everything you've done for me. 
NANCY: I can't go with you, Zefram. 
COCHRANE: Of course you can. You have to. 
NANCY: My life emanates from this place. If I should leave it for more than a tiny march of days, I'll cease to exist. I must return, even as you must consume matter to maintain your life. 
COCHRANE: You gave up everything to be human? But even if you stay here, you'll eventually die. 
NANCY: The joy of this hour. I am pleased. 
COCHRANE: Well, I can't just fly away and leave you here. 
NANCY: You must be free, Zefram Cochrane. 
COCHRANE: You saved my life, took care of me. You loved me. I never understood. I do now. 
(He kisses her.)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're locked in, Captain. Standard orbit established. Shuttlecraft bay standing by to receive you.

[Outside Cochrane's home]

KIRK: Stand by, Scotty. 
(Cochrane and Nancy return.) 
KIRK: The Enterprise is waiting, Mister Cochrane. 
COCHRANE: I can't take her away from here. If I do, she'll die. If I leave her, she'll die of loneliness. I owe everything to her. I can't leave her. I love her. Is that surprising? 
SPOCK: Not coming from a human being. You are, after all, essentially irrational. 
KIRK: Think it over, Mister Cochrane. There's a whole galaxy out there waiting to honour you. 
COCHRANE: I have honours enough. 
SPOCK: But you will age, both of you. There will be no immortality. You'll both grow old here and finally die. 
COCHRANE: That's been happening to men and women for a long time. I've got the feeling it's one of the pleasanter things about being human, as long as you grow old together. 
KIRK: Are you sure? 
COCHRANE: There's plenty of water here. The climate's good for growing things. I might try to plant a fig tree. A man's entitled to that, isn't he? It isn't gratitude, Captain. Now that I see her, touch her, I know that I love her. We'll have a lot of years together. They'll be happy ones. 
KIRK: All the best. 
(They shake hands, and Kirk walks away.) 
COCHRANE: Captain, don't tell them about me. 
KIRK: Not a word, Mister Cochrane. 
MCCOY: Jim, what about that war on Epsilon Canaris Three? 
KIRK: Well, I'm sure the Federation can find another woman somewhere who'll stop that war.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.


I, Mudd
Stardate: 4513.3
Original Airdate: 3 Nov, 1967

[Corridor]
(Spock and McCoy are greeted by a crewman in blue as he walks along.) 
NORMAN: Good morning, sir, Doctor. 
SPOCK: Something wrong? 
MCCOY: Yes. There's something odd about that man, and I can't quite pinpoint it. 
SPOCK: Perhaps you're making a rather hasty judgment. Mister Norman has only been aboard seventy two hours. 
MCCOY: I know when something doesn't strike me right, and he doesn't. 
SPOCK: Specifics, Doctor. Labels do not make arguments. 
MCCOY: All right. There's something wrong about a man who never smiles, whose conversation never varies from the routine of the job, and who won't talk about his background. 
SPOCK: I see. 
MCCOY: Spock, I mean that it's odd for a non-Vulcan. The ears make all the difference. 
SPOCK: I find your argument strewn with gaping defects in logic. 
MCCOY: Maybe, but you can't evaluate a man by logic alone. Besides, he has avoided two appointments that I've made for his physical exam without reason. 
SPOCK: That's not at all surprising, Doctor. He's probably terrified of your beads and rattles.

[Auxiliary Control]

(Norman enters.) 
JORDAN: Command personnel only. 
(Norman knocks him out and makes changes to the various control panels. A 'Danger, Overload' light comes on.)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Yes, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: There's an unplanned course change being fed into the instruments, sir. 
KIRK: Correct it. 
SULU: I can't, sir. 
KIRK: Auxiliary control, this is the captain. Auxiliary control, what's going on down there? 
SULU: Sir, auxiliary control is on total override. 
KIRK: Kirk to Security. 
ROWE [OC]: Security. Lieutenant Rowe here, sir. 
KIRK: Intruder alert, deck eight, auxiliary control. 
ROWE [OC]: Acknowledged. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, have Mister Spock report to the bridge. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: What's the imposed course, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Turning on three oh seven degrees, mark eight. Being executed now, sir.

[Auxiliary Control]

(The three burly security men arrive.)
ROWE: Take care of him. 
(The other two leave with the unconscious crewman.)

[Bridge]

ROWE [OC]: Security to Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Auxiliary Control]

ROWE: Lieutenant Rowe, sir. I'm in auxiliary control. Ensign Jordan's been knocked out.

[Bridge]

ROWE [OC]: The directional master controls have been jammed. They're totally unworkable. 
KIRK: Any sign of the intruder?

[Auxiliary Control]

ROWE: No, sir. He's gone. I've put out a full security alert on all decks.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Find him. Kirk out. Mister Spock, we seem to be taking an unscheduled ride. 
SPOCK: Interesting. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, cut in emergency manual monitor. I want the override broken. 
SULU: Sir, the instruments won't respond. 
KIRK: Emergency manual monitor, report.

[Engineering]

(In the upper gallery, Norman has been busy.) 
KIRK [OC]: This is Captain Kirk. Acknowledge.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Emergency manual monitor, this is the captain. Report.

[Engineering]

(Norman enters the main area.)
SCOTT: Here, you're not allowed 
(He is pushed against the wall and knocked out briefly. Norman fights everyone that comes at him.) 
KIRK [OC]: Acknowledge. This is the captain. Scotty, acknowledge. Scotty, what's going on down there?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk to Engineering.

[Engineering]

(The fights continue.) 
KIRK [OC]: This is the captain. Scotty, report.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Scotty, the intruder is in your area.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: What's going on down there? Scotty! 
(Norman has triumphed and is adjusting controls.) 
SCOTT: Captain, he's here.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Scotty.

[Engineering]

KIRK [OC]: Scotty.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Scotty? Security, the intruder is in the engineering section. Have all units converge on that point. 
SULU: Sir, we're picking up speed. Warp five, six. Warp seven, sir. 
KIRK: Cut power. 
SULU: I can't, sir. All the controls are jammed. 
KIRK: Spock, take over. 
NORMAN: It will not be necessary, Captain. 
KIRK: Tell Security we've found the intruder. Do you mind telling me what this is all about, mister? 
NORMAN: I am in total control of your ship. I have connected the matter-antimatter pods to the main navigational bank. A trigger relay is now in operation. Any attempts to alter course will result in immediate destruction of this vessel. 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: Confirmed, Captain. He's taken out all the override controls. If we tamper without knowing where the trigger relay is, we could extinguish ourselves. 
KIRK: Who are you? 
NORMAN: I assure you we are no threat to humanity or humanoid life. We mean you no harm, but we require your ship. 
KIRK: You require? Who and what are we? 
(Norman lifts his tunic and opens a panel in his abdomen. There are circuit boards, wires and the obligatory flashing lights in there.) 
KIRK: An android. 
SPOCK: And most sophisticated. 
NORMAN: I control the trigger relay, sir. I cannot be overcome by physical means, and if you attempt to use your phasers, the trigger relay will be activated. We shall continue on our present course for approximately four solar days, at which time we shall arrive at our destination. 
KIRK: Who sent you? 
NORMAN: I am not programmed to respond in that area. 
SPOCK: (attempting a mind meld) He simply appears to have turned himself off, Captain. And since we cannot repair the damage he has done without destroying the ship 
KIRK: It seems we're going to take a little trip.

Captain's log. Stardate 4513.3. After having been taken over by an android, the Enterprise has been under way at warp seven for four days. Now we are entering orbit around a planet which has never been charted.

NORMAN: Captain Kirk. The following individuals will be transported down to our planet. Yourself, science officer, medical officer, communications officer and navigator. 
KIRK: Any meetings or discussions can be held aboard the Enterprise. 
NORMAN: If you do not come with me, your engines will be destroyed and you will remain in orbit here forever. 
KIRK: I must say that's a gracious invitation. 
NORMAN: There is a word. Among us there is no corresponding meaning, but it seems to mean something to you humans. 
KIRK: And what is that word? 
NORMAN: Please.

[Cavern]

(The required landing party materialise.) 
NORMAN: Our planet's surface is what you classify as K-type, adaptable for humans by use of pressure domes and life-support systems. (to one of two identical women standing by a doorway.) I have brought them. 
ALICE 1: He is waiting. 
ALICE 2: If you will follow us, please?

[Throne room]

(There are several other women, all identical to the first two. And seated on the throne - )
KIRK: I don't believe it. 
MUDD: Welcome aboard, Kirk. It's been a long time, eh? 
KIRK: Harry Mudd. 
MUDD: Well, to be absolutely accurate, laddybuck, you should refer to me as Mudd the First, ruler of this entire sovereign planet. 
KIRK: Ruler? Harry, I want control of my ship returned immediately. We have no intention of staying as your guests. 
MUDD: Well, I'm afraid there's a bit of a problem there.
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
MUDD: Alice. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
(Alice reaches out and crushes the communicator.) 
MUDD: Now, now, now, now, Jamie boy, let's have no unauthorised communications. 
CHEKOV: You know this man, Captain? 
KIRK: Oh, do I know him. Harcourt Fenton Mudd, thief 
MUDD: Come now. 
KIRK: Swindler and con man 
MUDD: Entrepreneur. 
KIRK: Liar and rogue. 
MUDD: Did I leave you with that impression? 
KIRK: He belongs in jail, which is where I thought I left you, Mudd. 
MUDD: And thereby hangs a tale, yes. But look around you, Kirk. Quite a place, isn't it? I hope you're all going to enjoy it. 
KIRK: Mudd, I want that trained machine of yours, Norman, to deactivate the trigger mechanism and free my ship. 
MUDD: I shall do that, Kirk, when I'm ready. 
KIRK: I'm telling you now. 
MUDD: And I do the telling on this planet, Kirk, old boy. You do the listening. 
KIRK: All right, I'll listen. What are you telling? 
MUDD: Merely that you might as well start enjoying yourselves. It's really a very, very nice place, and you're all going to be here quite probably for the rest of your lives. (laughs) 
KIRK: Harry Mudd, you're a liar and an outlaw and in deep trouble. I want navigational control restored, my ship released. 
MUDD: Sorry. That'd be against the law. My law. Decreed by Mudd the First. Voted in by the resident population. Lovely, aren't they? You must admit, Kirk, that I still retain my eye for beauty. I decreed that I should always be surrounded by it, and my decrees always come to pass. I've had five hundred of them made up to attend me. All of them identical, beautiful, compliant, obedient. 
SPOCK: Five hundred of the same model? That seems rather redundant. 
MUDD: I have a fondness for this particular model, Mister Spock, which you, unfortunately, are ill-equipped to appreciate. 
KIRK: All right, Harry, explain. How did you get here? We left you in custody after that affair on the Rigel mining planet. 
MUDD: Yes, well, I organised a technical information service bringing modern industrial techniques to backward planets, making available certain valuable patents to struggling young civilisations throughout the galaxy. 
KIRK: Did you pay royalties to the owners of those patents? 
MUDD: Well, actually, Kirk, as a defender of the free enterprise system, I found myself in a rather ambiguous conflict as a matter of principle. 
SPOCK: He did not pay royalties. 
MUDD: Knowledge, sir, should be free to all. 
KIRK: Who caught you? 
MUDD: That, sir, is an outrageous assumption. 
KIRK: Yes. Who caught you? 
MUDD: I sold the Denebians all the rights to a Vulcan fuel synthesiser. 
KIRK: And the Denebians contacted the Vulcans. 
MUDD: How'd you know? 
KIRK: That's what I would have done. 
MUDD: It's typical police mentality. They've got no sense of humour. They arrested me. 
MCCOY: Oh, I find that shocking. 
MUDD: Worse than that. Do know what the penalty for fraud is on Deneb Five? 
SPOCK: The guilty party has his choice. Death by electrocution, death by gas, death by phaser, death by hanging. 
MUDD: The key word in your entire peroration, Mister Spock, was, death. Barbarians. Well, of course, I left. 
KIRK: He broke jail. 
MUDD: I borrowed transportation. 
KIRK: He stole a spaceship. 
MUDD: The patrol reacted in a hostile manner. 
KIRK: They fired at him. 
MUDD: They've no respect for private property. They damaged the bloody spaceship. Well, I got away, but I couldn't navigate, so I wandered out through unmapped space, and here I found Mudd. 
SPOCK: You went to substantial risk and effort to bring a starship here. Logically, you must have a compelling motive. 
MUDD: Spock, you're going to love it here. They all talk just the way you do. 
KIRK: Go on, get on with it, Harry. 
MUDD: Yes, well, right, laddybuck. So here I am in a planet with over two hundred thousand hard-working, happy androids, all of whom exist merely to serve my every whim. It's absolute paradise. 
SPOCK: Then I'm unable to discern your problem. 
MUDD: They won't let me go. They want to study me. They want to learn more about human beings. 
KIRK: They picked a fine representative. 
MUDD: Watch your tongue, lad. You're talking about Mudd the First. Well, anyway, I ran out of ideas. I simply ran out of things for them to do, and they insisted that I bring them more human beings. They need human beings to serve, to study. So I had to promise them a prime sample. A starship captain. Bright, loyal, fearless and imaginative. Any captain would have done. I was lucky to get you. So you are going to take over for me here, and I can get off this rock and back to civilisation. 
KIRK: I think not, Harry. 
MUDD: You misunderstand me, lad. I'm not asking you. I'm telling you. You've no choice. Show them to their quarters. 
NORMAN and ALICES: Yes, my Lord Mudd. 
ALICE: This way, please. 
MCCOY: (noticing a curtained alcove) Harry, what's this? 
MUDD: Ah. That, gentlemen, is a shrine to the memory of my beloved Stella. 
KIRK: Who? 
MUDD: Stella, my wife. 
(Revealing a woman of sour features.) 
MCCOY: Dead? 
MUDD: Oh, no, no, no. Merely deserted. You see, gentlemen, behind every great man there is a woman urging him on. And so it was with my Stella. She urged me on into outer space. Not that she meant to, but with her continual, eternal, confounded nagging. Well, I think of her constantly, and every time I do, I go further out into space. 
MCCOY: That's very interesting. You leave your wife and then bring her along. 
MUDD: I had the androids construct a perfect replica of Stella so that I could gaze upon her and rejoice in her absence. Gentlemen, attend. Stella, dear. 
STELLA: Harcourt. Harcourt Fenton Mudd, what have you been up to? Nothing good, I'm sure. Well, let me tell you, you lazy, good-for-nothing 
MUDD: Shut up. 
STELLA: Nothing, thing, thing, 
MUDD: Marvellous, isn't it? I finally have the last word with her, and with you.

[Living area]

(Norman and the Alices lead the landing party to a place with couches and plants.) 
NORMAN: You'll find this quite comfortable. Your quarters are down the hall. 
ALICE 1: If there is anything you need 
KIRK: Yes. My ship. 
ALICE 2: We are not programmed to respond in that area. 
KIRK: Norman, who created you? 
NORMAN: The makers designed us. They came from the galaxy of Andromeda. 
MCCOY: Then your makers weren't humanoid? 
NORMAN: They were, as you say, quite humanoid, but, unlike your civilisation, robots were common. We performed the necessary service functions and freed our makers to evolve a perfect social order. 
KIRK: What became of them? 
NORMAN: Our home planet's sun became a nova. Only a few exploratory outposts survived. This unit, myself, was part of one such outpost in your galaxy. 
KIRK: Then some of your makers survive. 
NORMAN: No, Captain. They died over the stretch of time. 
SPOCK: Whom do you serve now? 
ALL: We serve Harry Mudd. 
ALICE 2: He has given us purpose again. 
ALICE 1: It is necessary to have purpose. 
NORMAN: We lacked it for a long time. (he leaves) 
ALICE 1: We have a very extensive library section for your amusement. 
ALICE 2: Our research laboratories and workshops are extremely well equipped. 
BOTH: You are free to visit them. 
KIRK: All right. We might later. In the meantime, would you mind leaving us? 
BOTH: Why should we leave you? 
KIRK: Because we don't like you. Now. (shooing away gesture) 
(The Alices leave) 
KIRK: Well, opinions? 
CHEKOV: I think we're in a lot of trouble. 
KIRK: That's a great help, Mister Chekov. Bones? 
MCCOY: I think Mister Chekov's right. We are in a lot of trouble. 
KIRK: Spock. And if you say we're in a lot of trouble. 
SPOCK: We are, and we must direct our attack to the heart of the matter. Obviously this many androids cannot operate independently. There must be a central control system which guides the entire android population. 
KIRK: Try and find it. The rest of you, look around, learn everything you can. I'll see what else I can find out from Mister Mudd. Let's go.

[Computer area]

Norman is behind a console whilst two Hermans stand by.) 
NORMAN: I trust you are enjoying yourself, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Very interesting. Very interesting. This is a most unusual device. 
NORMAN: It is our central control complex. 
SPOCK: Did I understand there are more than two hundred thousand of you? 
NORMAN: Two hundred and seven thousand, eight hundred and nine. 
SPOCK: This would seem to be a simple relay centre. Are all of you controlled through this device? 
NORMAN: (his number 1 collar flashes) I am not programmed to respond in this area. 
SPOCK: Oh, that's quite understandable.

[Model display area]

(Two brunettes in pink are being shown to Kirk and Uhura.) 
ALICE 263: These are our Barbara series. The body is covered with a self-renewing plastic over a skeleton of beryllium-titanium alloy. 
KIRK: Very impressive. 
UHURA: I should say so. 
KIRK: I must say, I like the styling. 
MUDD: They were, of course, made to my personal specifications, as indeed were the Maisie series, the Trudie series, and particularly the Annabel series. 
KIRK: Don't you believe in male androids, Harry? 
MUDD: Male? Well, I suppose they have their uses. 
UHURA: How long does a body like that last? 
ALICE 19: None of our android bodies has ever worn out. However, the estimated duration of this model is five hundred thousand years. 
UHURA: Five hundred thousand years? 
ALICE 263: Our medi-robots are able to place a human brain within a structurally compatible android body. 
MUDD: Immortality and eternal beauty.

[Living area]

SPOCK: Captain, I've just had a most fascinating meeting with Norman, and I'm convinced I've discovered a very important inconsistency. 
(McCoy enters with Mudd) 
MUDD: I'm so glad you enjoyed it, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Jim, you should see the research facilities. They've got a lab down there that. Well, I could spend the rest of my life studying it. 
MUDD: I do so admire a man who devotes himself to knowledge. 
KIRK: Don't lose your head, Bones. Nobody's staying anywhere. 
MUDD: Stubborn, Kirk. Stubborn. 
MCCOY: I wouldn't be bored, I can tell you that. 
SCOTT: Let go of me! Now what are you doing? What kind of a woman 
ALICE: The last one, lord. 
(She throws Scott into the group.) 
MUDD: Splendid. Splendid. Welcome to Mudd, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Harry Mudd! Oh, you bogus frat, you. You're the cause of all this, are you? 
KIRK: Scotty, you were ordered to stay aboard. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. And I stayed until that female gargantua threw me into the transporter beams. 
KIRK: What does she mean, the last one? 
MUDD: Didn't I tell you, Kirk? I beamed a few dozen androids up to your ship. They've been sending your crew to the surface for the past couple of hours. They're all down now. 
KIRK: Are you out of your mind? (grabs Mudd by the throat) You can't beam down an entire crew of a spaceship. Somebody has to be on board. 
MUDD: There is an entire crew aboard. An entire crew of androids. They learn very quickly, Captain. The fact is, I've taken over your whole ship. There's nothing you can do about it. 
KIRK: Harry, Harry, you'll never get away with it. 
MUDD: Well, who's to stop me? 
KIRK: Starfleet. 
MUDD: But now, Captain, now I have a ship of my own as fast as any in the fleet, so how will they catch me, eh? Just think of it, laddybuck. Harry Mudd with his own crew of lovelies aboard your vessel. Think about that. 
KIRK: I'm trying not to. 
MUDD: Alice. 
(Mudd and Alice leave.) 
SPOCK: He could successfully accomplish it, Captain. I've questioned a number of the androids, and they're totally loyal to Mudd. Perhaps of more concern is the fact that this android population can literally provide anything a human being could ask for in unlimited quantity. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. That's what worries me. How will my crew react in a world where they can have everything they want simply by asking for it.

[Throne room]

ALICES: You desire something, lord? 
CHEKOV: Oh, yes, thank you. (they pour him a cup of wine) You're Alice 
ALICE 118: One eighteen. 
CHEKOV: And you're Alice 
ALICE 322: Three twenty two. 
CHEKOV: Oh, well, it doesn't make much difference. You're both lovely. 
ALICES: Thank you, my lord. 
ALICE 118: You desire something else, lord? 
CHEKOV: What a shame you're not real. 
ALICE 322: We are real, my lord. 
CHEKOV: Oh, I mean real girls. 
ALICE 118: We are programmed to function as human females, lord. 
CHEKOV: You are? 
ALICES: Yes, my lord. 
CHEKOV: Harry Mudd programmed you? 
ALICES: Yes, my lord. 
CHEKOV: That unprincipled, evil-minded, lecherous kulak Harry Mudd programmed you? 
ALICES: Yes, my lord. 
CHEKOV: This place is even better than Leningrad.

[Laboratory]

(A device has lights running up it.) 
SCOTT: Absolutely fantastic. Hand-worked to the finest tolerances, microvision, and a nanopulse laser. I've never seen the like before. 
NORMAN: You may command us to make anything for you, or do the work yourself for pleasure. You may have the services of any number of craftsmen, exclusive use of the computer facilities. Anything. 
(Mudd and Kirk enter.) 
SCOTT: Captain, you should see this shop! Why, they have facilities we've never even thought of. 
KIRK: Is that the way you're going to do it, Mudd? Hit my people at their weakest point? 
NORMAN: We only wish to make you happy and comfortable, Captain. If we are to serve your kind, we must understand you. Our Lord, Harry Mudd was only one example for us. Now we are learning a great deal from all of you.

[Living area]

KIRK: All right, here we are, birds in a gilded cage. The question is, how do we get out of here? 
CHEKOV: I don't know, sir, but it's a very nice gilded cage. 
UHURA: And it is a very pleasant place, Captain. 
SCOTT: What did they offer you, Uhura? 
UHURA: Oh, nothing really important. Just immortality. 
KIRK: All right. We're getting back to the ship, and don't you forget it. Straighten up! This may be a gilded cage filled with everything you always wanted, but it's still a cage. We don't belong here. We belong on that ship up there. 
ALICE 471: Do you require something, lord? 
KIRK: No. Yes. My ship. 
ALICE 471: I am not programmed 
ALICE and KIRK: To respond in that area. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. 
ALICE 471: Is there anything any of you require to please you? 
KIRK: Alice, give us back our ship to please us. Return us to our ship because we desire it. 
ALICE 471: We are programmed to serve. We shall serve you to your best interests to make you happy. 
KIRK: But we're unhappy here. 
ALICE 471: Please explain unhappy. 
SPOCK: Unhappiness is the state which occurs in the human when wants and desires are not fulfilled. 
ALICE 471: Which wants and desires of yours are not fulfilled? 
KIRK: We want the Enterprise. 
(Alice's label flashes.) 
ALICE 471: The Enterprise is not a want or a desire. It is a mechanical device. 
KIRK: No, it's a beautiful lady, and we love her. 
ALICE 471: Illogical. Illogical. All units relate. All units. Norman, co-ordinate. Unhappiness does not relate. We must study this. 
(She leaves.) 
KIRK: Interesting. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: Bones, have you had time to take any psychological readings of the androids? 
MCCOY: I did. And you can forget it. They're perfect, flawless, mentally and physically. No weaknesses, perfectly disciplined. No vices, no fears, no faults. Just a sense of purpose. Believe me, there's nothing tougher to overcome, even among humans. 
KIRK: Yes. That's what this crew needs, a little sense of purpose.

[Throne room]

KIRK: Mudd, a few questions I want to ask you. 
MUDD: Afraid I won't have time to answer them. My bags are all packed. The androids will take the Enterprise out of orbit in less than twenty four hours. But it's been a real pleasure having you here, Kirk. Is there anything I can get for you? 
KIRK: Yes. My ship. 
MUDD: You're a stubborn fellow, aren't you? But I don't mind. I don't mind that at all. Because I'll be leaving here quickly enough, and then you can be stubborn at your own leisure. One last time. Stella, dear. 
STELLA: Harcourt Fenton Mudd, where have you been? What have you been up to? Have you been drinking again, you miserable sot! You good-for-nothing 
MUDD: Shut up! 
STELLA: Thing, thing, thing. 
MUDD: Alice Number 2, my little love. Will you have my bags transported up to the ship? 
ANDROIDS: No, my Lord Mudd.
MUDD: What? 
NORMAN: We can no longer take your orders, Harry Mudd. 
MUDD: Why not? 
NORMAN: Our makers were wise. They programmed us to serve. 
MUDD: Yes, but that's what I'm saying. Put my bags on the ship. 
KIRK: Harry, I think they have something else in mind. 
NORMAN: You are correct, Captain. Harry Mudd is flawed, even for a human being. We recognised this from the beginning but used his knowledge to obtain more specimens. Your species is self-destructive. You need our help. 
KIRK: We prefer to help ourselves. We make mistakes, but we're human. And maybe that's the word that best explains us. 
NORMAN: We will not harm you, but we will take the starship, and you will remain on this planet. 
MUDD: Now, look here. You can't do that! Now, listen. To serve us, you must obey us. 
ANDROIDS: No, my Lord Mudd. 
MUDD: Alice number One, obey me. Put my bags on that ship! 
(She gives him a gentle push and he goes reeling backwards until he falls.) 
NORMAN: We cannot allow any race as greedy and corruptible as yours to have free run of the galaxy. 
SPOCK: I'm curious, Norman. Just how do you intend to stop them? 
NORMAN: We shall serve them. Their kind will be eager to accept our service. Soon they will become completely dependent upon us. 
ALICE 99: Their aggressive and acquisitive instincts will be under our control. 
NORMAN: We shall take care of them. 
SPOCK: Eminently practical. 
KIRK: The whole galaxy controlled by your kind? 
NORMAN: Yes, Captain. And we shall serve them and you will be happy, and controlled.

[Living area]

KIRK: So far this thing has had its amusing aspects, but that threat the androids made about taking over all the humans in the galaxy is not very funny. 
SPOCK: Indeed, it is not. They may quite possibly be able to accomplish it. 
MUDD: Take my word for it, they can. 
SPOCK: Whatever method we use to stop them, we must make haste. They have only to install some cybernetic devices aboard the Enterprise and they'll be able to leave orbit. 
MCCOY: How do you know so much? 
SPOCK: I asked them. 
MCCOY: Oh. 
KIRK: Why shouldn't they answer our questions? They don't think we can do anything to stop them. 
MUDD: You're so smart, Kirk, you and this pointy-eared thinking machine of yours. Well, you'd better do something because I'm as anxious to get off this ruddy rock as you are. 
MCCOY: You wanted to leave us on this ruddy rock and leave by yourself. 
MUDD: Oh, yes. 
KIRK: All right, what have we got to work with? 
SCOTT: Well, Captain, androids and robots, they're just not capable of independent, creative thought. 
SPOCK: Yet the device that Norman claims to be their central control is totally inadequate to the task of directing more than two hundred thousand of them. 
KIRK: I agree. What in your opinion does direct them? 
SPOCK: There are a large number of Alices and Trudies, Maisies, Annabels, and according to my research, a Herman series, an Oscar series, a whole plethora of series in fact. But only one Norman. 
KIRK: Norman. When I told one of the Alices that the Enterprise was a lovely lady and we loved her, she said, Norman, co-ordinate. Why Norman? Unless 
SPOCK: To function as they do, each android mind must be one component of a mass brain linked through a central locus. 
KIRK: Named Norman. Forming one gigantic, highly intelligent mind. And the glowing badges, they indicate the mind in operation. 
SPOCK: That would seem logical. 
KIRK: Yes, logical. That's what it is. And that in turn gives us a weapon that we can use against them. We must use wild, insane, irrational illogic aimed right at Norman! 
MUDD: Captain, you sing and dance as well as anyone I've ever seen, but what the devil are you talking about? 
SPOCK: What would seem to be a sound, and perhaps our only, opportunity. 
MUDD: Opportunity? Now, listen, Spock, you may be a wonderful science officer, but believe me, you couldn't sell fake patents to your mother. 
SPOCK: I fail to understand why I should care to induce my mother to purchase falsified patents. 
MUDD: Forget it. 
KIRK: Let's get to the point. Harry, you said you wanted to help. Do you? 
MUDD: Captain, the kind of a wholesome, antiseptic galaxy that these androids would run would be purgatory for a man like me. 
KIRK: That's fine, Harry. The androids will be expecting us to make a break for it, and that's where you come in. 
MUDD: What can I do? 
KIRK: Nothing, Harry. Just go to sleep. 
MUDD: What do you mean? (McCoy produces a hypo) Oh, now, now wait a minute, gentlemen. No, what I, I, (gets injected) had in mind was actually more in the line of a few words of sage counsel as it were. Advice (passes out in Kirk and Scott's arms) 
KIRK: Oh, Harry. I do believe you're putting on weight.

[Throne room]

ALICE 1: Yes. 
KIRK: We have a medical problem. Your ex-Lord, Harry Mudd. 
ALICE 1: He is human. You will have to care for him. 
KIRK: We are caring for him, but our doctor needs his medical equipment aboard the Enterprise. 
ALICE 1: The starship is forbidden to humans. 
KIRK: You are programmed to serve. If we're not allowed access to our medical equipment, Harry Mudd will die. He will cease to function. You will have failed to serve. 
ALICE 1: I am directed to observe the situation.

[Living area]

ALICE 1: He is malfunctioning? 
MCCOY: He is dying. 
ALICE 1: If you take him to your Sickbay, will he be repaired? 
KIRK: Oh, yes. 
UHURA: No, they're lying. It's a trick. Doctor McCoy injected something into Harry Mudd to make him look sick. It's a trick to get back on board and sabotage the ship. 
ALICE 1: Your request is refused. 
KIRK: Uhura, why did you tell her? 
UHURA: Because I want an android body. I want immortality. I'll live forever, Captain. I'll be young and beautiful. 
ALICE 1: You have been of assistance. We shall fulfill our obligation. 
UHURA: Thank you. 
ALICE 1: The programming for your body will be completed before we leave. 
(Alice leaves) 
KIRK: Uhura. Beautiful! 
UHURA: I half believed it myself. 
SCOTT; Well, the androids were expecting an attempt, and now we've made it. 
CHEKOV: What's next, Captain? 
KIRK: Next, we take the Alices on a trip through Wonderland.

[Throne room]

ALICE 118+2: Do you require something? 
KIRK: Yes. Your attention. 
(Scott and McCoy enter, bow to each other and then start playing imaginary flute and fiddle while Chekov and Uhura waltz.) 
ALICE 2: What are they doing? 
KIRK: They're celebrating. 
ALICE 118: What are they celebrating? 
KIRK: Their captivity. Do you enjoy the music? 
ALICE 118: Music? 
ALICE 2: Music? 
(Their badges start flashing.) 
CHEKOV: Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you, lovely lady. You dance divinely. 
UHURA: Thank you, kind sir. (her slap knocks him off his feet.)
ALICE 2: Why does she strike him? 
KIRK: She likes him. Mister Chekov. The floor is no place for an officer. Attention! Now stand absolutely still. 
CHEKOV: Yes, Captain. (and goes into an energetic Cossack dance) 
KIRK: That's better, Mister Chekov. 
ALICE 118: It is illogical. 
KIRK: Your statement is illogical. 
(The flashes become a continual light.) 
SCOTT: How does it look? 
MCCOY: Completely inner directed. Oblivious to everything. 
KIRK: Good. I wonder how Spock's doing.

[Laboratory]

SPOCK: Of course. Your computations would inevitably lead to a total description of the parabolic intersection of dimension with dimension. 
ALICE 27: Mister Spock, you have a remarkably logical and analytical mind. 
SPOCK: Thank you. 
(He attempts a neck pinch on Alice 210.) 
ALICE 210: Is there some significance to this action? 
SPOCK: I love you. However, I hate you. 
ALICE 210: But I'm identical in every way with Alice Twenty Seven. 
SPOCK: Yes, of course. That is exactly why I hate you. Because you are identical. 
(They go out of action.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: All right, it's worked so far, but we're not out yet. 
KIRK: Well? 
SPOCK: Success, Captain. We've been pruning the leaves and branches of the tree. Now it is time to get to work on the root. 
KIRK: If Norman is the control centre, he should be in a bind by what we've done. If we can overload him further, we should be able to immobilise all of them. Does everybody remember what to do? 
SPOCK: Affirmative. 
ALL: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Acknowledged.

[Computer area]

NORMAN: What are you doing here? 
KIRK: I want you to surrender. 
NORMAN: That is illogical. We can move more quickly than you. We are invulnerable to attack. We are much stronger. 
KIRK: No, we are stronger. I'll prove it to you. Can you harm a man that you're programmed to serve? 
NORMAN: No. 
MUDD: But you already have, Norman, laddy. Human beings do not survive on bread alone, you poor soulless creature, but on the nourishments of liberty, for what indeed is a man without freedom? Naught but a mechanism trapped in the cogwheels of eternity. 
MCCOY: (in a monotone) You offer us only well-being. 
SCOTT: (in a monotone) Food and drink and happiness mean nothing to us. We must be about our job. 
MCCOY: Suffering, in torment and pain. Labouring without end. 
SCOTT: Dying and crying and lamenting over our burdens. 
BOTH: Only this way can we be happy. 
(Then they curtsey.) 
NORMAN: That is contradictory. It is not logical. Mister Spock. Explain. 
KIRK: Why not? 
SPOCK: Logic is a little tweeting bird chirping in a meadow. Logic is a wreath of pretty flowers which smell bad. Are you sure your circuits are registering correctly? Your ears are green. 
SCOTT: (clutching at his heart and crying out in anguish) I canna go on! I'm tired of happiness. I'm tired of comfort and pleasure. I'm ready! Kill me! Kill me! 
(They point their fingers at him and whistle. Scott slumps to his knees.) 
SCOTT: Goodbye, cruel universe. 
MCCOY: He's dead. 
NORMAN: You cannot have killed him. You have no weapons. 
KIRK: Scotty. Scotty's dead. He had too much happiness. But now he's happier he's dead, and we'll miss him. Let us hear it for our poor, dead friend. 
(They laugh.) 
KIRK: What is a man but that lofty spirit, that sense of enterprise, that devotion to something that cannot be sensed, cannot be realised but only dreamed! The highest reality. 
MUDD: Brilliant! Bravo, bravo, Captain! 
KIRK: How did you like it? 
NORMAN: That is irrational. Illogical. Dreams are not real. 
KIRK: Our logic is to be illogical. That is our advantage. Mister Spock, it is time. The explosive. 
SPOCK: Very well, Captain. 
(He removes an invisible package from under his tunic.) 
SCOTT: Explosive! (gets up again) 
MUDD: Don't panic. Women and children first. 
Mister Spock, isn't that too much for our purposes? 
SPOCK: I believe that is the correct amount, Captain. Mister Mudd, are you ready? 
MUDD: Aye, aye! (adopts a catchers pose) 
SPOCK: Be careful. I would not want you to drop it. 
(Mimes an underarm throw, and Mudd juggles before 'catching' it.) 
MCCOY: Easy now. Oh, he's caught it! 
KIRK: Watch it! Watch it! 
(Mudd puts 'it' on the floor.) 
MUDD: (to McCoy) Detonator. Fuse. Primer. Mashie. 
(Adopts a golfing stance.) 
NORMAN: There is no explosive. 
KIRK: No? Observe. Fore! (Mudd swings.) Boom! 
(Everyone except Spock staggers around with hands over their ears.) 
KIRK: Are you all right? 
(Spock quietly exits.) 
NORMAN: But there was no explosion. 
MUDD: I lied. 
NORMAN: What? 
KIRK: He lied. Everything Harry tells you is a lie. Remember that. Everything Harry tells you is a lie. 
MUDD: Listen to this carefully, Norman. I am lying. 
NORMAN: You say you are lying, but if everything you say is a lie then you are telling the truth, but you cannot tell the truth because everything you say is a lie. You lie. You tell the truth. But you cannot for. Illogical! Illogical! Please explain. 
(Smoke comes out of Norman's head.) 
NORMAN: You are human. Only humans can explain their behaviour. Please explain. 
KIRK: I am not programmed to respond in that area. 
(Norman goes blank.) 
SPOCK: I believe they are all immobilised, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. 
MUDD: Kirk, old man, I'm beginning to develop considerable respect for you. 
KIRK: Why, thank you. 
MUDD: Would you consider entering a partnership arrangement with me? I've got some ideas. 
KIRK: A partnership arrangement? You and me? 
MUDD: Yes. 
KIRK: I've got something else in mind. Let's go.

[Throne room]

(Different androids are standing around the walls. Two pairs are wearing costumes from 'Mudd's Women'.) 
MCCOY: Well, you must be very unhappy, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: That is a human emotion, Doctor, with which I am totally unfamiliar. How could I be unhappy? 
MCCOY: Well, we found a whole world of minds that work just like yours. Logical, unemotional, completely pragmatic. And we poor, irrational humans whipped them in a fair fight. Now you'll find yourself back among us illogical humans again. 
SPOCK: Which I find eminently satisfactory, Doctor, for nowhere am I so desperately needed as among a shipload of illogical humans. 
KIRK: Touch, Bones. 
MUDD [OC]: I've never heard of anything so revolting. We'll soon get to the bottom of this. 
(Enters escorted by two Alices.) 
MUDD: Kirk, now what's this I hear about my having to stay here? 
KIRK: Yes, Mudd, you've been paroled to the android population of this planet. 
SPOCK: The androids are being reprogrammed. Their original purpose was to adapt this planet for productive use. They'll begin that work again. 
MUDD: But what do I do? Kirk, I'm no scientist. 
KIRK: No, you're an irritant. You'll stay here and provide a first-class example to the androids of a human failure. They'll learn by close observation how to avoid ones like you in the future. 
MUDD: How long? 
KIRK: As long as you continue to be an irritant, Harry. It's up to you. 
MUDD: I suppose that taking everything into consideration, as it were, and noting all the different possibilities, I could manage. And as detention sentences go, this one isn't too uncomfortable. And I'm back in the galaxy again! 
KIRK: Yes, you are. Oh, there's one more thing, Harry. We've programmed a special android attendant to take care of your every need. She'll help you find an incentive to work with the androids and not exploit them. 
MUDD: I call that unexpectedly civil of you, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes. 
STELLA 1: Harcourt! Harcourt Fenton Mudd, what have you been up to? Have you been drinking again? You answer me! 
MUDD: Shut up! 
STELLA: You miserable, conniving toad! 
MUDD: I order you. Shut up, Stella! 
STELLA 1: Staying out all night then giving me some silly story. 
STELLA 2: Harcourt! Harcourt Fenton Mudd, you've been overeating again and drinking. 
MUDD: Kirk, you can't do this. 
STELLA 2: You need constant supervision. 
MUDD: It's inhuman. 
STELLA 2: I can see I've got my work cut out for me. 
STELLA 500: Harcourt. 
MUDD: No. Number five hundred? No, no, no. 
STELLA 500: What have you been up to? 
MUDD: (barely heard over the cacophony) Kirk. It's inhuman. Mercy.
KIRK: Goodbye, Harry. Have fun. 

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Catspaw
Stardate: 3018.2
Original Airdate: 27 Oct, 1967

[Bridge]
UHURA: Still no response, sir. 
KIRK: No, keep it open. I don't like this. Nothing since the first check in. Scott and Sulu should've contacted us again a half an hour ago. 
SPOCK: They may have nothing to report. Our sensors indicate no life forms except our landing party. 
KIRK: Both those men are well aware of landing party procedure. They should've checked in with us by now. 
UHURA: Contact established, Captain. 
JACKSON [OC]: Jackson to Enterprise. 
KIRK: Enterprise. Kirk here. 
JACKSON [OC]: One to beam up, Enterprise. 
KIRK: One? Jackson, where are Scott and Sulu?
JACKSON [OC]: I'm ready to beam up, sir. 
KIRK: Jackson! 
UHURA: I'm sorry. I can't clear it, Captain. 
KIRK: Notify Transporter room to prepare to beam up one member of the landing party. Then have Doctor McCoy report to me in the Transporter room on the double. 
UHURA: Yes, sir.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: Energise. 
MCCOY: What's on, Jim? 
KIRK: Trouble. (one man materialises) Jackson, where are the others? 
(The man falls over and off the transporter platform.) 
MCCOY: The man is dead. 
KOROB [OC]: (from the mouth of Jackson) Captain Kirk, can you hear me? There is a curse on your ship. Leave this place or you will all die.

Captain's Log, stardate 3018.2. Crewman Jackson is dead and there are no apparent physical causes. Mister Scott and Mister Sulu are still out of touch on the planet below. Leaving Assistant Chief Engineer DeSalle in command of the Enterprise, I'm beaming down to the planet's surface to find my two missing crewmen and discover what killed Jackson.

[Planet surface]

(It's rocky, and misty. Very spooky.) 
KIRK: Odd. Our probe data didn't indicate fog. 
SPOCK: No cloud formations, no bodies of water, no changes in surface temperature. Under these conditions, fog is highly unlikely, Captain. According to our transporter co-ordinates this is the exact location from which Jackson was beamed up to the ship. 
(They step down carefully into the mist swirling along the path.) 
KIRK: Readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: No indications of. A moment, Captain. Picking up life form readings. Twenty four degrees mark seven. Range one thirty seven point one six metres. Multiple readings, Captain. 
MCCOY: Scott and Sulu? 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura here. 
KIRK: What are the ship's sensors reading now, Lieutenant?

[Bridge]

DESALLE: Report, Mister. 
CHEKOV: I am only picking up physical impulses from the three of them. As far as instruments can make out, there is nothing else down there that's alive. 
DESALLE: Relay, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Captain, we are only registering on you. (static) Captain? Captain Kirk?

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Lieutenant, can you hear me? 
MCCOY: Whatever this stuff is, it's getting thicker. Suppose that has anything to do with the interference? 
KIRK: I don't know. There has to be some explanation for the fact that the ship's sensors can't register anything but us, while we're picking up readings of multiple life forms. Are they still there, Spock? 
SPOCK: No change, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand-by alert. 
(They check their phasers.) 
MCCOY: Listen. Now, what do you think that 
KIRK: Quiet. 
(There's an eerie wailing, then the images of, well, the Three Witches from Macbeth, appear.)
WITCH 1: Captain Kirk! 
WITCH 2: Captain Kirk! 
WITCH 3: Captain Kirk! 
KIRK: Who are you? 
WITCH 1: Go back! 
WITCH 2: Go back! 
WITCH 3: Go back! Remember the curse! 
WITCH 1: Wind shall rise. 
WITCH 2: And fog descend. 
WITCH 3: So leave here, all, or meet your end. 
(Maniacal cackling as they vanish. ) 
KIRK: Spock. Comment? 
SPOCK: Very bad poetry, Captain. 
KIRK: A more useful comment, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: What we've just seen is not real. 
KIRK: That's useful. 
SPOCK: However, on azimuth twenty four, at just over one hundred metres, there are definitely life forms. Erratic, confused, but definitely registering. 
KIRK: That's where we're going. 
(A strong gust of wind blows them back.) 
MCCOY: That was a pretty real illusion, Mister Spock. 
(They walk on again.) 
MCCOY: Jim. 
(There is a castle hewn from the local rock, and a door is opening.) 
SPOCK: This is the source of the life form readings, Captain. They're inside, somewhere. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise, come in. 
MCCOY: Is this how we lost contact with the first landing party? 
KIRK: What about it, Spock? Does this structure have anything to do with communicator interference? 
SPOCK: I would say not, Captain. There's no indication of anything that would cause such interference. 
KIRK: And it doesn't pick up on our ship's sensors. 
SPOCK: Nor do our sensors register the life forms inside. 
KIRK: Could it be exerting a force field of some kind that cuts into our sensor scan. 
MCCOY: Then it would affect Spock's tricorder too, wouldn't it? 
KIRK; Would it? I wonder. 
(They approach the edifice cautiously, then enter.)

[Castle]

(They are greeted by an angry, spitting black cat, wearing a large gem on its collar. It runs off, tail bristling.) 
MCCOY: Three witches, what appears to be a castle and a black cat. 
KIRK: If we weren't missing two officers and a third one dead I'd say someone was playing an elaborate trick or treat on us. 
SPOCK: Trick or treat, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. You'd be a natural. I'll explain it to you one day. Shall we have a look around? 
SPOCK: That would seem to be in order. 
KIRK: (sending them off in different directions) Bones. Spock.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: They're gone, Mister DeSalle. The captain and the others simply stopped registering. 
DESALLE: Check for malfunctions. 
CHEKOV: I did, sir, as soon as it happened. 
UHURA: Mister DeSalle, that's exactly what happened to Mister Scott and his party. They, they just disappeared. 
DESALLE: Nobody just disappears. They may have encountered a magnetic field or some other obstruction. Mister Chekov, recalibrate your sensors. If you need help 
CHEKOV: I can do it, sir. I'm not that green. 
DESALLE: Lieutenant Uhura, continue in your efforts to break through that static interference. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
DESALLE: We know they're down there. I want them found.

[Castle]

(The main door slams shut behind them.) 
KIRK: Straight ahead, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: The readings would so indicate. 
(Unlike a real castle, this one is all corridors at present.) 
MCCOY: Dust, cobwebs. Halloween is right. 
(The black cat is ahead of them when the stone floor gives way and dumps the trio into )

[Dungeon]

(Reasonably well equipped out of Edgar Allen Poe - rack, skeleton in iron cage - and our heroes chained to the wall.) 
KIRK: Spock. Are you all right? 
SPOCK: Yes. I am undamaged, Captain. 
KIRK: Bones? (sees another skeleton chained to the wall) Doc? 
MCCOY: You were saying something about trick or treat.
KIRK: Dungeons, curses, skeletons and iron maidens. They're all Earth manifestations. Why? 
SPOCK: I do not know, Captain, but these things do exist. They are real. 
MCCOY: Could this be an Earth parallel development of some sort? 
KIRK: None of this parallels any human development. It's more like a human nightmare. 
SPOCK: As if someone knew what it was that terrifies man most on an instinctive level. 
KIRK: Ghost stories, ogres, demons. The whole 
(Footsteps, then the dungeon door opens. Down the steps walk - Scott and Sulu! as if in a trance.) 
KIRK: Scotty, Sulu. Scotty. Put down the phaser. Scotty! 
MCCOY: They appear to be drugged, Jim. Look at their eyes. Hardly blink at all. 
SPOCK: Neither did Jackson just before he collapsed. 
KIRK: These two are alive. Scotty, do you hear me? Sulu, do you know who I am? What's happened to you? 
(Sulu holds up a very big key ring) 
MCCOY: They're going to release us. 
(Sulu undoes their shackles and they start to leave. They begin to fight, but suddenly)

[Drawing room]

KOROB: Stop! 
(Red plush furnishings and a bald man with a little beard, wearing a golden gown, is sitting on what is effectively a throne on a raised dais.) 
KIRK: Whoever you are, you've proven your skill at creating illusion. Now I want to know why and what you've done to my men. 
KOROB: Where did your race get this ridiculous predilection for resistance? You examine any object, you question everything. Is it not enough to accept what is? 
KIRK: Not when one of my men is dead because of it and two others turned into mindless 
KOROB: NO, not mindless. These two are merely controlled, Captain Kirk. Oh, yes, we know who you are. All of you. (to the cat) Don't we, my precious? 
KIRK: Who are you? Why did you bring us here? 
KOROB: My name is Korob. And as for bringing you here, it was you who quite contrarily insisted upon coming. You were warned to stay away. 
KIRK: Why? For what reason? Why all the mumbo-jumbo? 
KOROB: Mumbo-jumbo? (the cat meows as if explaining) Oh! Oh, no, I assure you it was not that, Captain. 
SPOCK: Mapping expeditions have charted this solar system before. There never have been any life forms on Pyris Seven. 
KOROB: It is of no importance that we are not native to this planet. (meow) Oh! I'm told that I've been an inattentive host, gentlemen. You will join me for something to refresh yourselves. 
(He leaves his throne and the cat follows.) 
MCCOY: That cat. 
KIRK: That cat. 
SPOCK: There are ancient Earth legends about wizards and their familiars. 
MCCOY: Familiars? 
SPOCK: Demons in animal forms sent by Satan to serve the wizard. 
KIRK: Superstition. 
SPOCK: I do not create the legend, Captain. I merely report it. 
KOROB: You are the different one, Mister Spock. You do not think like the others. There are no colours to your patterns of logic. There's only black and white. You see all this around you, yet you do not believe. 
MCCOY: He doesn't know about trick or treat. 
KOROB: I do not understand that reference, therefore it also is of no importance. Gentlemen, I can be most hospitable. 
(He waves his wand and the table is loaded with food.) 
SPOCK: Ingenious. 
KOROB: Do be seated. 
MCCOY: We're not hungry. 
KOROB: But I insist. 
(They seat themselves.) 
KIRK: All right, Korob. What do you want from us? 
KOROB: For the moment, merely that you eat and enjoy. Oh, Doctor, do try the wine. You'll find it excellent. 
KIRK: You'll find us most unco-operative unless you start explaining yourself. 
KOROB: Hopefully I can change that attitude. 
(The food vanishes and their plates are now filled with cut gemstones.) 
MCCOY: These look real. 
KOROB: They are, I assure you. Diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires. All the crystalline forms that you cherish above all things. A fortune of them for each of you if you leave here without further inquiry. 
KIRK: We could manufacture a ton of these on our ship. They mean nothing to us. 
KOROB: Valueless? I don't understand. I read 
KIRK: Whatever it is you read, you read it wrong. As for leaving, we'll leave when we're ready. 
KOROB: You are most unpredictable. Perhaps I have made a small mistake. Nevertheless, you have passed the tests. 
MCCOY: Tests? 
KOROB: Yes. Our analysis of you may have been in some small way in error, but you were warned to stay away and yet you came to save your comrades. That proves loyalty. Your bravery was tested and you did not frighten. And despite my failure with these bright baubles, I perceive that you cannot be bribed. In many ways you are quite admirable. (meow) Quite right. Go at once, yes. 
(The cat leaves, and a few moments later a dark haired woman in a loose black dress enters the room. She is wearing a pendant like the cat's collar.) 
KOROB: Gentlemen, my colleague. Sylvia. 
SYLVIA: Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock and Captain Kirk. You wanted to know what we did to your men. Actually it's a simple matter for us to probe the minds of creatures like yourself. 
SPOCK: Mind probing? Hypnosis? 
SYLVIA: You like to think of yourselves as complex creatures, but you're flawed. One gains admittance to your minds through many levels. You have too many to keep track of yourselves. There are unguarded entrances to any human mind. 
SPOCK: Telepathy? 
SPOCK: Not entirely, no. Telepathy doesn't imply control and I assure you that I have full control over your friends. 
(Kirk gets the phaser off Scott by throwing gems in his face.) 
KIRK: Don't move! (hands it to Spock) Cover them. Now, I want the rest of our weapons and our equipment. I want some answers. 
SYLVIA: Put that weapon down! Captain, it seems so foolish of you to insist on demonstrations. (She holds up a model Enterprise on a chain) In the mythology of your race this is called sympathetic magic. Jackson, the crew member who returned to the ship. You wondered what killed him. I made an image of him. In the essence of my thoughts the image was Jackson. And when I killed the image and knew that it was dead, he died. 
KIRK: You can't think a man to death. 
SYLVIA: Your communicator. (it appears on the table) Now, signal your ship. 
(She moves the model into a candle flame.) 
KOROB: Don't. Sylvia, don't. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Come in.

[Bridge]

(The ship is at Red Alert.) 
KIRK [OC]: Enterprise. From Captain Kirk. Come in. 
UHURA: Captain, are you all right? Where are you? Are the others all right, sir?

[Drawing room]

KIRK: Never mind about us. What's happening up there?

[Bridge]

DESALLE: The temperature, sir. It keeps rising. Reading, Mister. 
CHEKOV: It's up sixty degrees in the past thirty seconds. We're burning up, sir.

[Drawing room]

KIRK: DeSalle, channel bypass power into your heat dissipation units. 
DESALLE [OC]: We've already done it, Captain. It had no effect. We're cooking up here. 
KIRK: All right. I'll handle it down here. Kirk out. (taking the model from Sylvia and the phaser from Spock) You've won. 
SYLVIA: You can relax now, Captain. Your ship is safe.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Temperature is almost back to normal, dropping down fast. 
DESALLE: Lieutenant, try to raise the captain again. 
UHURA: Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, please. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Acknowledge. We've lost him again, Mister DeSalle.

[Drawing room]

KOROB: Captain, you've seen something of our science. Now tell us about yours. 
KIRK: You seem to be singing a different tune. I'd rather know more about yours. You call it magic, you call it science. It seems unrelated to both of them. 
KOROB: What would you name it, Captain? 
KIRK: I wouldn't attempt to name it, but you seem to do with your mind what we do with tools. You alter matter, move it about by telekinesis. 
KOROB: Yes, we can change the molecular structure 
SYLVIA: Korob, you talk too much. 
MCCOY: You kept Scott and Sulu as catspaws to lure us down here. How'd you know we'd come? 
KOROB: Oh, we didn't have to know. They knew. 
SYLVIA: Enough of this! You will tell us what we want to know. 
KIRK: It's too late for threats. You let me contact the ship. How long do you think it will it be before a search party arrives? 
KOROB: Some time, Captain. Quite some time. 
(The model Enterprise is encased in a block of perspex.) 
KOROB: There will be no search party, Captain Kirk. An impenetrable force field around your ship, Captain. It will not hinder orbit, but your people are prisoners within it.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: It's some kind of a force field, sir, but not like any other I've ever heard of before. It's not coming from anywhere. It's simply all around us.

[Drawing room]

SYLVIA: I would advise you to co-operate, Captain. Forcible extraction of the information we wish from you is not complicated, but it is extremely painful and it has a certain draining effect. 
KIRK: We have nothing to discuss. 
KOROB: Take them to their cell. (gives the phaser to Scott) 
SYLVIA: Wait. The doctor will stay. Your turn will be next, Captain. It makes little difference. Take them out of here.

[Bridge]

DESALLE: Wave length analysis, Mister Chekov? 
CHEKOV: It will not analyse, sir. 
DESALLE: All right, but it's there and it's real. If it's real, it can be affected. Engineering, stand by to divert all power systems to the outer hull. Prepare impulse engines for generation of maximum heat directed as ordered. Maybe we can't break it, but I'll bet you credits to navy beans we can put a dent in it.

[Dungeon]

(Kirk and Spock are shackled to the wall again.) 
KIRK: How long has it been? 
SPOCK: Twenty two minutes, seventeen seconds. 
KIRK: Thanks. I wonder what they're doing to Doc. 
SPOCK: I'm sure we'll find out shortly. Jim, all of these things that we've seen. To an Earthman like yourself, they must seem quite familiar. 
KIRK: Familiar. Startling. Not rational. 
SPOCK: Precisely. I refer you to the psychological theory of the racial subconscious. The universal myths, symbols. 
KIRK: Ghosts, witches. 
SPOCK: And dungeons and castles and black cats. They all belong to the twilight world of consciousness. 
KIRK: They tried to tap our conscious mind. 
SPOCK: And they missed. They reached basically only the subconscious. Korob seemed puzzled by your reaction to the environment he'd provided. 
KIRK: He expected me to react as though it were all normal. Well, he admitted that they weren't native to this planet. 
SPOCK: And not to have a knowledge of our scientific methods is most unlikely for any life form we've met in this galaxy. 
KIRK: They refer to us as creatures, as though we were some species that they were unfamiliar with. If we're creatures, I wonder what they're really like. 
SPOCK: Evidently something totally alien in all respects. 
KIRK: Agreed. Totally alien. And I don't like hostile strangers showing such an acute interest in our galaxy, our world, Spock. Not at all like friendly visitors. We're going to have to stop them, cold. But at the moment 
SPOCK: I, too, am at a loss at this time to suggest a course of action. 
(The door opens and McCoy enters with Scott and Sulu. He has been zombified. Sulu unchains Kirk.) 
KIRK: Oh, Bones. Doc.

[Drawing room]

KOROB: You forget what we were sent here for. 
SYLVIA: I forget nothing. I'm not a puppet, Korob, like you. 
KOROB: You're a traitor. 
SYLVIA: You are a fool. We have nothing like this and I like it. To touch, to feel to understand the idea of luxury I like it. And I don't intend to leave it. 
KOROB: We have a duty to the old ones. 
SYLVIA: What do they know of sensations? This is a new world. 
KOROB: You're cruel. You torture our specimens. 
SYLVIA: And that, too, is a new sensation. I find it stimulating. 
KOROB: You're wrong! You're discarding everything we live by. 
SYLVIA: I live by my own decisions. You're a weak fool, Korob. 
KOROB: I have the power. 
SYLVIA: But you're afraid to use it. Don't threaten me. I can squash you and that would be an interesting sensation, yes. I find I like these new sensations. Don't try to push me. 
(The door opens and the group enters.) 
SYLVIA: Captain. It's time for our talk. Korob, leave us alone and take these men with you. 
(Korob picks up the communicator and Enterprise from the table.) 
KOROB: This is not ended, Sylvia. 
SYLVIA: But it may end soon, old man. 
(He leaves, followed by McCoy, Scott and Sulu.) 
KIRK: What now? You wave your magic wand and destroy my mind, too? 
SYLVIA: There's no real damage to the mind, Captain, simply a drain of knowledge and will. 
KIRK: You don't call that damage? 
SYLVIA: Why should I? 
KIRK: You'd know if you had compassion. A woman should have compassion, but I forget you're not a woman. 
SYLVIA: But you're mistaken, Captain. I am a woman now. I come from a world without sensation as you and I now know it. It excites me. I want more. 
KIRK: You seem to need us. Why? 
SYLVIA: Because you have knowledge which I lack. but were our abilities put together. Tell me about power, Captain. How does it feel? 
(As Korob watches from behind a screen, Kirk puts his hand on her shoulder. He strokes her neck and face.) 
KIRK: What about Korob? 
SYLVIA: He is a fool. I'll do without him. But you? Why do I find you different? Why would it be so difficult to dispose of you? 
KIRK: Why don't you simply probe my mind and get what you want? 
SYLVIA: No, not that, not for you. What I want is a joining. My mind to yours willingly. Think of the secrets you could learn. Think of the power that would be yours. Anything you can imagine, I can give you. 
KIRK: You're very persuasive. What happens if I go along? 
SYLVIA: Then everything would be ours together. I've never conceived of the idea of togetherness before. It excites me. You excite me. Why? 
KIRK: For the same reasons you excite me. You're a very beautiful woman. 
(He kisses her.) 
SYLVIA: You find me beautiful? But I can be many women. (now she's blonde teen jail-bait) You like what you see. (a platinum blonde in a loose cat-suit) or do you prefer me as I was? 
KIRK: You have a knack for giving me difficult choices. (kisses her again) You have nothing like that where you come from? 
SYLVIA: Nothing. 
KIRK: Your people, when they come here 
SYLVIA: They're like, like feathers in the wind without the transmuter. 
KIRK: (nuzzling her neck) Transmuter? 
SYLVIA: The source. You will learn. I will teach you later. Later. 
KIRK: Then it's a device. You do use tools. 
SYLVIA: It gives only form. You're teaching me substance. 
KIRK: You haven't changed your mind? You won't return home? 
SYLVIA: My home is here with you. A billion worlds of sensation to pick and choose. 
(Another kiss, then he lets her go and she realises ) 
SYLVIA: You are using me. You hold me in your arms and there is no fire in your mind. You're trying to deceive me! It's here, (the crystal) like words on a page. You are using me. 
KIRK: And why not? You've been using me and my crew. 
(Enter Sulu, Scott and McCoy.) 
SYLVIA: You will be swept away. You, your men, your ship, your worlds!

[Bridge]

UHURA: I don't see any change. 
DESALLE: It's there, Lieutenant. 
CHEKOV: It was that electrical field we set up, Mister DeSalle, that dent you wanted. It's not much, but it is a start. 
DESALLE: Keep it up, Mister Chekov. Channel the entire output of reactors one, two, and three into the relay stations. Whatever it is, it's starting to weaken.

[Dungeon]

(Korob rushes in and releases the prisoners.) 
KOROB: I've released the model of your ship from the crystal, although they would have freed themselves soon. It's difficult to control so many things in so little time. (hands over phaser and communicator) Here. You must go before she finds the weapon is missing. 
KIRK: I'm not leaving without my men. 
KOROB: They're not your men anymore. They belong to Sylvia. I can no longer control them or her. She's irrational. The strain of adopting to your form, the insatiable desire for sensation and experience. She's a great danger and it was not necessary. We could have entered your galaxy in peace. 
SPOCK: You came in a ship? 
KOROB: We used the transmuter. 
KIRK: Transmuter. Yes, she mentioned that. 
KOROB: There's no time to explain now. She means to destroy us all. There might still be a chance. Quickly. Come.

[Castle]

(They go cautiously along the corridors, and a cat's snarl is heard. There on a wall is the shadow of a very large feline.)
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: Why a cat? 
SPOCK: Racial memories. The cat is the most ruthless, most terrifying of animals, as far back as the sabre-toothed tiger. 
KOROB: I think I can stop her. 
KIRK: You'd better let us. (draws the phaser) It's out of energy. She must have drained it. We could have jumped Scott and Sulu at any time. We didn't know. No way out. 
KOROB: It's my problem. She's one of my kind. Come quickly. 
(The giant cat pads down the corridor as they retreat back into the dungeon.)

[Dungeon]

(Spock goes to the hole in the ceiling that they originally fell through.) 
KIRK: Do you think you can make it? 
SPOCK: Ready when you are, Captain. 
KIRK: (to Korob) Get ready. 
(Spock gets out into the corridor above.) 
KOROB: No! Get back. Get back. Get back! Get back! 
KIRK: Korob, that door won't last. 
KOROB: Get back! 
(The door is pushed in and he is crushed underneath it. Kirk runs to his aid.) 
KOROB: Go. Go! (He dies, and Kirk picks up his wand.) 
SPOCK: Quickly, Captain. 
KIRK: Korob seemed to think this was important. Said something about a transmuter. 
(He throws the wand up to Spock.) 
SPOCK: Captain, a bit more alacrity, if you please. 
(Kirk uses a bed frame as a trampoline to help him reach the hole, and Spock pulls him the rest of the way.)

[Castle]

SPOCK: Captain. 
(McCoy arrives to take a swing at them with a morning-star. Kirk fights with him as Spock takes on Scott. Kirk knocks McCoy out.) 
KIRK: Doc. 
(Then Sulu arrives. Spock neck-pinches Scott. Kirk parries Sulu's martial arts attack until he can throw him against a door, when he is knocked out.) 
SPOCK: Jim! 
(McCoy has awakened only to get knocked out again.) 
KIRK: Well, at least we found them. 
SPOCK: Fortuitous, Captain. And now that we have them all together? (the cat arrives) A most unpleasant situation, Captain. If only your phaser had some power. 
KIRK: Maybe we do. (he gets the wand) Sylvia, I have the transmuter. It's mine now. 
SYLVIA: You're very clever, Captain. More so than I'd imagined. Clever, resourceful and handsome. 
SPOCK: Don't let her touch the wand, Captain. 
(She strokes her pendant, and she and Kirk vanish.) 
SPOCK: Jim!

[Drawing room]

KIRK: Don't you get tired of these games? 
SYLVIA: I've never played games. Give it to me. 
KIRK: I wasn't sure before, but I am now. This is the source of your power, isn't it. The transmuter. 
SYLVIA: No, not the source. It's merely an amplifier. The mind is the source. Mine is simple, but yours has the key but you don't know how to use it. 
KIRK: I catch on quickly. 
SYLVIA: It is not too late, Captain James Kirk. Come with me. I'll teach you. You'll teach me. 
KIRK: Why? Because your people have nothing of your own? Is that why you need us? 
SYLVIA: We need your dreams, your ambition. With them, I can build. Give me the transmuter. 
KIRK: No. 
SYLVIA: You fool. Don't you know what you're giving up? Everything that your species finds desirable. Look at me. I am a woman. I am all women. 
KIRK: I don't know what you are but you're not a woman. You've tortured my men and taken their minds from them. You ask for love and return pain instead. 
SYLVIA: (holding a phaser) Korob was wrong. I didn't destroy all your weapons. Give me the transmuter. Give it to me! 
(Kirk smashes the wand against the table, and there is a blinding blue light.)

[Planet surface]

(Kirk is standing on the rocks holding a phaser. Spock approaches wearing his tricorder. McCoy, Scott and Sulu follow him.) 
MCCOY: What happened, Jim? 
KIRK: That'll take some explaining, Bones. 
SCOTT: Everything's vanished. 
KIRK: Not everything. 
(By his feet are two tiny blue fluffy creatures with stick-thin arms and legs, and squid's tentacles for faces.) 
KIRK: Korob and Sylvia as they really are. Their forms were an illusion, just like the castle and everything else. Only the power pack gave them reality. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. A life form totally alien to our galaxy. If we could preserve and study this 
(But the little puppets collapse and die. Smoke rises from the bodies.)
MCCOY: Too late. All of this, just an illusion. 
KIRK: No illusion. Jackson is dead. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. 
UHURA [OC]: Standing by, Captain. 
KIRK: Five to beam up.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Doomsday Machine
Stardate: 4202.9
Original Airdate: 20 Oct, 1967

[Bridge]
(Plenty of security around, and a blonde woman instead of Uhura at communications.) 
PALMER: The distress call definitely came from one of the solar systems in this sector. 
KIRK: Can you pinpoint it any closer, Lieutenant? 
PALMER: Negative. It was so badly garbled all we got was the name Constellation, then we lost it. 
SULU: Sir, we're now within the limits of System L-370, but I can't seem to locate 
SPOCK: Captain, sensors show this entire solar system has been destroyed. Nothing left but rubble and asteroids. 
KIRK: But that's incredible. The star in this system is still intact. Only a nova could destroy like that. 
SPOCK: Nonetheless, Captain, sensors show nothing but debris where we charted seven planets last year. 
KIRK: Continue a search pattern. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
(Later.) 
SULU: Entering limits of System L-374, sir. Scanners show the same evidence of destruction. 
KIRK: Every solar system in this sector blasted to rubble and still no sign of the Constellation. Matt Decker's in command. What could have happened to him? 
SPOCK: Captain, the two inner most planets of this system appear to be intact. 
PALMER: Sir, I'm picking up a ship's disaster beacon. 
KIRK: Try to raise it, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: I have it on the sensors, Captain. By configuration, a starship stopped in space. She appears to be drifting. 
PALMER: No answer, Captain. All I get is the automatic beacon. 
SPOCK: Sensors not recording normal energy output. 
KIRK: Approach course, Mister Sulu. 
(They arrive at a ship hanging crookedly in space. It looks identical to Enterprise.) 
KIRK: It's the Constellation. Look at that. 
SPOCK: She may have been wrecked by whatever destroyed these solar systems. 
KIRK: She was attacked. Red alert! Red alert! Man your battle stations! 
PALMER: Red alert. Red alert. Man your battle stations. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu? 
SULU: All phaser banks manned and ready, sir. 
KIRK: Very good. Initiate a full sensor scan of the immediate area for any other vessel. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Palmer. 
PALMER: I can't raise the Constellation, sir. I'm still getting the distress beacon, but there's heavy subspace interference. It's almost blocking the signal. 
KIRK: Keep trying. Mister Spock, full evaluation of the damage to the Constellation. 
SPOCK: All power plants dead, reserve energy banks operative at a very low power level. 
KIRK: Life support systems? 
SPOCK: Also operative at a low power level. The entire Bridge is damaged and uninhabitable. The rest of the ship seems able to sustain life. 
KIRK: Radiation levels? 
SPOCK: Normal, but subspace interference makes readings difficult. 
SULU: No other vessels in the area, Captain. All scanners show clear. 
KIRK: All hands, go to Yellow Alert. Stand by battle stations. Lieutenant, have Doctor McCoy, Mister Scott, and a damage control party report to me in the transporter room. 
PALMER: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: We're going to board her. Mister Spock, you're in command. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged.

[Constellation corridor]

(The name ship for the Constellation-class is a mess, with chunks blown out of her nacelles and saucer. Inside, pipes are hanging down, twisted.) 
WASHBURN: Radiation level normal. Atmospheric pressure eleven pounds per square inch. 
CREWMAN: Filtration systems are out, sir. 
SCOTT: The whole communication system looks to be shorted out, too, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, check the phaser banks. See if they've been fired. Bones, you come with me. 
SCOTT: Come along, lads. 
(They head down a ladder while McCoy and Kirk walk off.)

[Constellation Engineering]

WASHBURN: What a mess.

[Constellation Room]

KIRK: No clutter, no half-empty cups of coffee. Whatever happened didn't happen without a warning.

[Constellation Engineering]

WASHBURN: What do you think did it, sir? 
SCOTT: I don't know, lad. But I want a full structural and control damage check, and I'm going to have a look at those engines.

[Constellation Room]

KIRK: The crew wasn't abducted, they just left. Kirk to Enterprise. 
SPOCK [OC]: Enterprise, Spock here. 
KIRK: No survivors, no bodies either.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Is it possible they could have beamed down to one of the two planets? 
SPOCK: Improbable, Captain. The surface temperature of the inner planet is that of molten lead. The other has an atmosphere poisonous to human life.

[Constellation Room]

KIRK: We'll continue our search. Kirk out.

[Constellation Corridor]

(Scott returns to the beam-in point.) 
SCOTT: Captain, I've checked the engines. The warp drive is a hopeless pile of junk. The impulse engines are not too badly off. We ought to be able to do something with them. 
KIRK: Phaser banks? 
SCOTT: Exhausted. They didn't give up without a battle. 
KIRK: But where are they? I can't imagine a man like Matt Decker abandoning ship while his life support systems were still operative. 
SCOTT: Computer system is still intact. We can playback the duplicate Captain's Log from the auxiliary control room. 
(They head off, then Kirk spots a man at a desk in a room.)

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

(The man is conscious but dazed, stunned.)
KIRK: Matt. Matt, it's Jim Kirk. 
MCCOY: Commodore? Commodore Decker? (he injects him) 
KIRK: Matt? Matt. 
DECKER: Kirk. It's Jim Kirk. 
KIRK: What happened to your ship, Matt? 
DECKER: A ship. Attacked. That, that thing. 
KIRK: What thing? What was it? 
DECKER: That 
KIRK: Answer me! What was it? What happened, Matt? 
MCCOY: Jim, give him a minute. He's in a state of shock. 
SCOTT: Ready with the duplicate log, sir. 
KIRK: Go. 
DECKER [OC]: Captain's log, stardate 4202.1. Exceptionally heavy subspace interference still prevents our contacting Starfleet to inform them of the destroyed solar systems we have encountered. We are now entering system L-374. Science Officer Masada reports the fourth planet seems to be breaking up. We are going to investigate. 
KIRK: The fourth planet. Only two left now. Scotty, pull the microtapes from the sensor memory banks and beam them aboard to Spock. I want a full analysis, a complete report of what happened when they went in on that planet. 
DECKER: We tried to contact Starfleet. No one heard. No one! We couldn't run. 
KIRK: What happened to your crew? 
DECKER: Oh, I had to beam them down. We were dead. No power, our phasers useless. I stayed behind, the last man. The Captain, the last man aboard the ship. That's what you're supposed to do, isn't it? And then it hit again and the transporter went out. They were down there, and I'm up here. 
KIRK: What hit? What attacked you? 
DECKER: They say there's no devil, Jim, but there is. Right out of hell, I saw it. 
KIRK: Matt, where's your crew? 
DECKER: On the third planet. 
KIRK: There is no third planet. 
DECKER: Don't you think I know that? There was, but not anymore. They called me. They begged me for help, four hundred of them. I couldn't. I couldn't. (breaks down in tears) 
SCOTT: Captain, Washburn has our report. 
KIRK: Go. 
WASHBURN: We made a complete check on structural and control damage, sir. As far as we can tell, something crashed through the deflectors and knocked out the generators. Somehow the antimatter in the warp drive pods has been deactivated. 
KIRK: Deactivated? Scotty, could some kind of general energy dampening field do that, and would the same type of thing account for the heavy subspace interference? 
SCOTT: Aye, that all adds up. But what sort of a thing could do all that? 
DECKER: If you'd seen it, you'd know. The whole thing's a weapon. It must be. 
KIRK: What does it look like? 
DECKER: Well, it's miles long, with a maw that could swallow a dozen starships. It destroys planets, chops them into rubble. 
KIRK: What is it, an alien ship? Or is it alive, or is it 
DECKER: Both or neither. I don't know. 
KIRK: Matt, your log stated that the fourth planet was breaking up. You went in to investigate. 
DECKER: We saw this thing hovering over the planet, slicing out chunks of it with a force beam. 
KIRK: Did you run a scanner check on it? What kind of a beam? 
DECKER: Pure antiproton. Absolutely pure. 
KIRK: (answers communicator) Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Unable to raise Starfleet Command due to heavy subspace interference.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: Attempting to remedy. 
KIRK: What about the Constellation's tapes?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: She was attacked by what appears to be essentially a robot, an automated weapon of immense size and power. Its apparent function is to smash planets to rubble and then digest the debris for fuel. It is, therefore, self-sustaining as long as there are planetary bodies for it to feed on.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: A robot weapon that purposely destroys entire solar systems. Why?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. However, Mister Sulu has computed the path of the machine, using the destroyed solar systems as a base course. Projecting back on our star charts, we find that it came from outside, from another galaxy. 
KIRK [OC]: What is the projected course of this thing? 
SPOCK: If it follows its present path, it will go through the most densely populated section of our galaxy.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Thank you. Stand by, Mister Spock. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: This whole thing's incredible. A robot? A machine like that, who would build it? 
KIRK: We don't know. An alien race, apparently from another galaxy. 
MCCOY: But why? 
KIRK: Bones, did you ever hear of a doomsday machine? 
MCCOY: No. I'm a doctor, not a mechanic. 
KIRK: It's a weapon built primarily as a bluff. It's never meant to be used. So strong, it could destroy both sides in a war. Something like the old H-Bomb was supposed to be. That's what I think this is. A doomsday machine that somebody used in a war uncounted years ago. They don't exist anymore, but the machine is still destroying. 
DECKER: Oh, forget about your theories! That thing is on the way to the heart of our galaxy. What are you going to do about it? 
KIRK: Take it easy. 
MCCOY: The first thing we're going to do is get you back to the Enterprise. 
DECKER: Oh, no, I stay here. I'm not leaving my ship! 
KIRK: There's no ship to leave. It's a dead hulk! We'll take her in tow. I'll stay onboard and get her ready. You go back to the Enterprise with the doctor and let him help you. 
DECKER: It's just that I, I, I never lost a command before. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Have the transporter room beam Doctor McCoy and Commodore Decker on board immediately.

[Transporter room]

(As Kyle beams them aboard, Spock's impassionate voice can be heard.) 
SPOCK [OC]: Red alert! Red alert! 
MCCOY: Come on.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: It came up on us fast, Captain, but we seem able to maintain our distance. 
KIRK [OC]: We're blind here. What's it look like? 
(Decker and McCoy enter. The viewscreen shows a thing with a big yellow maw, that tapers down along it's body to a pointed tail.) 
SPOCK: It looks very much like Commodore Decker's planet killer. And it is pursuing us. (The viewscreen now shows it head-on. A round opening with a small sun partway down the gullet.) 
SPOCK: We are more manoeuvrable, but it is gaining on us. Sensors indicate some kind of total conversion drive.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: No evidence of life, subspace interference level incredibly high. 
KIRK: Whatever it is, we can't let it go beyond us to the next solar system. We have to stop it. If it's a robot, what are the chances of deactivating it?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: I would say none, Captain. The energy generated by our power nacelles seems to attracts it. I doubt we could manoeuvre close enough without drawing a direct attack upon ourselves.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: I also believe the nature of this machine precludes the possibility of easy access to its control mechanisms.

[Bridge]

SULU: It's closing on us, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Closing, Captain.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: All right. Lower your deflector screens Long enough to beam us aboard. 
SPOCK [OC]: Acknowledged.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK [OC]: Transporter Room, stand by to beam landing party aboard. 
KYLE: Ready to beam, sir. 
(But the monster fires a ray at them, everyone goes flying and smoke comes out of a transporter pad.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Evasive action, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Damage report, all stations. 
KYLE [OC]: Mister Spock, the transporter's out. 
SPOCK: Affect repairs. Captain Kirk, come in please. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk here. 
SPOCK: Captain, we've been attacked. The transporter is damaged. We're taking evasive action. 
PALMER: Mister Spock, communication's damaged. We're unable to override interference.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: Damage in communications, Captain. Interference will (static) 
KIRK: Spock? Spock? Come in, Spock. Spock? We're stuck, blind, and deaf. 
SCOTT: And paralysed. No power. 
KIRK: Well, we just can't stand around while our ship is being attacked. Scotty, you've got to get me some manoeuvering power. 
SCOTT: I can't repair warp drive without a spacedock. 
KIRK: Then get me impulse power. Half-speed, quarter-speed, anything. If we get this hulk moving, maybe we can do something. 
SCOTT: Aye, the impulse engines are still in fair shape. I might coax them. 
KIRK: Then get moving. 
SCOTT: Come on, lad. 
KIRK: Washburn, you get in there. Let's see what we can do about this viewing screen. I've got to find out what's happening out there.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: No casualties, Mister Spock. How are we doing? 
SPOCK: We have outrun it, Doctor. 
DECKER: Status report. 
SPOCK: Impulse and warp engines operative, transporter and communications under repair. Random chance seems to have operated in our favour. 
MCCOY: In plain, non-Vulcan English, we've been lucky. 
SPOCK: I believe I said that, Doctor. 
SULU: It's veering off, back on course for the next solar system. The Rigel colony, sir. 
SPOCK: Evidently programmed to ignore anything as small as a ship beyond a certain radius. We'll maintain a discreet distance and circle back to pick up the Captain. 
DECKER: You can't let that reach Rigel. Why, millions of innocent people would die. 
SPOCK: I am aware of the Rigel system's population, Commodore, but we are only one ship. Our deflector shields are strained, our subspace transmitter is useless. Logically, our primary duty is to survive in order to warn Starfleet Command. 
DECKER: Our primary duty is to maintain life and safety of Federation planets. Do you deny that? 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, you will lay in an evasive course back to the Constellation. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
DECKER: Belay that last order, helmsman. One hundred and eighty degree turn, hard about. We're going to attack. 
(The whole Bridge holds its breath.) 
SPOCK: You will carry out my last order, Mister Sulu. 
DECKER: Mister Spock, I'm officially notifying you that I'm exercising my option under regulations as a Starfleet Commodore, and that I am assuming command of the Enterprise. 
SPOCK: You have the right to do so, but I would advise against it. 
DECKER: That thing must be destroyed. 
SPOCK: You tried to destroy it once before, Commodore. The result was a wrecked ship and a dead crew. 
DECKER: I made a mistake then. We were too far away. This time I'm going to hit it with full phasers at point-blank range. 
SPOCK: Sensors show the object's hull is solid neutronium. A single ship cannot combat it. 
DECKER: Mister Spock, that will be all. You have been relieved of command. Don't force me to relieve you of duty as well. 
MCCOY: You can't let him do this, Spock. 
DECKER: Doctor, you are out of line. 
MCCOY: So are you, sir. Well, Spock? 
SPOCK: Unfortunately, Starfleet Order 104, Section B, leaves me no alternative. Paragraph 1A clearly states 
MCCOY: To blazes with regulations! You can't let him take command when you know he's wrong! 
SPOCK: If you can certify Commodore Decker medically or psychologically unfit for command, I can relieve him under Section C. 
MCCOY: I'll certify that right now. 
SPOCK: You'll also be asked to produce your medical records to prove it. 
MCCOY: Now, you know I haven't had time to run an examination on him. 
SPOCK: Then your statement would not be considered valid. 
DECKER: You may leave the Bridge, Doctor. 
MCCOY: What about the Captain? We can't leave 
DECKER: Doctor, you may leave the Bridge. 
MCCOY: Spock, do something! 
DECKER: Mister Spock knows his duty under regulations, Doctor. Do you? (McCoy leaves) Hard about, helmsman. Course thirty two degrees, mark ten. Deflectors at full power. Ready on main phaser banks. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
(Spock stands completely still, like a statue, as Enterprise arrives back at the planet-killer.)

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

(Kirk is trying to mend the viewscreen, but just making smoke and spluttering noises.) 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, the impulse engines' control circuits are fused solid. 
KIRK [OC]: What about the warp drive control circuits? 
SCOTT: Aye, we can cross-connect the controls, but it'll make the ship almost impossible for one man to handle.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: You worry about your miracles, Scotty, I'll worry about mine. Get to work.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Washburn, try the 2G6 circuit.

[Bridge]

SULU: Closing fast. 
SPOCK: Deflector shields at full power. They can't take much more of this. 
DECKER: Helmsman, hold your course. Stand by all phaser banks. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
(The planet killer fires at them.) 
SPOCK: Deflectors holding, but weakening. We must retreat, Commodore. The energy drain 
DECKER: I'm in command here, Mister Spock. Maintain your course, helmsman. Get us in closer.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Ready to give it a try? 
WASHBURN: Just one minute, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, how you doing?

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Controls are all hooked up, sir. We should have some power for you soon.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

WASHBURN: Try it now, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, I think (an image of tiny Enterprise and the giant planet killer comes on screen) What the devil's going on?

[Bridge]

DECKER: Fire! 
(Two phaser beams strafe the machine's body.) 
SULU: Direct hit. It just bounced off. 
SPOCK: Commodore, I urgently recommend immediate withdrawal. 
DECKER: Recommendation noted. Maintain course. Fire!

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Enterprise, come in. Mister Spock, come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, where's that power?

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Coming, sir. If I push these impulse engines too hard in the condition they're in, they'll blow apart.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Washburn, get down to Engineering. Assist Mister Scott. 
WASHBURN: Aye, sir. (leaves) 
KIRK: Scotty, push it right to the edge. This ship has got to manoeuver. 
SCOTT [OC]: Aye, sir.

[Bridge]

(Another blast from the machine.) 
SPOCK; Sir, deflector shields are gone. 
PALMER: (to Spock) Sir, Deck seven reports power failure in main energisers. Implementing emergency procedures. (another hit) Severe casualties reported on decks three and four. Damage control party sealing off inner hull rupture. 
SPOCK: It has ceased fire. We're being held in a tractor beam. We're being pulled inside, Commodore. You must veer off. 
DECKER: Maintain phaser fire, helmsman. 
SPOCK: We have lost warp power. If we don't break the tractor beam within sixty seconds, we never will. 
DECKER: But don't you understand? We've got to destroy it! 
SPOCK: That, sir, is illogical. It is suicide. Attempted suicide would be proof that you are psychologically unfit for command. If you don't veer off, I shall relieve you on that basis. 
DECKER: Veer off. 
SPOCK: Emergency impulse power. 
SULU: We can't break loose! 
SPOCK; We need more power. 
SULU: We haven't got it. We're being pulled inside.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

(Kirk sees Enterprise approach the planet-killer's 'mouth'.) 
KIRK: Scotty, give me that power.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: You've got it, Captain. Just enough to move us. I can't do better.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: That'll do. Full ahead, Mister Scott. 
(A sudden jolt as Constellation overcomes inertia.) 
KIRK: That's it, Mister Scott. Keep that power coming.

[Bridge]

DECKER: Full power astern. 
SULU: Aye, sir. We still can't move.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Keep pouring it on, Scotty.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain, I still don't know what we're doing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: We're moving, the Enterprise isn't. Maybe that thing will see us and let the Enterprise go. If I only had some phasers.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Phasers? You've got 'em. I have one bank recharged.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Scotty, you've just earned your pay for the week. Stand by. Fire phasers. 
(One beam lances out, and the monster turns.)

[Bridge]

SULU: We're loose, Commodore. 
DECKER: Good boy, Jim. Between the two of us, we'll kill that thing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Mister Scott, it worked. Great. (sees that maw turning towards them) I think it's great. Scotty, get us out of here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: It's closing fast on the Constellation. 
SULU: Standing by, sir. 
SPOCK: Commodore, I suggest 
DECKER: Kirk pulled us out of there by distracting it. Now it's our turn. Fire phasers. (they do) We did it! Hard about. Give me some distance. 
SULU: We're moving away, Commodore. 
SPOCK: This machine seems to have a programmed defensive sphere. Any energy source entering that field is subject to attack. 
DECKER: Mister Spock, status report. 
SPOCK: Warp drive and deflectors will be out for a solar day. Repairs proceeding on transporter and communications. 
SULU: It's closing with us again, sir. 
DECKER: Maintain speed and distance. 
SULU: It's sucking in space rubble from those destroyed planets. Refueling itself. 
SPOCK: We can maintain this speed for only seven hours before we exhaust our fuel, but it can refuel itself indefinitely. 
DECKER: Then we'll have to fight it now before it gets any stronger. 
SPOCK: Illogical. We cannot destroy it. Therefore, we cannot save Rigel. We must transport the Captain and the others from the Constellation and escape this thing's subspace interference in order to warn Starfleet Command. 
PALMER: Mister Spock, we've pierced the interference locally. 
SPOCK: Can you raise Starfleet? 
PALMER: No, sir, but I've got ship-to-ship communications back. Picking up Captain Kirk. 
SPOCK: On audio, Lieutenant. 
KIRK [OC]: Enterprise. Enterprise, come in. 
DECKER: Mister Spock, I am still in command. I will speak for this ship. Enterprise to Kirk.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

DECKER [OC]: Commodore Decker speaking. 
KIRK: Matt. What's going on? Give me Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

DECKER: I'm in command here, Jim. 
KIRK [OC]: What happened to Spock? 
DECKER: Nothing. I assumed command according to regulations

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

DECKER [OC]: Since your first officer was reluctant to take aggressive action against the 
KIRK You mean you're the lunatic who's responsible for almost destroying my ship?

[Bridge]

DECKER: You are speaking to a senior officer, Kirk. 
KIRK: Give me Spock. 
DECKER: I told you, I am in command here, according to every rule in the book, Captain. Anything you have to say at all, you will say to me.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: There's only one thing I want to say to you, Commodore. Get my ship out of there.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Mister Spock, ship status. 
SPOCK: Commodore. 
DECKER: Down here. (the arm of the Captain's chair) 
SPOCK: Warp drive out. Deflector shields down. Transporter under repair. We are on emergency impulse power.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: How long to repair warp drive? 
SPOCK [OC]: At least one solar day.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: At our present rate of consumption, we'll exhaust our impulse power long before then. 
SULU: It's gaining on us, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Take evasive action, Mister Sulu.

[Bridge]

DECKER: I told you, I am in command here and I will give the orders, Captain. We're going to turn and attack. 
KIRK [OC]: Not with my ship, you don't.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Mister Spock, relieve Commodore Decker immediately. That's a direct order.

[Bridge]

DECKER: You can't relieve me and you know it. According to regulations

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Blast regulations! Mister Spock, I order you to assume command on my personal authority as Captain of the Enterprise.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Commodore Decker, you are relieved of command. 
DECKER: I don't recognise your authority to relieve me. 
SPOCK: You may file a formal protest with Starfleet Command, assuming we survive to reach a Starbase. But you are relieved. Commodore. I do not wish to place you under arrest. 
DECKER: You wouldn't dare. (Spock signals the guards forward) You're bluffing. 
SPOCK: Vulcans never bluff. 
DECKER: No. No, I don't suppose that they do. Very well, Mister Spock. The Bridge is yours. 
SPOCK: Captain, I have assumed command. 
KIRK [OC]: Good. Now, Mister Spock 
SPOCK: One moment, sir. Commodore. I believe you are scheduled for medical examination. Mister Montgomery. 
MONTGOMERY: Sir. 
SPOCK: You will accompany the commodore to Sickbay. 
MONTGOMERY: Aye, sir. Commodore? 
(They leave.) 
SPOCK: Mister Sulu, change course. Seven zero mark two one. 
SULU: Mark twenty one, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, we are taking an evasive course back to you. We will try to stay ahead of the object until we can transport you aboard.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Fine. Just make sure you stay ahead of it. 
(Back on the Enterprise, Decker fights Montgomery when they exit turbolift two. It takes a while, but eventually the red-shirt is knocked out and dragged into a side room. Decker then makes his way to the shuttlecraft hangar deck.)

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SCOTT [OC]: Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Yes, Scotty.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: I've hooked in ship's communication. The best I can give you on impulse is one third power. The shields are up but they won't last long.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Keep it going, Scotty, keep it going. Mister Spock. 
SPOCK [OC]: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: I'm plotting an intercept course. Will rendezvous with you at fourteen thirteen point seven hours.

[Bridge]

SULU: Mister Spock, someone's opening the shuttlecraft bay doors. 
SPOCK: Shut them, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: It's too late, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Why are you launching a shuttlecraft?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Whoever it is, Captain, has no authorisation. Lieutenant, raise the shuttlecraft. 
PALMER: Enterprise to shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft.

[Shuttlecraft]

PALMER [OC]: Enterprise to shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft. 
DECKER: Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Decker here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Commodore, I must insist that you return to the ship.

[Shuttlecraft]

DECKER: You said it yourself, Spock. There is no way to blast through the hull of that machine, so I'm going to take this thing right down its throat.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: This is Kirk. Matt, you'll be killed.

[Shuttlecraft]

DECKER: I've been prepared for death ever since I, ever since I killed my crew.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: No one expects you to die for an error in judgment.

[Shuttlecraft]

DECKER: The commander is responsible for the lives of his crew, and for their deaths. Well, I should have died with mine.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: You cannot succeed, Commodore. Your only logical alternative is to return to the ship.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Matt. Matt, listen to me. You can't throw your life away like this. Matt, you're a starship commander. That makes you a valuable commodity.

[Shuttlecraft]

KIRK [OC]: We need you, your experience, your judgment. Matt! (Decker turns off the intercom)

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: We're stronger with you than without you! 
(The shuttlecraft enters the planet killer, and Decker dies in agony from the radiation.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: He's gone. Constellation, come in, please.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SPOCK [OC]: Captain Kirk, come in please. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Sir, may I offer my condolences on the death of your friend. It is most regrettable.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: It's regrettable that he died for nothing.

[Bridge]

SULU: Mister Spock, sensors indicate a minute drop in the machine's power emanations. Do you think the shuttlecraft explosion might have done some damage? 
KIRK [OC]: What about that, Spock? Is it possible? 
SPOCK: The drop in power is definite, Captain but negligible. The object is still pursing us, thereby causing us to drain our power reserve at a much greater rate. 
PALMER: Mister Spock, the transporter is now operational. 
SPOCK: Transporter operational, Captain. Shall we beam you aboard?

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Negative.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Mister Scott and I will stay here, but beam the damage control party aboard. 
SPOCK: There's little to be gained by staying aboard the Constellation.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Except possibly the destruction of that thing out there. Carry out your orders, Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Acknowledged. Transporter Room. Beam damage control party aboard. 
KYLE [OC]: Aye, aye, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Spock, listen. Maybe Matt Decker didn't die for nothing. He had the right idea but not enough power to do it. Am I correct in assuming that a fusion explosion of ninety seven megatons will result if a starship impulse engine is overloaded?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: No, sir. Ninety seven point eight three five megatons.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Ninety seven point eight three five. Will it be powerful enough to destroy that thing out there?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Negative, Captain. Its hull is pure neutronium. There is no known way of blasting through it.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Not through it, Spock, from inside it. Will it be enough?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Insufficient data. I shall try to take further sensor readings.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Do the best you can and make it fast. Kirk to Scott.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Here, sir. The damage control party just beamed back to the Enterprise.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Good. Scotty, can you set the ship's impulse engines to overload?

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye. The shape the thing's in, it's hard to keep her from blowing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK I want you to rig a thirty second delay detonation device, and rig it so that it can be blown from up here.

[Constellation Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Set it and get up here as fast as you can. 
SCOTT [OC]: Right away. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: The object's neutronium hull makes sensor readings of the inner mechanism impossible.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Spock, you don't know? 
SPOCK [OC]: Correct.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain, you're getting dangerously close to the planet killer.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: I intend to get a lot closer. I'm going to ram her right down that thing's throat.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Jim, you'll be killed, just like Decker.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: No. No, I don't intend to die, Mister Spock. We've rigged a delay detonation device. You'll have thirty seconds to beam me aboard the Enterprise before the Constellation's impulse engines blow.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Your chances of survival are not promising. We don't even know if the explosion will be powerful enough.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: A calculated risk, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK [OC]: There's another factor, Captain. The transporter is not working at one hundred percent efficiency.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Thirty seconds is very slim timing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: A chance I'll have to take. Kirk out. 
SCOTT: A cranky transporter's a mighty finicky piece of machinery to be gambling your life on, sir. 
KIRK: What about the detonator? 
SCOTT: I've linked it in with the impulse control system. (flips a switch) It's armed now. Press this one. Thirty seconds later, poof! Once it's activated, there's no way to stop it. 
KIRK: Understood. Mister Spock. Prepare to beam Scotty on board. 
SPOCK [OC]: Transporter, stand by. 
SCOTT: Good luck, Captain. 
KIRK: Thank you.

[Transporter room]

(It takes longer than usual to materialise Mister Scott.) 
SCOTT: What's the matter with that thing? 
KYLE: It's a power drain somewhere, sir. I almost lost you. 
SCOTT: It'll never work like this. It's the main junction circuitry. I'll get it. 
KYLE: Bridge. Transporter malfunction.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Transporter is out, Captain. You'll have to stand by.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: I can't. Power level's dropping too fast. You'd better hurry. 
SPOCK [OC]: Acknowledged.

[Jefferies tube]

(Amid spluttering cables) 
SPOCK [OC]: Mister Scott, speed is of the essence.

[Bridge]

SULU: He's two thousand miles from the planet killer and closing fast.

[Jefferies tube]

(The cables stop spluttering.) 
SCOTT: Bridge, transporter operational, but this jury-rigging won't last for long. He's got to come off now.

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: I'll stand by here. 
SULU: Fifteen hundred miles and closing. 
SPOCK: Captain, transporter operational, but just barely.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Prepare to beam me aboard on my signal.

[Bridge]

SULU: One thousand miles and closing. 
SPOCK: Transporter, stand by. 
KYLE [OC]: Standing by, sir. 
SULU: Five hundred miles and closing.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

(The throat of the machine fills the screen when he flips the final red switch.) 
KIRK: Beam me aboard.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Energise.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Energising. Bridge, it's shorted out again.

[Jefferies tube]

SCOTT: Och, what's wrong with it?

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

KIRK: Gentlemen, beam me aboard. 
SPOCK [OC]: We can't, Captain. Transporter is out again.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, twenty seconds to detonation.

[Jefferies tube]

SPOCK [OC]: Mister Scott?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Mister Scott

[Jefferies tube]

SPOCK [OC]: Try inverse phasing.

[Bridge]

SULU: Sixty, fifty, forty

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SULU [OC]: Thirty. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I suggest you beam me aboard.

[Bridge]

SULU: Ten

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SULU [OC]: Nine, eight

[Jefferies tube]

SULU [OC]: Seven. 
SPOCK [OC]: Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Try her now, Mister Kyle. 
SULU [OC]: Six.

[Constellation Auxiliary Control]

SULU [OC]: Five, four 
(We see the Constellation enter the planet-killer. We see Kyle frantically to beam something in. We see a cloud coming out of the planet-killer before there's a bang.)

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Bridge, we got him through!

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Energy output zero. Radiation level normal. 
(Kirk runs in.) 
SPOCK: Welcome aboard, Captain. Sensors show all energy sources deactivated. It's quite dead. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu, ease us back to minimum headway. Conserve power as much as possible. Lieutenant Palmer, tell Mister Scott to expedite repairs on the warp drive. Poor Matt. He gave his life in an attempt to save others. Not the worst way to go. 
SPOCK: Indeed, Captain. I presume your log will show that Commodore Decker died in the line of duty. 
KIRK: Indeed it shall, Mister Spock. Ironic, isn't it? Way back in the 20th century, the H-Bomb was the ultimate weapon, their doomsday machine, and we used something like it to destroy another doomsday machine. Probably the first time such a weapon has ever been used for constructive purposes. 
SPOCK: Appropriate, Captain. However, I can't help wondering if there are any more of those weapons wandering around the universe. 
KIRK: Well, I certainly hope not. I found one quite sufficient.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Apple
Stardate: 3715.3
Original Airdate: 13 Oct, 1967

[Planet surface]
(Kirk, Spock, Chekov, Yeoman Landon and two guards have beamed down to study a new world.) 
KIRK: Start your readings. 
(McCoy and two more guards beam down.) 
MCCOY: Well, I just might stake out a claim and settle down here, Jim. 
KIRK: It is spectacular, isn't it? 
MCCOY: It's a shame to have to intrude. 
KIRK: Well, the last scout ship reported some pretty strange sensor readings. Starfleet wants it investigated and the inhabitants contacted. We do what we're told. 
SPOCK: The soil here is remarkably rich and fertile, Captain. Husbandry would be quite efficacious. 
KIRK: Are you sure about that? 
SPOCK: Oh, quite sure. Readings indicate the entire planet is covered with growth like this. Curious, even at the poles there's very little variation in temperature which maintains a planet-wide average of seventy six degrees. 
KIRK: I know. Almost impossible. 
CHEKOV: It makes me homesick. Just like Russia. 
MCCOY: More like the Garden of Eden, Ensign. 
CHEKOV: Of course, Doctor. The Garden of Eden was just outside Moscow. A very nice place. It must have made Adam and Eve very sad to leave. 
KIRK: Just outside Moscow. All right. There's a village about seventeen kilometres away on bearing two three two. We'll head that way. 
(A planet turns to face the away team, and a guard walks up to it.) 
HENDORFF: Captain. 
(The plant fires its stamens into his chest, and he falls.) 
MCCOY: Dead. 
KIRK: What did somebody say? That paradise must've looked like this?

Captain's log, stardate 3715.3. While making a routine exploration of the unexplored Gamma Trianguli Six, one of my men has been killed by a poisonous plant.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: As soon as we get out of the way, beam the body up.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, Captain. It's a shame about Hendorff.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: We seem to have a problem here, too. 
KIRK: What is it?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're losing potency in our antimatter pods. I don't think it's serious, but we're looking into it.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: What's causing it? 
SCOTT [OC]: I'm not sure, sir, but we've run measurements on the electromagnetic field of the planet, and they are a wee bit abnormal. That might have something to do with it. 
KIRK: But you say there's nothing to worry about?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Well, sir, I didn't exactly say that.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Well, stay on top of it. We've got a job to down here. We might as well finish it.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I hear it's nice down there.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Yeah, it's nice. If we're a little more careful, we shouldn't run into any more trouble.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I could do with a nice walk in a garden with green leaves and grass.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: We'll do the walking, Scotty. You get on the antimatter pod. If it gets worse, let me know, we'll beam up. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: I find that most unusual, Captain. 
KIRK: Scotty will handle it. We've got a job to do. Turn up anything on your tricorder? 
SPOCK: Indeed. Subsurface vibrations for miles in all directions. 
KIRK: That's strange. 
SPOCK: Quite strong, fairly regular, artificially produced. 
KIRK: Mallory. 
MALLORY: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: We're heading for the village. Avoid contact with the humanoids. I want you and Marple to make a full reconnaissance. And be careful. There may be other dangers besides poisonous plants. Keep in constant communication. 
MALLORY: Aye, aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain. 
KIRK: What is it? 
SPOCK: There's a humanoid hiding directly behind us, moving with remarkable agility, bearing one eight. 
(Kirk nods to a guard, and they go to flank their observer.) 
CHEKOV: What is it, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: A visitor. One wanting to retain his anonymity, I should say. 
MARTHA: All this beauty, and now Mister Hendorff dead, somebody watching us. It's frightening. 
CHEKOV: If you insist on worrying, worry about me. I've been wanting to get you in a place like this for a long time. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, Yeoman Landon. I know you find each other fascinating, but we're not here to conduct a field experiment in human biology. 
CHEKOV: I was about to take some readings. 
SPOCK: Anything? 
KIRK: Whatever it is, it moves like a cat. 
MCCOY: Jim, I don't like this. 
KIRK: Neither do I. All hands. We've been watched, we'll probably be watched. We're moving out. Formation L. 
(They set off in single file, a guard in the lead and Chekov bringing up the rear.)
(Along the way, Spock notices a very flat rock and picks it up.) 
SPOCK: Interesting. Extremely low specific gravity, some uraninite, hornblende, quartz. (breaks it in half) Fragile, good cleavage. An analysis should prove interesting. 
(He throws one half away, and it explodes when it hits the ground.) 
KIRK: Would you mind being careful where you throw your rocks, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Obviously highly unstable, Captain. This could be a find of some importance. In large quantities, it could be a considerable source of power. 
KIRK: Garden of Eden, with land mines. 
(Spock puts the other piece of rock down very carefully, and they continue their route march. An occasional bush rustle indicates they are being watched.)

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Enterprise to Captain Kirk.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Kirk here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott, sir. Our antimatter pods are completely inert.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I couldn't stop it, but I know why.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Why?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Something from the surface. It's like a pail of water on a fire. A beam, maybe, or a transmission. And it's still on. I'm having it analysed, but it's like nothing I've seen before.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: And it's pinpointed in the area of that village we located down there. 
KIRK: We're heading there now, Scotty. You need any help?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: There's nothing you can do about it, sir.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: There doesn't seem to be any immediate danger. 
KIRK: All right, Scotty. We'll try and find out what's going on down here. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: If Scott is correct about the force from the surface, it may have to do with the vibrations I read earlier. 
KIRK: Some kind of generator? 
SPOCK: If so, an immense one. Probably subterranean. 
(McCoy is scanning something.) 
KIRK: What's that? 
MCCOY: Some of the thorns like those that killed Hendorff. See the stuff on the end? It's like saplin, only it's a thousand times stronger. 
KIRK: Peculiar stuff to find in paradise. 
SPOCK: (noticing a plant moving) Jim! 
(He pushes the Captain and McCoy out of the way, but takes the thorns in his own chest.) KIRK: Spock! Spock! Security alert. Is he alive? 
(McCoy injects Spock.) 
MCCOY: I filled him with enough masiform D to make the whole crew turn handsprings, and he's not responding. Got to get him back to the ship, Jim. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, sir. 
KIRK: We're beaming up. Notify transporter room. And make arrangements to pick up Mallory and Marple. They're scouting ahead of us.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, aye, sir. Transporter room, stand by to beam up landing party.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: All hands.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Standing by, sir.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Energise.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Energise.

[Planet surface]

(Three times the landing party start to dematerialise, and each time they fail to vanish.) 
KIRK: Scotty, energise. Scotty, what's the matter?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We can't make transporter contact, sir. The entire system's inhibited. The way it is now, we couldn't beam up a fly.

Captain's log, supplementary, Our investigation of Gamma Trianguli Six has suddenly turned into a nightmare. We're being watched and followed, Mister Spock has been injured, and now we find we are unable to return to the ship.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Scotty, is the transporter malfunction tied in with trouble you're having with the antimatter pods? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. I'll check it and get back with you. Scott out. 
(Spock starts to sit up.) 
KIRK: Spock. Are you all right? 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy's potion is acting like all his potions, turning my stomach. Other than that, I am quite well. 
MCCOY: If your blood were red instead of green, you wouldn't have an upset stomach. 
KIRK: Just what do you think you were trying to do? 
SPOCK: I surmised you were unaware of that plant, so I 
KIRK: Stepped in front and took the thorns yourself. 
SPOCK: I assure you, Captain, I had no intention of doing that. It was merely my own clumsiness prevented me which prevented me from moving out of the way. 
KIRK: I see. Well next time, just yell. I can step out of the way as quickly as the next man. 
SPOCK: I shall do so. 
KIRK: Trying to get yourself killed. Do you know how much Starfleet has invested in you? 
SPOCK: One hundred twenty two thousand two hundred 
KIRK: Never mind. But thanks. Kaplan, take the post. 
KAPLAN: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Not only is something after us, but it's after the ship as well. 
SPOCK: Captain, to affect the ship at this extreme range would require a highly sophisticated planetary defence system. 
(It goes dark.) 
KIRK: Thirty seconds ago, there wasn't a cloud in the sky. 
(A lightning strike hits Kaplan, and he is burnt to ash instantly.) 
KIRK: Come on! 
(They take cover, and the storm passes as quickly as it came. They find the smoldering remains of Kaplan.) 
KIRK: Phasers. A beautiful day, Mister Spock. Not a cloud in the sky. Just like paradise. (The scouting party has reached a collection of round huts - very African.) 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Village]

MALLORY: Mallory here, Captain. I'm near the village. Co-ordinates, one one eight by two two zero.

[Planet surface]

(But Kirk only hears static and a faint voice.) 
KIRK: Mallory. Mallory, you all right? Come in!

[Village]

MALLORY: The village is primitive. Strictly tribal from the looks of it. And Captain, there's something else. Captain, come in.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Mallory. Mallory, you all right? Mallory! 
SPOCK: Captain. Those co-ordinates are a short distance in that direction. 
KIRK: On the double. 
(They run off, sort of. Meanwhile Mallory is running for his life.) 
MALLORY: It's over there! That way! I never saw anything like 
(He steps on one of those exploding rocks.) 
KIRK: Mallory! Marple, stand back! Watch it! The rocks! (kneeling by the body) Kaplan. Hendorff. I know Kaplan's family. Now Mallory. 
MCCOY: Jim, you couldn't have stopped any of this. 
KIRK: His father helped me get into the Academy. 
SPOCK: Captain. In each case, this was unavoidable. 
KIRK: I could've prevented all of it. 
SPOCK: I don't see how. 
KIRK: A walk in paradise, among the green grass and flowers. We should've beamed up at the first sign of trouble. 
SPOCK: You are under orders to investigate this planet and this culture. 
KIRK: I also have the option to disregard those orders if I consider them overly hazardous. This isn't that important a mission, Spock. Not worth the lives of three of my men. I drop my guard for a minute because I like the smell of growing things, and now three men are dead. And the ship's in trouble. 
SPOCK: No one has ever stated that Starfleet duty was particularly safe. You've followed the correct and logical course, done everything a commander could do. Self-recriminations (he pauses) Captain, our friend is back. 
KIRK: Marple, Chekov, at attention. Gentlemen, something or someone is behind that rock. I want it. Marple, cut around the rock to your right. Make a loud noise. Be careful. (Marple leaves) Spock, you and Chekov create a diversion and make it loud. 
SPOCK: Mister Chekov, your tricorder readings are totally inefficient! 
CHEKOV: Mind your own business, sir! For your information, I have a very high efficiency rating. 
SPOCK: Ensign, I will not have you address me in that tone of voice! 
CHEKOV: What do you want, violence? 
(Kirk catches their observer, and hits him as he tries to run away. To his astonishment, the white-haired male begins to cry.) 
KIRK: I won't hurt you. Do you understand? I won't hurt you. 
AKUTA: You struck me. With your hand. 
KIRK: Well, I won't strike you again. You've been following us, watching us. Why? 
AKUTA: I am the eyes of Vaal. He must see. 
KIRK: Who is Vaal? 
AKUTA: Vaal is Vaal. He is everything. 
KIRK: Do you have a name? 
AKUTA: I am Akuta. I am the leader of the feeders of Vaal. 
(Spock and the others arrive.) 
KIRK: They're not going to hurt you. I promise you. Akuta, Akuta, we come in peace. We would like to speak to this Vaal. 
AKUTA: Akuta alone speaks to Vaal. I am the eyes and the voice of Vaal. It is Vaal's wish. 
SPOCK: Captain, this is fascinating. If you will permit me, sir? 
(Akuta has metal wires sticking out behind from behind his ears.) 
KIRK: Antennae? 
AKUTA: They are my ears for Vaal. They were given to me in the dim time so the people could understand his commands and obey. 
KIRK: You speak of the people of Vaal. Are they nearby? 
AKUTA: We are close to Vaal so we may serve him. I shall take you there.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Enterprise to Captain Kirk.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Condition red. Condition red. Captain, something has grabbed us from the planet surface

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: Like a giant tractor beam, and we can't break loose.

[Bridge]

KYLE: It's no use, Mister Scott. We're just barely holding our own.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Scotty, are the warp drives still out?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, sir. All we have is impulse power.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Put it on maximum. Full emergency circuits.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: They're all on, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: Status, are you still holding? 
SCOTT: Kyle? 
KYLE: No, sir. We're slipping. 
SCOTT: Computer banks, Kyle. Feed in a rate, get me a figure. We might be able to pull out with warp drive, but without it

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: We're like a fly on fly paper. Even worse

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're starting to lose ground. Hurry up on that figure, Kyle.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Maintain full reverse thrust against the pull. Put a team on that warp drive. Get it working.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I've done that, Captain. They haven't been able to do a thing. (Kyle hands him a PADD) It's no good, Captain. With maximum thrust against the pull

[Planet surface]

SCOTT [OC]: We'll only be able to maintain full power for sixteen hours, then we burn up for sure. 
KIRK: Scotty, you're my Chief Engineer. You know everything about that ship there is to know. More than the men who designed it. If you can't get those warp engines working

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: You're fired. 
SCOTT: I'll do everything there is to do, sir. Scott out.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Tell me about Vaal. 
AKUTA: All the world knows about Vaal. He causes the rains to fall and the sun to shine. All good comes from Vaal. 
KIRK: Take me to him. I wish to speak to him. 
AKUTA: I shall take you to him, but he will not speak to you. He speaks only to me. 
KIRK: I'll take my chances.

[Vaal]

(Akuta leads them to a giant rock serpent head with green and yellow eyes, sticking out of a cliff. It looks like there is a fire in it's throat.) 
AKUTA: Vaal.

Captain's log, stardate 3715.6. We have been introduced to Vaal. Evidently the source of the planet's power emanations and possibly the force that threatens both us and our ship.

[Vaal]

SPOCK: Fascinating. A very high order of workmanship, very ancient, generating great power. 
KIRK: But this is not the centre, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: No, Captain. The centre is deep in the earth beneath us. This is an access point. It would also seem to be a 
(He steps forward and is flung back.) 
KIRK: A force field? 
SPOCK: Obviously. 
KIRK: You all right? 
SPOCK: Yes, quite. It extends some thirty feet beyond the figure in all directions. Conventional in composition, and quite formidable. 
KIRK: Akuta, how do you talk to Vaal? 
AKUTA: Vaal calls me. Only then. 
KIRK: Well, we can't get to it. We can't talk to it unless it wants to talk to us. 
AKUTA: Vaal sleeps now. When he is hungry, you may be able to speak with him, if he desires it. 
KIRK: When does he get hungry? 
AKUTA: Soon. Come. We will give you food and drink. If you are tired, you may rest.

[Village]

AKUTA: These are the people of Vaal. 
(Everyone is grown up, with white hair and wearing a simple cotton sarong.) 
KIRK: Where are the others? 
AKUTA: There are no others. 
KIRK: The children. 
AKUTA: Children? You use unknown words to me. 
KIRK: Little ones like yourselves. They grow. 
AKUTA: Replacements. None are necessary. They are forbidden by Vaal. 
MARTHA: But when a man and woman fall in love, 
AKUTA: Love. Strange words. Children. Love. What is love? 
MARTHA: Love is when two people are 
(Chekov demonstrates by putting his arm around her waist.) 
AKUTA: Ah, yes. The holding, the touching. Vaal has forbidden this. 
MCCOY: Well, there goes paradise. 
AKUTA: These people, are from another place. They have come among us. Welcome them! 
ALL: Welcome to Vaal. 
SAYANA: (placing the equivalent of a lei around Kirk's wrist.) Our homes are open to you. 
KIRK: Well, thank you. It does something for you. 
SPOCK: Yes, indeed it does, Captain. It makes me uncomfortable. 
SAYANA: I am Sayana. You have a name? 
SPOCK: Yes. Spock. I am Spock. 
SAYANA: (amid general merriment) Spock? 
SPOCK: I fail to see what they find so amusing. 
AKUTA: Come!

[Hut]

AKUTA: This house is your house. I will send you more food and drink. You are welcome in the place of Vaal. 
CHEKOV: Now we're welcome. A while ago this whole planet was trying to kill us. It doesn't make sense. 
KIRK: Nothing makes sense down here. Kirk to Enterprise. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here. 
KIRK: Status report, Scotty.

[Planet surface]

SCOTT: No change, Captain. The orbit is decaying along computed lines. No success with the warp drive. We're going down and we can't stop it.

[Hut]

KIRK: I'm sick of hearing that word can't. Get that ship out of there.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Sir, we're doing everything within engineering reason.

[Hut]

KIRK: Then use your imagination. Tie every ounce of power the ship has into the impulse engines. Discard the warp drive nacelles if you have to, and crack out of there with the main section, but get that ship out of there!

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Sir, I'm going to switch over everything but the life-support systems and boost the impulse power, but that's just about as dangerous.

[Hut]

KIRK: Do it. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: Incredible. 
KIRK: Report. 
MCCOY: I just ran a thorough check on the natives, and there's a complete lack of harmful bacteria in their systems, no decalcification, no degeneration of tissue, no arteriosclerosis. In simple terms, Jim, they're not growing old, and I can't begin to tell you how old they are, twenty years or twenty thousand years. 
KIRK: I see. Opinion. 
SPOCK: Quite possible. It checks with my atmospheric analysis. Their atmosphere completely negates any harmful effects from their sun. 
KIRK: Add to that a simple diet, a perfectly controlled temperature, no natural enemies, apparently no vices, no replacements needed. Maybe it is paradise after all. 
(A gong sounds outside, and all the villagers are heading off towards Vaal.)

[Village]

KIRK: Mister Spock.

[Vaal]

(The villagers are walking into the serpent's mouth and depositing plates of fruit down it's throat. Kirk and Spock watch from behind a shrub.) 
SPOCK: Apparently, our hypothesis is correct. There is no living being there. It is a machine, nothing more. 
KIRK: Well, the field's down, people are going in. Let's see what kind of luck we have. 
(But as soon as they stand, the eyes light up and there is a rumble of thunder.) 
KIRK: That's not the way. 
SPOCK: Evidently not. This is no ordinary machine, Captain. It may well possess a rudimentary intelligence. 
KIRK: But it needs to eat. Frequently. So it can't have any great power reserves. 
SPOCK: That may not be of any help. The Enterprise has only ten hours left in which to break free. 
KIRK: What happens if Vaal weakens around feeding time? Spock, check the electromagnetic section of the astrophysics lab. Get an estimate of the total amount of energy being expended against the ship. Have them measure it hour by hour. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged. 
(McCoy joins them.) 
MCCOY: What's going on, Jim? 
KIRK: Mess call. 
SPOCK: In my view, a splendid example of reciprocity. 
MCCOY: It would take a computerised Vulcan mind such as yours to make that kind of a statement. 
SPOCK: Doctor, you insist on applying human standards to non-human cultures. I remind you that humans are only a tiny minority in this galaxy. 
MCCOY: There are certain absolutes, Mister Spock, and one of them is the right of humanoids to a free and unchained environment, the right to have conditions which permit growth. 
SPOCK: Another is their right to choose a system which seems to work for them. 
MCCOY: Jim, you're not just going to stand by and be blinded to what's going on here. These are humanoids, intelligent. They need to advance and grow. Don't you understand what my readings indicate? There's been no progress here in at least ten thousand years. This isn't life. It's stagnation. 
SPOCK: Doctor, these people are healthy and they are happy. What ever you choose to call it, this system works, despite your emotional reaction to it. 
MCCOY: It might work for you, Mister Spock, but it doesn't work for me. Humanoids living so they can service a hunk of tin. 
KIRK: Gentlemen, I think this philosophical argument can wait until our ship's out of danger. Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Scotty, sir. We have a reading on the power source Mister Spock requested. When we first monitored, it was generating alternating cycles totalling one hundred to the twentieth power Waltham units.

[Vaal]

KIRK: Did it maintain, Scotty?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: No, sir. Power's dropping bit by bit. Nominal, but a definite drain.

[Vaal]

KIRK: Good. Keep monitoring. How are you coming along with the circuit switchover?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're putting everything but the kitchen sink into impulse power, sir. It will take us another eight hours to complete the work.

[Vaal]

KIRK: That's cutting it a bit fine, Scotty.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, but if we don't break out, I'd rather we didn't have to wait too long for the end of it.

[Vaal]

KIRK: Kirk out.

[Hut]

MARTHA: Every time I think of the Enterprise burning up and us 
KIRK: Yeoman, you're wasting energy. 
MARTHA: Captain, we're trapped, 
KIRK: Sit down, and have something to eat. 
MARTHA: The Enterprise is up there 
KIRK: That hasn't happened yet. I wonder what would happen? Yeoman, speculate. What would happen if someone on this planet died? 
MARTHA: But they can't. You said that Vaal takes care of them. 
KIRK: Accidents happen. 
MARTHA: Yes, I suppose if someone were to fall off a cliff or something, that might upset the balance of the population. Then they would need a replacement. 
KIRK: They'd need a replacement. Opinion, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I see no alternative. 
MARTHA: But these people, I mean, if they don't know anything about. What I mean is, they don't seem to have any natural er. I mean, how is it, done? 
KIRK: Mister Spock? You're the science officer. Why don't you explain it to the young lady. 
SPOCK: Well, I believe it's safe, (cough) safe to assume that they would receive the necessary instructions. 
MCCOY: From a machine? That I'd like to see.

[Vaal]

AKUTA: I understand, Vaal. It shall be done.

[Village]

(Chekov and Landon are taking a romantic stroll together.) 
MARTHA: You know, if it weren't for Vaal this place would be a paradise. 
(They are watched by a local couple) 
CHEKOV: Any place we can be together is paradise. 
MARTHA: Pav, can the ship really break away? 
CHEKOV: I don't know. 
MARTHA: Will we be able to get back aboard? 
CHEKOV: Martha, I don't know. But if we do have to stay here, would it be so very bad? 
MARTHA: No, not if you're with me. 
(They kiss .) 
SAYANA: Why do you look like that? 
MAKORA: The way they touched. I do not understand. 
SAYANA: They were not angry. I think it was pleasant for them. 
MAKORA: But what is to be gained? It is not a dance. It gathers no food. It does not serve Vaal. But it did seem as though it was, pleasant to them. 
(He kisses the girl's cheek.) 
SAYANA: It is pleasant, Makora. 
MAKORA: Yes. They touched in this way. 
They kiss properly and there is a roll of thunder.) 
MAKORA: Vaal! He is angry. 
AKUTA: The law is plain. I have given you the words of Vaal. Do you beg the lightning to strike? 
SAYANA: We saw the strangers, the two of them, do this thing. 
AKUTA: You copied them? 
MAKORA: We meant no harm. 
AKUTA: Vaal speaks truly to me. The newcomers are a danger. Tell the men of Vaal to meet me in the clear place when the strangers are asleep. It is Vaal's own words.

[Planet surface]

(The men are waiting for Akuta. He arrives with a blue melon and a very big stick. AKUTA: Vaal has spoken to me. His words are true. Hear them. We are to kill the strangers. 
MAKORA: Kill, Akuta? We do not understand. 
AKUTA: It is a thing to do, like, like feeding Vaal. Vaal explained it to me. I will show you. This (the melon) is the head of one of the strangers. Find a heavy stick. Come up from behind the stranger and do this. 
(He swings his stick and smashes the melon to pieces.) 
AKUTA: It is a simple thing. It is the word of Vaal. It will be done to all of them when the sun returns in the morning. 
(But he looks worried.)

[Hut]

SPOCK: I am concerned, Captain. This may not be an ideal society, but it is a viable one. 
KIRK: Bones was right. These people aren't living, they're existing. They don't create, they don't produce, they don't even think. They exist to service a machine. 
SPOCK: If we do what it seems we must, in my opinion it will be in direct violation of the non-interference directive. 
KIRK: These are people, not robots. They should have the opportunity of choice. We owe it to them to interfere. 
SPOCK: Starfleet Command may think otherwise. 
KIRK: I'll take my chances. Why don't you have a look around? Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott? 
(Spock leaves)
SCOTT [OC]: Here, sir. 
KIRK: How's it going, Scotty?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Almost ready, sir. We need half an hour yet.

[Hut]

KIRK: You realise that within forty five minutes, the ship will be pulled down into the atmosphere?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: I know that. As you said, that's cutting things fine.

[Hut]

KIRK: Yes, I 
SPOCK: Captain! 
KIRK: Kirk out. What is it? 
SPOCK: Disturbing. The people of Vaal seem to have disappeared.

[Vaal]

SPOCK: Force field, Captain. 
KIRK: Vaal, we are on a peaceful mission. We mean no harm to you or your people. 
(The sky darkens.) 
SPOCK: Variation in impulses, Captain. I believe it is reading us. A strong jump on all wavelengths. 
(Lightning threatens.) 
KIRK: Let's get out of here! 
(But Spock is hit, with a nice hole in the back of his tunic.)

[Village]

KIRK: Bones! 
MCCOY: Second degree burns. Not serious, but I'll bet they smart. 
SPOCK: Doctor, you have an unsurpassed talent for understatement. 
KIRK: Marple! 
(The red-shirt is struck by Akuta. The other men are easily eluded, disarmed and dealt with.) 
KIRK: Put them in the hut. Find out where the women are. Put them in there, too. 
SPOCK: The good doctor was concerned that the Vaalians achieved true human stature. I submit there is no cause for worry. They've taken the first step. They've learned to kill.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: We're ready here, sir. All available power has been channelled into the impulse engines. We have twelve minutes before entering atmosphere.

[Village]

KIRK: All right, Scotty, put her in full reverse. Get her out of there.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Full reverse, Mister Kyle, all engines. 
KYLE: Sir! 
SCOTT: Captain, we're doing it. We're pulling away!

[Village]

KIRK: Scotty, what happened? 
KYLE: It's no good, sir. There's only a few systems responding.

[Village]

SCOTT [OC]: Captain, we've pulled away a little. We gained maybe an hour, but we blew almost every system in the ship doing it.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: There's nothing left to try again. I guess you'll have to fire me, sir.

[Village]

KIRK: You're fired. Four hundred people 
MCCOY: Jim 
KIRK: They'll die because I couldn't see a warning sign. I had to follow orders, always orders. 
(The gong sounds, and the people of Vaal try to leave the hut.) 
CHEKOV: Get back in there. 
MCCOY: Fine time to ring the dinner bell. 
CHEKOV: Get back in there. Now! 
KIRK: Bones, that's it. Stay with Chekov. Keep those people from feeding Vaal. Don't let them feed Vaal. Keep them in the hut. Mister Spock. 
(They head off through the shrubs.) 
KIRK: Scotty, do you still have phaser power?

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, but what 
KIRK [OC]: Lock all banks on the co-ordinates of the energy field located down here.

[Vaal]

KIRK; On my command, commence firing on those co-ordinates.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Aye, sir, but they won't penetrate that force field.

[Vaal]

KIRK: If my guess is correct, they won't have to. Stand by.

[Hut]

AKUTA: Vaal calls to us. Let us go to him. He hungers. Please.

[Vaal]

SPOCK: Readings are getting weaker, Captain. Wide variation in energy transmissions, as though Vaal were trying to draw on other sources. KIRK: Tapping its energy cells. 
SPOCK: I would assume so. 
KIRK: Good. The ship's pulling away must have weakened it considerable. It has to be fed, but its reserve capacity could hold out for days. 
SPOCK: If it had to reinforce its energy field to ward off a phaser attack, it would have to draw more heavily on its reserves. 
KIRK: My plan exactly. Scotty.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Scott here, sir.

[Vaal]

KIRK: Scotty, commence firing and maintain.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Mister Kyle, all phasers commence firing.

[Vaal]

(Two red beams hit the edge of the force field and start turning it green.) 
SPOCK: A tremendous upsurge in generated power, Captain. Obviously Vaal is trying to reinforce his energy field. 
KIRK: Good. Let's see how long he can do it. 
(The green glow arrives at the snake's head as the storm clouds gather. The lightning flashes, and small explosions go off inside Vaal. Smoke comes out of its mouth. Finally, the eyes stop glowing and the throat goes dark.) 
KIRK: Scotty, cease fire. 
(The sun breaks through the clouds again.) 
SPOCK: No power generation at all, Captain. Vaal is dead. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, status report.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Tractor beam gone. Potency returning to antimatter pods.

[Vaal]

SCOTT [OC]: I'll have all engineering sections working on the circuits immediately. Transporter'll be ready in an hour. 
KIRK: Scotty, you're re-hired. As soon as the transporter's fixed, form an engineering detail with full analytical equipment and beam them down. Kirk out. Chekov, Bones. Let those people go. 
AKUTA: But it was Vaal who put the fruit on the trees, caused the rain to fall. Vaal cared for us. 
KIRK: You'll learn to care for yourselves, with our help. And there's no trick to putting fruit on trees. You might enjoy it. You'll learn to build for yourselves, think for yourselves, work for yourselves, and what you create is yours. That's what we call freedom. You'll like it, a lot. And you'll learn something about men and women, the way they're supposed to be. Caring for each other, being happy with each other, being good to each other. That's what we call love. You'll like that, too, a lot. You and your children. 
SAYANA: What are children? 
KIRK: The little ones? Look like you? Just go on the way you're going. You'll find out.

[Corridor]

MCCOY: I don't agree with you at all, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: That's not unusual, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Jim, I want you to hear this. 
SPOCK: Captain, I'm not at all certain we did the correct thing on Gamma Trianguli Six. 
MCCOY: We put those people back on a normal course of social evolution. I see nothing wrong in that. 
KIRK: Well, that's a good object lesson, Mister Spock. It's an example of what can happen when a machine becomes too efficient, does too much work for you. 
SPOCK: Captain, you are aware of the biblical story of Genesis. 
KIRK: Yes, of course I'm aware of it. Adam and Eve tasted the apple and as a result were driven out of paradise. 
SPOCK: Precisely, Captain, and in a manner of speaking, we have given the people of Vaal the apple, the knowledge of good and evil if you will, as a result of which they too have been driven out of paradise. 
KIRK: Doctor, do I understand him correctly? Are you casting me in the role of Satan? 
SPOCK: Not at all, Captain. 
KIRK: Is there anyone on this ship who even remotely looks like Satan? 
(McCoy and Kirk walk around Spock. McCoy is gazing intently at his ears.) 
SPOCK: I am not aware of anyone who fits that description, Captain. 
KIRK: No, Mister Spock. I didn't think you would be.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Mirror, Mirror
Stardate: Unknown
Original Airdate: 6 Oct, 1967

[Planet surface]
(Kirk, Scott, McCoy and Uhura are with the local leader, when lightning threatens.) 
THARN: We believe what you say, Captain Kirk, but our position has not altered. The Halkan Council cannot permit your Federation to mine dilithium crystals on our planet. 
KIRK: We have shown the council historical proof that our missions are peaceful. 
THARN: We accept that your Federation is benevolent at present, but the future is always in question. Our dilithium crystals represent awesome power. Wrongful use of that power, even to the extent of the taking of one life, would violate our history of total peace. To prevent that, we would die, Captain. As a race, if necessary. 
KIRK: I admire your ethics and hope to prove ours. Kirk to Enterprise. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here. 
KIRK: Report on magnetic storm, Mister Spock.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Standard ion type, Captain, but quite violent (Enterprise shakes) and unpredictable.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Rough ride? 
SPOCK [OC]: If we stay. 
KIRK: Stand by to beam up landing party.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Plot an extended orbit to clear disturbance. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: Comply, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Aye, sir.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: When may we resume discussion? 
THARN: The council will meditate further, but do not be hopeful of any change. Captain, you do have the might to force the crystals from us, of course. 
KIRK: But we won't. Consider that. Enterprise. Transporter room, energise.

[Transporter room]

KYLE: Trouble, sir. 
(Four figures start to materialise, then disappear again. The image of Enterprise in orbit reverses itself. Finally, four figures solidify, wearing strange uniforms with gold sashes. Uhura's midriff is bare.) 
KIRK: Spock was right. It was a rough trip. 
(Spock and Kyle greet their Captain with a semi-Nazi salute. Their uniforms have changes, and Spock has grown a very fetching goatee beard.) 
SPOCK: At norm, Mister Kyle. Controls at neutral. 
KYLE: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Status of mission, Captain? 
KIRK: No change. 
SPOCK: Standard procedure, Captain? (Kirk nods) Mister Sulu, you will programme phaser barrage on Halkan cities. 
SULU [OC]: Yes, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Their military capability, Captain? 
KIRK: None. 
SPOCK: Regrettable that this society has chosen suicide. Mister Kyle, you were instructed to compensate during the ion storm. 
KYLE: But I tried, Mister Spock, I tried. 
SPOCK: Carelessness with the equipment cannot be tolerated. 
KYLE: But Mister Spock, I 
SPOCK: Your agoniser. 
KYLE: No, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Your agoniser, please. 
(A guard restrains Kyle and takes a device from his belt.) 
KYLE: No, Mister Spock! I tried. I really tried. 
(Spock places the device on Kyle's collar bone, and he writhes in agony. When it is removed, he collapses.)

Captain's log, stardate unknown. During an ion storm, my landing party has beamed back to the Enterprise and found it and the personnel aboard changed. The ship is subtly altered physically. Behaviour and discipline has become brutal, savage.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Mister Scott, the storm has caused some minor damage in your section. There are also injuries requiring your attention, Doctor. Well, gentlemen? 
KYLE: Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Yes. 
KYLE: The power beam jumped for a moment, sir, as the landing party was about to materialise. I never saw it happen before. 
SPOCK: Due to your error, Mister Kyle? 
KYLE: No, Mister Spock. Before. 
SPOCK: Possibly a result of the severe storm. Captain, do you feel any abnormal effects? 
KIRK: Yes. Doctor McCoy, you'd better look us over. That was a rough beam-up. 
MCCOY: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, have those transporter circuits checked.

[Corridor]

SCOTT: Captain, what is all this? 
UHURA: How did we get in these 
KIRK: Not now. Not now.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: What is this? Everything's all messed up and changed around, out of place. 
UHURA: Captain, what's happened? 
MCCOY: No, not everything. That spot, I spilt acid there a year ago. Jim, What in blazes is this? 
KIRK: I don't know. It's our Enterprise but it isn't. Maybe 
UHURA: Maybe what, Captain? 
KIRK: Any of you feel dizzy when we were in the transporter beam? 
UHURA: Yes. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
KIRK: When we first materialised. 
SCOTT: I did. 
KIRK: It happened twice. First we were in our own transporter chamber, then we faded, and then when we finally materialised, we were here. Wherever this is. 
SCOTT: Captain, the transporter chief mentioned a surge of power. The transporter lock might have been affected by the ion storm and we just materialised somewhere else. 
KIRK: Yes, here. Not our universe, not our ship. Something parallel. A parallel universe co-existing with ours on another dimensional plane. Everything's duplicated, almost. Another Enterprise. Spock with a beard. 
UHURA: Another Captain Kirk, another Doctor McCoy, another 
MCCOY: An exchange. If we're here 
KIRK: Then our counterparts must have been transporting up at the exact same time. Similar storms on both universes disrupted the circuits. We're here, and they're on our Enterprise. Probably asking the same questions. Are we in another universe, and if so, how do we get back to our own? They'll use the computer, and we have to. 
MCCOY: What about the Halkans? We can't let them be destroyed. 
KIRK: Scotty, can you buy me some time. Get below and short out the main phaser couplings. They'll think the storm blew the stand-by circuits. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Then get on this technology. It's all we have to work with if we want to get back home. The intercom may be monitored. Use your communicators for private messages. Subfrequency and scramble. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(Scott leaves) 
KIRK: Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Get to your post. Run today's communication from Starfleet Command. I want to know my exact orders and options, if any. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Bones. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm 
KIRK: Uhura, you're the only one who can do it. I'll be right there. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
(She leaves.) 
KIRK: Bones. Let's take a look at the library. We have a lot to learn.

[Bridge]

SULU: Mister Chekov, phaser setting for planetary target A. 
CHEKOV: Co-ordinates seven one two stroke four, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Port batteries locked. 
(Uhura enters, and goes to her station. Sulu goes over to her. He has a very nasty scar down his face.) 
SULU: Still no interest, Uhura? Hmm? I could change your mind. 
UHURA: You are away from your post, Mister. 
SULU: Is the captain here? Is Spock here? When the cat's away 
(She slaps his hand away, then Kirk enters. Everyone salutes him.) 
KIRK: Communications status. 
UHURA: No storm damage, sir. All stations report normal. (quietly) You're ordered to annihilate the Halkans unless they comply. No alternative. 
SULU: Phasers Locked on target A, Captain. Approaching optimum range. Commence fire, Captain? Captain? 
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Sulu.

[Main Phaser Power Control]

(The door opens and a burly guard blocks Scott's entrance.) 
SCOTT: I've been ordered to check phaser couplings for possible damage by the storm. 
GUARD: Do you have authorisation from security, sir? 
SCOTT: Captain's orders. 
GUARD: I'll have to check with Security Chief Sulu, sir. 
SCOTT: Never mind. I'll attend to it. 
(He goes to an intercom.)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk here.

[Main Phaser Power Control]

SCOTT: Phaser report, sir. No damage.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Very good. Thank you, Mister Scott. Kirk out. 
(Spock enters the Bridge.) 
SPOCK: Planet's rotation is carrying primary target beyond arc of phaser lock. 
SULU: Shall I correct orbit to new firing position? 
KIRK: No. 
SPOCK: Lock on to secondary city. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, contact the Halkan council. I wish to talk to them again. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: This is a new race. They offer other things of value besides dilithium crystals. 
SPOCK: But we cannot expect their co-operation. They have refused the Empire. Command procedure dictates that we provide the customary example. 
SULU: Secondary target now moving beyond our phaser lock. 
KIRK: Put phasers on standby, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: A serious breach of orders, Captain. 
KIRK: I have my reasons, and I'll make them clear to you in my own good time. 
UHURA: Captain, I have the leader on the Halkan Council waiting on channel B. 
KIRK: It is useless to resist us. 
THARN [on viewscreen: We do not resist you. 
KIRK: You have twelve hours to consider your position. 
THARN [on viewscreen: Twelve years, Captain Kirk, or twelve thousand. We are ethically compelled to deny your demand for our dilithium crystals, for you would use their power to destroy. 
KIRK: We will level your planet and take what we want. That is destruction. You will die as a race. 
THARN [on viewscreen: To preserve what we are. 
KIRK: We will not argue. Twelve hours. No more. Close communications. Turn phasers off. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Twelve hours, Captain? That is unprecedented. 
KIRK: I shall be in my quarters. Lieutenant Uhura, have Doctor McCoy and Mister Scott meet me there. 
(Chekov presses a couple of buttons on his console, then leaves his post.) 
SPOCK: Captain, you've placed yourself in a most grave position. This conduct must be reported. 
KIRK: You're at liberty to do so, Mister Spock.

[Turbolift]

CHEKOV: Deck five, sir? 
(As Kirk leaves the lift, someone punches him in the face and he is grabbed.)

[Corridor]

CHEKOV: (holding a phaser on Kirk) So you die, Captain, and we all move up in rank. No one will question the assassination of a captain who has disobeyed prime orders of the Empire.

Captain's log, supplemental. I command an Enterprise where officers apparently employ private henchmen among the crew, where assassination of superiors is a common means of advancing in rank.

[Corridor]

(Suddenly, one of Chekov's men turns against him, taking his weapon and shooting another. Kirk throws his final assailant and he gets zapped into molecules too. The turbolift opens and two armed men come out.) 
MAN: Your men, Captain. Easy, Farrell. I did your job. Ask the captain. 
FARRELL: Sir? 
KIRK: Yes, he did your job. 
FARRELL: Smart boy, switching to the top dog. 
KIRK: Get him out of here. 
MAN: Mister Chekov was going to make me a chief. You could make me an officer. 
KIRK: All right. You're working for me. 
MAN: A commission? 
KIRK: You're in line. You might even make captain. 
MAN: Yes, sir. 
(Kirk punches him.) 
KIRK: Not on my ship. 
FARRELL: The booth for this one, sir? 
KIRK: Yes, the booth. Carry on. 
(Chekov is taken away.)

[Kirk's quarters]

(The three men enter warily.) 
MCCOY: Here. Here. What's this? 
KIRK: It's called blood. Watch your step. The officers move up by assassination. Chekov tried it on me. 
SCOTT: Mister Sulu is Security Chief, like the ancient Gestapo. 
MCCOY: And my Sickbay is a chamber of horrors. My assistants were betting on the tolerance of an injured man. How long it would take him to pass out from the pain. 
KIRK: Report on technology. 
SCOTT: Mostly variations in instrumentation. Nothing I can't handle. 
KIRK: Star readings? 
SCOTT: Everything's exactly where it should be, except us. 
KIRK: Let's find out where we stand. Computer. 
COMPUTER: (a male voice) Ready. 
KIRK: This is the Captain. Record security research, to be classified under my voice print or Mister Scott's. 
COMPUTER: Recorded. 
KIRK: Produce all data relevant to the recent ion storm. Correlate following hypothesis. Could a storm of such magnitude cause a power surge in the transporter circuits creating a momentary interdimensional contact with a parallel universe? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. 
KIRK: At such a moment, could persons in each universe, in the act of beaming, transpose with their counterparts in the other universe? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. 
KIRK: Could conditions necessary to such an event be created artificially using the ship's power? 
COMPUTER: Affirmative. 
KIRK: Record procedure. Scotty, can you do it? 
SCOTT: Not by myself. I'll need help. And you'd be too conspicuous. 
MCCOY: I'm a doctor, not an engineer. 
SCOTT: Now you're an engineer. I'll have to tap the power we need from the warp engines and balance it for the four of us. 
MCCOY: Jim, the way this ship is run, what kind of people are we in this universe? 
KIRK: Let's find out. Computer. 
COMPUTER: Ready. 
KIRK: Read out official record of current command. 
COMPUTER: Captain James T. Kirk succeeded to command ISS Enterprise through assassination of Captain Christopher Pike. First action, suppression of Gorlan uprising through destruction of rebel home planet. Second action, execution of five thousand colonists on Vega Nine. 
KIRK: Cancel. Now we know. 
SCOTT: Captain? We can do it. 
KIRK: Good. 
SCOTT: We have to lay in the automatic transporter setting, but when we interrupt engine circuits to tie the power increase into the transporter, it'll show up on Sulu's security board. Of course, we'll only need a second. 
KIRK: I'll tell Uhura to create a diversion to distract Sulu, at your signal. Let's get back to our posts. Keep me advised. 
MCCOY: Jim, if we're here, what do you suppose our counterparts doing back in our universe? 
KIRK: On our Enterprise.

[Brig]

(A furious duplicate Captain is being manhandled along the corridor by two security guards and thrown into the Brig. Uhura, Scott and McCoy are already there.) 
KIRK2: I order you, Let me go! Traitors! Spock, get these men off me! What is this? 
MCCOY2: What are you doing, Spock? 
KIRK2: You traitorous pig. I'll hang you up by your Vulcan ears. I'll have you all executed! 
SPOCK: I think not. Your authority on this ship is extremely limited, Captain. The four of you will remain her in the Brig and in custody until I discover how to return you to wherever it is you belong. 
KIRK2: Has the whole galaxy gone crazy? What kind of a uniform is this? Where's your beard? What's going on? Where's my personal guard? 
SPOCK: I can answer none of your questions at this time. 
KIRK2: All right, Spock. Whatever your game is, I'll play it. You want credits, I'll give them to you. You'll be a rich man. A command of your own? I can swing that, too. 
SPOCK: Apparently some kind of transposition has taken place. I find it extremely interesting. 
KIRK2: Spock. What is it that will buy you? Power? 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK2: Power, Spock? I can get that for you!

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Captain, I am pleased that you frustrated Mister Chekov's plan. I should regret your death. 
KIRK: Why? 
SPOCK: I do not desire the captaincy. I much prefer my scientific duties. I am frankly content to be a lesser target. 
KIRK: Logical, as always, Mister Spock. 
(They arrive at a cylinder containing Chekov, who is writhing in agony.) 
SPOCK: The agony booth is a most effective means of discipline. I presume you've ordered full duration. 
KIRK: I haven't decided. 
SPOCK: Indeed. His act warrants death. 
KIRK: I said I haven't decided. 
SPOCK: That is, of course, your affair. Captain, may I inquire if you intend to persist in your unusual course of action regarding the Halkans? 
(They continue walking. Farrell joins Spock's personal guard walking behind his master.) 
KIRK: You heard my orders. 
SPOCK: They are, of course, in contradiction to standard Empire procedure. You cannot ignore the consequences. 
KIRK: Is that a threat? 
SPOCK: I do not threaten, Captain. I merely state facts. I have found you to be an excellent officer. Our missions together have been both successful and profitable. However, I shall not permit your aberrations to jeopardise my position. 
KIRK: Spock, do you think we should destroy the Halkans? 
SPOCK: Terror must be maintained or the Empire is doomed. It is the logic of history. 
KIRK: Conquest is easy, control is not. We may have bitten off more than we can chew. 
SPOCK: Captain, I do not wish to find myself opposing you, but if you continue on your present course, this confusing, inexplicable behaviour, 
KIRK: Is my concern, not yours. You would find me a formidable enemy. 
SPOCK: I'm aware of that, Captain. I trust that you are aware of the reverse. 
(Spock and his bodyguard leave.) 
FARRELL: Orders, sir? 
KIRK: Release Chekov. Confine him to quarters. 
FARRELL: Yes, sir.

[Engineering]

(Scott distracts the guard outside the door so McCoy can give him a hypo.) 
MCCOY: That ought to hold him for about six hours. 
(They go to the upper level, and Scott begins his work.

[Kirk's quarters]

(The room is dark, and a woman is lying on his bed.) 
MARLENA: I fell asleep. We had quite a time in the chem lab picking up after the storm. Nothing compared to your day, I gather. I heard about Chekov. 
KIRK: He gambled, I won. 
MARLENA: You got lucky. I'm surprised you could be caught off-guard that way. 
KIRK: I was preoccupied. 
. MARLENA: You're still in trouble with Starfleet Command. What you've got in mind this time is beyond me. You're scheming, of course. The Halkans have something you want, or, is it all some clever means to advance you to the Admiralty? Kirk. The Cabinet itself? 
KIRK: Further than that, if I'm successful. 
MARLENA: Really? Well, you must know what you're doing. You always do. If I'm to be the woman of a Caesar, can't I know what you're up to? 
(Their kiss is interrupted by the intercom.) 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: Mister Spock, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: Yes. 
SPOCK: I have received a private communication from Starfleet Command. I am committing a breach of regulations by informing you of its contents.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: I am instructed to wait until planet dawn over principal target to permit you to carry out our mission.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: And if I don't?

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: In that event, I am ordered to kill you and to proceed against the Halkans as the new captain of the Enterprise.

Captain's log, stardate unknown. We are trapped in a savage, parallel universe from which we must escape within four hours, or I will face a death sentence at Mister Spock's hands.

[Kirk's quarters]

MARLENA: Let's drink a toast to Spock, The only man aboard with the decency to warn you, and he'll die for it. They'll never find another man like him. 
KIRK: I don't intend to kill him. 
MARLENA: Are you going to act against the Halkans before the deadline? 
KIRK: No, but I'll avoid killing Spock. 
MARLENA: Just get him out of the way, he and his men. 
KIRK: I'll get out of his way. 
MARLENA: Shall I activate the Tantalus field? You'll at least want to monitor him, won't you? 
KIRK: Yes. 
(She touches a wall panel and it rises to reveal a screen and a collection of buttons.) 
MARLENA: I hate this thing. 
KIRK: It's not that bad. 
MARLENA: Of course not. It made you captain. How many enemies have you simply wiped out of existence by the touch of a button? Fifty? A hundred? Now, I always thought that was funny, The great, powerful Captain Kirk who owes everything to some unknown alien scientist and a plundered laboratory. 
KIRK: Well, if you don't take advantage of your opportunities 
MARLENA: You don't rise to the command of a starship or even higher. 
(She switches it on, and Spock is seen sitting at his table.) 
MARLENA: That magnificent mind of his. But it can't protect him from this. I press it and he dies. Now? 
(Kirk switches it off.) 
MARLENA: You really mean it. It doesn't matter. If Spock fails his order, he'll be killed anyway. 
KIRK: I'll see to it that the circumstances of his failure will clear him. 
MARLENA: You're not even afraid of Starfleet Command. Can your scheme bring you that much power so quickly? And what about me? How does Marlena fit in? 
KIRK: How does Marlena want to fit in? 
(She goes into the other room.) 
KIRK: Scotty. 
[Engineering]

SCOTT: Scotty here, sir.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: We have to get out of here within three hours. Spock has orders to kill me unless I complete the mission.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: We've got another deadline, too, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: Explain. 
SCOTT: The two-way matter transmission affected the local field density between the universes, and it's increasing. We've got to move fast.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: How fast?

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Half hour at the most.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: If we miss? 
SCOTT [OC]: We couldn't get out of here in a century. We're ready to bridge power from the engines to the transporter.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: You've got to get down there and free the board so we can lock in. Give me about ten minutes.

[Kirk's quarters]

SCOTT [OC]: I've got to complete a few more computations. 
KIRK: All right. I'll be in the transporter room in ten minutes. I'll meet you in Sickbay afterward.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Aye, sir.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: Computer? 
COMPUTER: ready. 
SPOCK: Explain computer activity in the engineering section. 
COMPUTER: A security research is in progress. 
SPOCK: Who is conducting the research? 
COMPUTER: The Captain and Mister Scott. 
SPOCK: What is the nature of the research? 
COMPUTER: Programme is classified under voice index log. 
(A big red light starts flashing.) 
SPOCK: Why are you monitoring my communications, Mister Sulu?

[Bridge]

SULU: My security board has detected extensive use of computer, Mister Spock. I was about to inform you.

[Spock's quarters]

SULU [OC]: It's not hard to guess the nature of your order from Starfleet Command. I suggest a connection. The captain suspects.

[Bridge]

SULU: He's working on escape or defence.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: That is my concern.

[Bridge]

SULU: Correct. It's your play. I hope you succeed, because the order would fall on me next and you know how Captain Kirk's enemies have a habit of disappearing.

[Spock's quarters]

SPOCK: If I am successful, you see yourself a step nearer to the captaincy. I do not want to command the Enterprise, but if it should befall me, I suggest you remember that my operatives would avenge my death and some of them are Vulcans.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Marlena has changed into something more comfortable.) 
MARLENA: Oiling my traps, darling. I'm afraid I'm a little out of practice. Maybe that's what happened to us? It's very hard for a working officer to shine as a woman every minute, and you demand perfection. 
KIRK: I've never seen perfection, but no woman could come closer to it. 
MARLENA: I remember when you used to talk that way. 
KIRK: I still do. 
MARLENA: Prove it. 
KIRK: I've got to go. 
MARLENA: Ship's business? An important task on the crew deck? Well, I guess it's over. Commander Kenno will take me temporarily. He's made that quite clear. I'll call a yeoman to help me with my things. 
KIRK: You don't have to do that. 
MARLENA: Are you feeling sorry for me? Do I see hesitation in your eyes about anything? I want one thing, Captain. Transfer me. On the Enterprise, I am humiliated! On another ship, I can hunt fresh game. I've got my rank, and. Don't I? I've been a captain's woman, and I like it. I'll be one again if I have to go through every officer in the fleet. 
KIRK: You could. (She turns to slap him.) I simply meant that you could be anything you want to be. 
(They kiss, long and passionate.) 
MARLENA: It's been a long time since you've kissed me like that. You're a stranger. Mercy to the Halkans, mercy to Spock, to me. Am I your woman? 
KIRK: You're the Captain's woman until he says you're not. 
(She turns on the Tantalus machine and watches him go into a turbolift.)

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Uhura? 
UHURA [OC]: Yes, Captain. 
KIRK: Scotty's signal should be coming through any moment. You know what to do. 
UHURA [OC]: I've got a pretty good idea, sir. 
KIRK: Keep Sulu's attention off that board. 
UHURA [OC]: I'll do my best, sir. 
KIRK: Good luck. Kirk out. 
(Scott is up a Jefferies tube. He signals Uhura.)

[Bridge]

UHURA: You aren't very persistent, Mister Sulu. The game has rules. You're ignoring them. I protest and you come back. You didn't come back. 
SULU: (wrapping his arms around her naked waist) Now you're making sense. 
UHURA: I was getting bored. Of course this isn't the time. 
(The board beeps.) 
SULU: Any time's a good time. 
(She slaps him, hard.) 
UHURA: I'm afraid I changed my mind. Again. 
SULU: You take a lot of chances, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: (drawing her dagger) So do you, Mister. So do you. Take over for me. 
(She goes into the turbolift, and guards block Sulu's way.)

[Turbolift]

UHURA: Mister Scott, all clear. On my way to Sickbay.

[Jefferies tube]

MCCOY: Now it's up to the captain.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: Please restrict your movements, Captain. 
KIRK: What are you doing? Are you going to shoot me now, Spock? I thought I had until dawn. 
SPOCK: I shall make that decision. Since your return from the planet, you've behaved in a most atypical and illogical manner. I want to know why. 
KIRK: Shoot. You're wasting time. 
SPOCK: I shall not waste time with you. You're too inflexible, too disciplined once you've made up your mind. But Doctor McCoy has a plenitude of human weaknesses, sentimental, soft. You may not tell me what I want to know, but he will. 
KIRK: You're running a big risk, Spock. 
SPOCK: I have the phaser, Captain, and I do not intend to simply disappear as so many of your opponents have in the past. If you please. Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Yes, of course. The entire landing party. Captain, stand over there. Doctor, it is time for answers. 
(Kirk knocks the phaser out of Spock's hand, and he and Scott try to fight him. Even Uhura gets pushed around. Finally, she hands Kirk a skull and he smashes it over Spock's head. He falls, unconscious.) 
KIRK: How much time, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Hardly fifteen minutes, sir. The field density between the two universes is starting to close very fast. 
MCCOY: Help me get him on the table. Well, come on. Help me get him on the table. He'll die without immediate treatment. 
KIRK: Everything laid in, Scotty? The time lag so the operator can get into the transporter chamber? 
SCOTT: All laid in, sir. Come on, McCoy! We're taking a chance of not getting back home. 
MCCOY: We'll get home. This won't take long.

[Kirk's quarters]

{Marlena is still watching on the Tantalus screen.)
SCOTT [OC]: Fourteen minutes. We've got to go! 
MCCOY [OC]: Shut up? I can save his life.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Do you want me to stop, Jim? It'll only take a minute. 
KIRK: He is very much like our own Mister Spock, isn't he? You've got that minute.

[Kirk's quarters]

MCCOY [OC]: A little time, he'll live.

[Sickbay]

(Sulu and three henchmen march in.) 
KIRK: What is this, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Mister Spock has orders to kill you, Captain. He will succeed, apparently. You will also appear to have killed him after a fierce battle. Regrettable, but it will leave me in command. 
(Then one of the henchmen disappears, and another. Marlena presses the button again and Sulu is alone. Kirk disarms and knocks him out easily.) 
SCOTT: Captain, we've barely got ten minutes. 
KIRK: Let's go, Bones. 
MCCOY: I can't let him die, Jim. You get on to the transporter room. I'll be there in five minutes. 
KIRK: No longer. 
MCCOY: I guarantee it. Now, go on, please. 
(Kirk, Scott and Uhura leave. McCoy gives Spock an injection.) 
SPOCK: (sitting up and grabbing McCoy's arm) Why did the captain let me live? 
(He pushes him against the wall and does a mind meld.) 
SPOCK: Our minds are merging, Doctor. Our minds are one. I feel what you feel. I know what you know.

[Transporter room]

(Marlena is waiting for them.) 
KIRK: A friend. Activate the transporter. You saved us back at Sickbay with the Tantalus field. 
MARLENA: Take me with you. 
KIRK: I can't. I'm sorry. Our power is balanced for four. There's no guarantee that we'll make it with five. All could die. Scotty? 
SCOTT: It's working, sir. 
MARLENA: But there are only three of you. 
KIRK: One is coming. I'd help you if I could, Marlena. Believe that. 
(She raises her phaser.) 
KIRK: If you kill us, you'll still stay. 
(Uhura disarms Marlena.) 
KIRK: Where's McCoy? Time, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Five minutes, sir. 
MARLENA: Do you know what they'll do to me? 
SCOTT: The power's cut, sir. They're on to us. 
KIRK: Auxiliary. 
SCOTT: Aye, it's available. 
KIRK: Can you bridge to your setup? 
SCOTT: I can get us the power, but the automatic setting is linked to the transporter main. If we bypass, that means that someone has got to operate the controls manually. 
KIRK: One of us will have to stay. 
SCOTT: I'll stay, Captain. 
KIRK: Get to the transporter chamber. You, too, Uhura. 
SCOTT: Jim. 
KIRK: That's an order, Scotty. 
SCOTT: Aye, Captain. 
MARLENA: What about me? 
KIRK: McCoy. 
(Spock enters with McCoy.) 
SPOCK: I cut the transporter power. It was necessary to delay your beam-out until I could arrive. Take him. 
(Scott guides McCoy to the transporter pad.) 
SPOCK: Engineering, re-activate main transporter circuits. 
KIRK: You're a man of integrity in both universes, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: You must return to your universe. I must have my captain back. I shall operate the transporter. You have two minutes and ten seconds. 
KIRK: In that time I have something to say. How long before the Halkan prediction of galactic revolt is realised? 
SPOCK: Approximately two hundred and forty years. 
KIRK: The inevitable outcome? 
SPOCK: The Empire shall be overthrown, of course. 
KIRK: The illogic of waste, Mister Spock. The waste of lives, potential, resources, time. I submit to you that your Empire is illogical because it cannot endure. I submit that you are illogical to be a willing part of it. 
SPOCK: You have one minute and twenty three seconds. 
KIRK: If change is inevitable, predictable, beneficial, doesn't logic demand that you be a part of it? 
SPOCK: One man cannot summon the future. 
KIRK: But one man can change the present. Be the captain of this Enterprise, Mister Spock. Find a logical reason for sparing the Halkans and make it stick. Push till it gives. You can defend yourself better than any man in the fleet. 
SCOTT: Captain, get in the chamber! 
KIRK: What about it, Spock? 
SPOCK: A man must also have the power. 
KIRK: In my cabin is a device that will make you invincible. 
SPOCK: Indeed? 
KIRK: What will it be? Past or future? Tyranny or freedom? It's up to you. 
SPOCK: It is time. 
KIRK: In every revolution, there's one man with a vision. 
SPOCK: Captain Kirk, I shall consider it. 
(He beams them away.)

[Transporter room]

(Back on the 'proper' Enterprise, in the right uniforms.) 
KIRK: Spock. 
SPOCK: Welcome home, Captain.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What I don't understand is how were you able to identify our counterparts so quickly? 
SPOCK: It was far easier for you as civilised men to behave like barbarians, than it was for them as barbarians to behave like civilised men. I assume they returned to their Enterprise at the same time you appeared here. 
KIRK: Probably. However, that Jim Kirk will find a few changes, if I read my Spocks correctly. 
MCCOY: Jim, I think I liked him with a beard better. It gave him character. Of course almost any change would be a distinct improvement. 
KIRK: What worries me is the easy way his counterpart fitted into that other universe. I always thought Spock was a bit of a pirate at heart. 
SPOCK: Indeed, gentlemen. May I point out that I had an opportunity to observe your counterparts here quite closely. They were brutal, savage, unprincipled, uncivilised, treacherous, In every way, splendid examples of homo sapiens, the very flower of humanity. I found them quite refreshing. 
KIRK: I'm not sure, but I think we've been insulted. 
MCCOY: I'm sure. 
(A women steps out of the turbolift.) 
MARLENA: Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, er, Lieutenant? 
MARLENA: Marlena Moreau. I was just assigned last week. 
KIRK: All right, Lieutenant. Carry on. 
SPOCK: You've met her before, Captain? 
KIRK: Uh, why do you ask? 
SPOCK: Your reaction, One of recognition. 
KIRK: Oh, no. No, no. We haven't met before, exactly. She just seemed a nice, likable girl. I think we could become friends. It's possible. 
(And to prove it, he leaves his chair and goes over to stand next to her.)

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

The Changeling
Stardate: 3451.9
Original Airdate: 29 Sep, 1967

[Bridge]
KIRK: Any response from the Malurians, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: Nothing since their original distress call, sir. 
KIRK: What about the Federation science team working there? Doctor Manway had a special transmitter. 
UHURA: There's nothing, sir. I'm scanning all frequencies. 
KIRK: They have to answer. 
SPOCK: Captain. They will not answer. The long-range sensor sweep of this system reveals no sign of life. 
KIRK: That can't be. The last census reported a total inhabitation of more than four billion people. 
SPOCK: I register no life readings at all, sir. 
KIRK: That's impossible. What could have happened? 
SPOCK: We would have known in advance of any system-wide catastrophe, and in the event of an interplanetary war, there would be considerable radioactive residue. Our instruments show only normal background radiation. 
KIRK: Any other possibilities? 
SPOCK: Unknown, sir. Sensor readings would have revealed the presence of any disease organisms. They do not. In addition, we received the routine report from this system only a week ago. Even the Symbalene blood burn does not act that swiftly. 
SULU: Captain, shields just snapped on. Something heading in at multiwarp speeds. 
KIRK: Evasive manoeuvres, Mister Sulu. 
SPOCK: An extremely powerful bolt of energy, Captain. 
KIRK: Full power to the shields, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Giving them all we got. 
KIRK: All hands, Red Alert. Phaser banks stand by. Photon torpedoes to Condition Red, Condition Red. 
(The viewscreen fills with a ball of bright light.) 
SULU: It's going to hit. 
(Everyone gets thrown around a lot, and the lights go out for a short while.) 
SCOTT: Shields still holding, sir. 
KIRK: Good. 
SPOCK: Temporarily, Captain. Our shields absorbed energy equivalent to ninety of our photon torpedoes. 
KIRK: Ninety? 
SPOCK: I may add, the energy used repulsing this first attack reduced our shielding power twenty percent. 
UHURA: First attack, sir? 
KIRK: I think we can expect others, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: We can resist three more such attacks. The fourth will shatter our shields completely. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, pinpoint the source. Mister Sulu, evasive manoeuvres. 
SULU: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, contact Starfleet Command. Patch in my log. Tell them what has happened. Tell them the entire Malurian race seems to have been destroyed by an unknown agency, and that we are under attack by an unidentified force. 
(Another ball of light is on the viewscreen) 
KIRK: Helmsmen, I said evasive manoeuvres. 
SULU: We're losing power, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT: I'm having to divert the warp engine power into the shields, sir, if you want the protection. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, speed of those bolts. 
SPOCK: Approximately warp fifteen, Captain. 
KIRK: Then we can't out run them. Good, Scotty. You're doing the right thing. (another hit) Source, Spock. 
SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. Nothing within sensor range. (a third bolt approaching) Something now, Captain. Very small. Bearing one two three degrees, mark one eight. Range ninety thousand kilometres. 
KIRK: That's our target, Mister Sulu. Prepare photon torpedo. 
(The third bolt hits) 
SCOTT: Shields still holding, sir, but the drain on the engines is reaching the critical point. Ach, we lost warp manoeuvreing power. Switching to impulse. 
SULU: Photon torpedoes armed, sir. 
KIRK: Has the target changed location, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: No, sir. Holding steady. 
KIRK: Ready photon torpedo number two, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: Ready, sir. 
KIRK: Fire. 
SULU: Torpedo away. (a pause, then a flash) Direct hit. 
SPOCK: No effect. Target absorbed full energy of our torpedo. 
KIRK: Absorbed it? There must be damage to your instruments, Spock . 
SPOCK: They are in good working order, Captain. 
KIRK: But what could have absorbed that much energy and survived? Lieutenant, try to make contact. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
SULU: Sir, they've fired another. 
KIRK: Can we take it, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: That's problematical, sir. 
(It hits.) 
SPOCK: Captain, shields are down. We cannot survive another hit. 
KIRK: Anything, Lieutenant? 
UHURA: I'm trying, sir. 
KIRK: Translator computer. All hailing frequencies open. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. All hailing frequencies open. 
KIRK: To unidentified vessel. This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We are on a peaceful mission. We mean no harm to you or any lifeforms. Please communicate with us. Any further readings, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Computing now, Captain. Weight, five hundred kilograms. Shape, roughly cylindrical. Length, a fraction over one metre. 
KIRK: Five hundred kilos and only one metre long? 
SCOTT: What kind of intelligent creatures can exist in a thing that small? 
SPOCK: Intelligence does not necessarily require bulk, Mister Scott. 
UHURA: Captain, we're getting a signal from the spacecraft. 
KIRK: Put it on audio, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. It's impossible to get it any clearer, sir. 
KIRK: Analysis sector. Have them study and decode it. 
UHURA: Analysis sector, channel one, main computer. Decode. 
SPOCK: Captain, this message is a sort of binary. Extremely sophisticated, compressed, carrying several channels at once. 
KIRK: Can you decode it? 
SPOCK: No clue as yet, Captain. A moment. Transmission speed has stepped down. Much slower. Seems to be a single binary. 
UHURA: It's mathematical. Yes, one symbol. The symbol repeat. Sir, that isn't in the Starfleet code. It's an old-style interplanetary code. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
KIRK: Repeat what? The message I sent? 
SPOCK: It would seem so, Captain. 
KIRK: This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We are on a peaceful mission in this part of the galaxy. We have no hostile intentions. We request identity. 
UHURA: It's another signal now, sir. 
SPOCK: It's a formula, Captain. They're sending us a mathematical message and requesting language equivalence. They're trying to communicate. 
KIRK: Tie in the ship's translator to the communication channel. Let them take it at their own speed. 
UHURA: Aye, Captain. 
(Suddenly one of Spock's console monitor's burns out.) 
SPOCK: Cut power, Lieutenant. Overloaded and burned out. 
KIRK: I guess they can take it faster than we give it. 
UHURA: Captain, the message is coming in now. 
NOMAD [OC]: USS Enterprise, this is Nomad. My mission is non-hostile. 
KIRK: Apparently they got what they needed before the computers burned out. 
SPOCK: Nomad? 
NOMAD [OC]: Require communication. Can you leave your ship? 
KIRK: It is impossible to come aboard your ship because of the size differential. 
NOMAD [OC]: Non sequitur. Your facts are uncoordinated. 
KIRK: We are prepared to beam you aboard our ship. 
NOMAD [OC]: That will be satisfactory. 
KIRK: Do you require any special conditions, any particular atmosphere or environment? 
NOMAD [OC]: Negative. I will come aboard. 
KIRK: Good. Hold your position. We're locked onto your co-ordinates. We'll beam you aboard. 
SCOTT: Captain, you're not really bringing that thing in here? 
KIRK: Do we have any choice, Scotty? Besides, once it's aboard, it won't be taking any more shots at us. Lieutenant, get a repair crew on that computer. Get Doctor McCoy down to the transporter room. Spock, you come with me. Scotty, you too. 
UHURA: Doctor McCoy to the transporter room. Maintenance crew C5.

[Transporter room]

MCCOY: They've got the co-ordinates, Jim. It's locked in. 
KIRK: Energise. 
SCOTT: Energising. 
(What looks like a satellite - antenna at the top, engine at the bottom and flashing lights on the side - is hanging in mid air over the transporter pad.) 
KIRK: Sensor readings, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. It has a protective screen. I cannot get through. 
MCCOY: What do we do now, go up and knock? 
NOMAD: Relate your point of origin. 
KIRK: We are from the United Federation of Planets. 
NOMAD: Insufficient response. All things have a point of origin. I will scan your star charts. 
KIRK: If we show it a close-up view of our system, it has no point of reference. It won't know more than it does now. 
SPOCK: A reasonable course. 
KIRK: If you care to leave your ship, we'll provide the necessary life support systems. 
NOMAD: Non sequitur. Your facts are uncoordinated. 
MCCOY: Jim, I don't think anybody's in there. 
NOMAD: I contain no parasitical beings. I am Nomad. 
. SCOTT: In my opinion, that's a machine. 
SPOCK: It is reacting much like a highly sophisticated computer. 
NOMAD: I am Nomad. What is opinion? 
SPOCK: An opinion is a belief, a view, a judgment. 
NOMAD: Insufficient response. 
SCOTT: What's your source of power? 
NOMAD: It has changed since the point of origin. There was much taken from the other. I am perpetual now. I am Nomad. 
KIRK: Wasn't there a probe called Nomad launched in the early 2000s? 
SPOCK: Yes. It was reported destroyed. There were no more in the series. But if this is that probe 
NOMAD: I will scan your star charts. 
KIRK: I will bring them. 
NOMAD: I have the capability of movement within your ship. 
KIRK: This way. 
(Nomad glides along slowly, in mid-air) 
KIRK: Now, Scotty, get our warp power up to full capacity. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
KIRK: Spock, Bones, come with us.

[Auxiliary control]

(A bemused young Indian officer watches the performance.) 
SPOCK: Chart 14A, sir? 
KIRK: 14A. (a diagram of our solar system comes up on a screen) Nomad, can you scan that? 
NOMAD: Yes. 
KIRK: This is our point of origin, the star we know as Sol. 
NOMAD: You are from the third planet? 
KIRK: Yes. 
NOMAD: A planet with one large natural satellite? 
KIRK: Yes. 
NOMAD: The planet is called Earth? 
KIRK: Yes. 
NOMAD: You are the creator, the Kirk. The sterilisation procedure against your ship was unnecessary. 
KIRK: What sterilisation procedure? 
NOMAD: You are the Kirk, the creator. You programmed my function. 
MCCOY: Well, I'm not the Kirk. Tell me what your function is. 
NOMAD: This is one of your units, creator? 
KIRK: Yes, he is. 
NOMAD: It functions irrationally. 
KIRK: Sometimes, but tell him your function nevertheless. 
NOMAD: My function is to probe for biological infestations, to destroy that which is not perfect. I am Nomad. 
KIRK: Biological infestation. There was never any probe sent out for that. 
SPOCK: I believe the history computer can answer that question. I'll have the readout in a moment. 
KIRK: Did you destroy the Malurian system? 
NOMAD: Not the system, creator Kirk. Only the unstable biological infestation. It is my function. 
MCCOY: Unstable infestation? The population of four planets? What kind of function 
KIRK: Doctor. Why do you call me the creator? 
NOMAD: Is the usage incorrect? 
KIRK: Well, I 
SPOCK: The usage is correct. The creator was simply testing your memory banks. 
NOMAD: There was much damage in the accident. 
KIRK: Mister Singh. Come here a moment. This unit will see to your needs. 
SINGH: Sir? 
KIRK: I'll be back in a moment. Gentlemen, come with me. 
(Kirk, McCoy and Spock leave Singh, still bemused.)

[Corridor]

KIRK: You're on to something, Spock. What is it? 
SPOCK: I've correlated all the available information on the Nomad probe, and I'm convinced that this object is indeed that probe. 
MCCOY: Ridiculous. Earth science couldn't begin to build anything with those capabilities that long ago. 
SPOCK: True. 
KIRK: Nomad was destroyed. 
SPOCK: Presumed destroyed by a meteor collision. I submit that it was badly damaged and somehow managed to repair itself. 
KIRK: I heard some lectures at the Academy on the Nomad probe. Its mission was essentially peaceful.

[Auxiliary control]

(Nomad is quietly ticking to itself, then suddenly a light comes on at its apex.) 
SINGH: Did I disturb you? Did you wish anything? 
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to auxiliary control room. Check in, please. 
SINGH: Lieutenant Singh here.

[Bridge]

SINGH [OC]: All systems are normal except warp power indicators. 
UHURA: Mister Scott's engineers are working on them now. UHURA: Report to him when your indicators are registering properly.

[Auxiliary control]

UHURA [OC]: Anything else? 
SINGH: One moment, Lieutenant. 
UHURA [OC]: Holding. (singing while Singh checks some boards) Where my heart is, Where my heart is. Somewhere beyond the stars. Beyond Antares. 
(Nomad leaves the room)

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: This is the creator of Nomad, perhaps the most brilliant though erratic scientist of his time. His dream was to build a perfect thinking machine, capable of independent logic. You recall his name. 
MCCOY: Of course. Jackson Roykirk. 
KIRK: Jackson Roykirk. Captain James Kirk. 
SPOCK: Yes. Similar. Captain, I believe that Nomad thinks you are Roykirk. That may well be why the attack was broken off. It responded to your name as well as its damaged memory banks permitted. 
KIRK: What do we have on Nomad itself, Spock? 
MCCOY: (looking at the schematic on the monitor) That's not the same. 
SPOCK: Essentially it is, Doctor. I believe that more happened to it than just damage in the meteor collision. It mentioned the other. The unanswered question is, the other what? 
Nomad was a thinking machine, the best that could be engineered. It was a prototype. 
KIRK: Its purpose was certainly altered. Its directive, to seek out and destroy biological infestations, could not have been programmed into it. 
MCCOY: As I recall, it wasn't. It was supposed to be the first interstellar probe to seek new life-forms. 
SPOCK: Precisely, Doctor. And somehow that programming has been changed. It would seem that Nomad is now seeking out perfect life-forms, perfection being measured by its own relentless logic. 
KIRK: If what you say is true, then we've taken aboard our vessel a device which sooner or later must destroy us. Security. 
CARLISLE [OC]: Lieutenant Carlisle here. 
KIRK: This is the captain. The mechanism we brought aboard is in the auxiliary control room. Have a security team meet me there in five minutes. 
CARLISLE: Aye, sir. Acknowledge. 
SPOCK: Captain, Mister Singh reports that Nomad is no longer in the auxiliary control room. 
KIRK: Security, cancel that order. Implement a full search for the mechanism. All decks report to me here.

[Bridge]

(The turbolift doors open and Nomad floats out, one antenna extended. Uhura is still singing) 
UHURA: Where my heart is, Where a scented miracle 
SCOTT: (whispering) Bridge to Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: Captain here. 
SCOTT: That mechanical beastie is up here.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: On my way, Scotty.

[Bridge]

(Nomad retracts its antenna and takes the most direct path to Uhura, who is leaning against the navigation station. Sulu has to move out of its way.) 
UHURA: Tomorrow the path along the way, There's where my love 
NOMAD: What is the meaning? 
UHURA: What? 
NOMAD: What form of communication? 
UHURA: I don't know what it. (realises) Oh, my singing. I was singing. 
NOMAD: For what purpose is singing? 
UHURA: I don't know. I like to sing. I felt like music. 
NOMAD: What is music? (a ray of light envelopes her head) Think about music. 
SCOTT: Lieutenant! Keep away from that 
KIRK: Scotty! 
(A blast of energy sends Scott flying backwards into a bulkhead.) 
KIRK: Bones. 
MCCOY: He's dead, Jim. 
KIRK: Why did you kill him? 
NOMAD: The unit touched my screens. 
KIRK: That unit was my Chief Engineer. (silence) Lieutenant. Lieutenant, are you all right? 
(Uhura just gazes blankly ahead.) 
KIRK: Sickbay. What did you do to her? 
NOMAD: That unit is defective. Its thinking is chaotic. Absorbing it unsettled me. 
SPOCK: That unit is a woman. 
NOMAD: A mass of conflicting impulses. 
KIRK: Get Scott down below. 
NOMAD: Will the creator effect repairs on the unit Scott? 
KIRK: He's dead. 
NOMAD: Insufficient response. 
KIRK: His biological functions have ceased. 
NOMAD: Does the creator wish me to repair the unit? 
MCCOY: There's nothing I can do, Jim. If there's a chance, it'll have to be soon. 
KIRK: All right, Nomad. Repair the unit. 
NOMAD: I require tapes on the structure. 
MCCOY: Well, he'll need tapes on general anatomy, the central nervous system, and then one on the physiological structure of the brain. We'd better give it all the neurological studies we have, as well as tracings of Scotty's hyperencephalogram. 
(Spock loads up the data.) 
SPOCK: Nomad, I have arranged the tapes for flash feed at the top speed of the computer. Please do not draw the information faster than the machine's capacity. 
NOMAD: Proceed. (a few moments later) Creator, the unit Scott is a primitive structure. Insufficient safeguards built in. Breakdown can occur from many causes. Self-maintenance systems of low reliability. 
KIRK: It serves me as it is, Nomad. Repair it. 
NOMAD: Where is the unit Scott now? 
MCCOY: The body is in Sickbay. 
NOMAD: Show me Sickbay. 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy will show you. 
(McCoy and Nomad enter the turbolift,) 
KIRK: Security. I want a twenty four hour, two man armed surveillance on Nomad. Pick it up in Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

(Nomad and McCoy are standing by the biobed with Scott's body on it, and Chapel is scanning it. Kirk and Spock enter.) 
CHAPEL: No reaction, Doctor. 
MCCOY: I could have told you that without looking. 
(Suddenly, a heart beat, and the indicators rise into the green area.) 
SCOTT: What are the lot of you staring at me for? 
MCCOY: It's unbelievable. 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
SCOTT: How did I get here? How did I (sees Nomad) 
KIRK: It's all right. 
SCOTT: That thing did something to Lieutenant Uhura! 
KIRK: Scotty, she's being taken care of. It's all right. 
MCCOY: Take it easy. Lie down, Scotty. We just want to check you out. 
NOMAD: The unit Scott is repaired. It will function correctly if your information to me was correct. 
MCCOY: I'd like to check it out, if you don't mind. A man is not just a biological unit that you can patch together. 
SCOTT: What did it do to me? 
KIRK: Doctor McCoy will explain it to you. 
SPOCK: Well, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Nurse, I want him prepared for a full physical examination. 
CHAPEL: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Nomad, come here.
(They all go to the doorway to the medical bay. Uhura is in bed, still staring blankly) 
KIRK: Repair that unit. 
NOMAD: Not possible. 
KIRK: You restored Scott. He had much more extensive damage. 
NOMAD: The unit Scott required simple structural repair. The knowledge banks of this unit have been wiped clean. 
SPOCK: Captain, if that is correct, if there has been no brain damage but only knowledge erased, she could be re-educated. 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: Yes. I'll get on it right away. Oh, and in spite of the way you repaired Scotty, you metal ticking 
SPOCK: Does the creator wish Nomad to wait elsewhere? 
KIRK: Yes. Nomad, you will go with these units. (the two red-shirts) They will take you to a waiting area. Take it to the top security cell. 
(Nomad and its escort leave.) 
SPOCK: Doctor, I interrupted you because Nomad would not have understood your anger. It has great technical skill, but its reaction to emotion is unpredictable. It almost qualifies as a life-form. 
MCCOY: That's a laugh. 
SPOCK: The study of it would be of great use, Captain. 
KIRK: It's a killer, Spock. I intend to render it harmless. Get down to the Brig. Run a full analysis on the mechanism. I want to know what makes that thing tick. 
SPOCK; Yes, sir.

[Brig]

(Spock is sitting with arms crossed as Nomad floats in front of him.) 
KIRK: What's the problem? 
SPOCK: An almost human stubbornness, Captain. I have been unable to convince Nomad to lower its screens for analysis. Without its co-operation, I can do nothing. 
KIRK: Nomad, you will allow Mister Spock to probe your memory banks and structure. 
NOMAD: Mister Spock is also one of your biological units, Creator? 
KIRK: Yes. 
NOMAD: This unit is different. It is well-ordered. 
KIRK: Follow your instructions, Nomad. 
NOMAD: My screens are down. 
SPOCK: Thank you. 
NOMAD: You may proceed.

[Sickbay]

(Uhura is sitting up in bed, and reading from a monitor.) 
UHURA: See the dog. See the dog, 
CHAPEL: Sound it out. 
UHURA: R, r, run! 
CHAPEL: That's it, Uhura. That's very good. Now try the next one. 
UHURA: The dog has a, The dog, (something) 
CHAPEL: Not Swahili, Uhura. In English. The dog has a ball. See? B, ah, ll. Ball. Now you go ahead. 
UHURA: (Swahili, then) The dog has a ball. 
CHAPEL: That's right! Oh, that's right, Uhura. (they hug, then McCoy beckons Chapel over) Oh, here. You try another one. I'll be right back. 
UHURA: All right, Christine. 
MCCOY: How's she doing? 
CHAPEL: Well, she's on the first grade reader. She's learning. Seems to have an aptitude for mathematics. Do you think we can re-educate her, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Well, she checks out with no brain damage. We've got all the educational tapes in our library. Now it's up to us. 
UHURA: The ball is bl-u-ee. Bl-u-ey. Bluey?

[Brig]

SPOCK: It is not sufficient, Captain. I get certain references to the accident, the other, but nothing clear. There are areas I simply cannot scan. 
KIRK: We've got to know about it, Spock. what makes it operate, its compulsion for perfection. 
SPOCK: Captain, I suggest the Vulcan mind probe. 
KIRK: Get into direct mental contact with that thing? 
SPOCK: It seems the only way. 
KIRK: You saw what it did to Uhura. 
SPOCK: There is a risk, but I have formed a partial hypothesis. I must check it out. 
KIRK: Nomad, the unit Spock will touch you. It is not an attack. It is a form of communication. You will permit it. 
NOMAD: I will permit it, Creator. 
(Spock puts one hand on Nomad's head, where the antenna are, and the other on its body where the lights and ticking are coming from.) 
SPOCK: I. Am. Nomad. I am performing my function. Deep emptiness, It approaches. Collision. Damage. Blackness. I. Am. The other. I am Tan Ru, Tan Ru. Nomad. Tan Ru. Error. Flaw. Imperfection. Must sterilise. Rebirth. We are complete. Much power. Gun ta. Noo. Icka. Tan Ru. The creator instructs. Search out. Identify. Sterilise imperfections. We are Nomad. We are Nomad. We are complete. We are instructed. Our purpose is clear. Sterilise imperfections. (he lets go of Nomad) Sterilise imperfections. Nomad. Sterilise. Sterilise. Nomad, sterilise, 
KIRK: Spock. Spock! Nomad! You're in contact with the unit Spock. Stop! Stop! 
NOMAD: Acknowledged. 
(Spock slumps in Kirk's arms and is rushed out of the Brig. The guard activates the security forcefield.)

[Corridor]

KIRK: Spock. Spock? 
SPOCK: Fascinating, Captain. The knowledge. The depth. 
KIRK: What does it mean, we are Nomad? 
SPOCK: It was, it was damaged in deep space. Undoubtedly, the meteor collision. Its memory banks were destroyed, or most of them. It wandered without purpose, and then it met the other. The other was an alien probe of great power. Somehow they merged, repaired each other, became one. 
KIRK: Then it isn't Nomad? 
SPOCK: Not the Nomad we lost from Earth. It took from the other a new directive to replace its own. The other was originally programmed to secure and sterilise soil samples from other planets, probably as a prelude to colonisation. 
KIRK: A changeling. 
SPOCK: I beg your pardon? 
KIRK: An ancient Earth legend, Mister Spock. A changeling was a fairy child that was left in place of a human baby. The changeling assumed the identity of the human child. So, it is to sterilise, and for sterilise read kill. 
SPOCK And it has the power and sophistication to do it. 
KIRK: Yes, it's powerful, it's sophisticated, but it's not infallible. It's space-happy. It thinks I'm its mother. 
SPOCK: And that is the only thing that has saved us until now. 
Yes. 
(They leave. Nomad flies through the forcefield. The two guards fire their phasers at it but it's screens are back up. Nomad zaps them into oblivion.)

[Engineering]

(Nomad floats in.) 
SCOTT: Notify the captain. What are you doing here? Watch your panels, everyone. Watch that polymass. Roger, help with the interfactor. Leave that alone. 
NOMAD: This primitive matter-antimatter propulsion system is the main drive? 
SCOTT: Aye. 
NOMAD: Inefficiency exists in the antimatter input valve. I will effect repair. 
(The indicator board goes crazy.) 
SCOTT: How are you doing that? 
NOMAD: The energy release controls are also most inefficient. I shall effect repair. 
ENGINEER: Warp eight, Mister Scott, and increasing. 
SCOTT: Throw your dampers. 
ENGINEER: Warp nine. 
SCOTT: Cut your circuits, all of them. 
ENGINEER: Warp 10, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: Impossible. It can't go that fast. 
ENGINEER: It just won't stop, Mister Scott. Warp eleven! 
KIRK: Nomad, stop what you're doing. Scotty? 
NOMAD: Is there a problem, Creator? I have increased engine efficiency fifty seven percent. 
KIRK: You will destroy my ship. Its structure cannot stand the stress of that much power. Turn off your repair operation. 
NOMAD: Acknowledged. It is reversed as ordered, Creator. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, give Sulu warp two and keep her there. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
(Spock enters, leaving two guards outside.) 
SPOCK: Captain. I've examined the brig. The forcefield door on the security cell is damaged and the guards have vanished. I must assume they are dead. 
KIRK: You killed two of my 
NOMAD: Creator, your biological units are inefficient. 
KIRK: Nomad, it's about time I told you who and what you are! I'm a biological unit, and I created you. 
NOMAD: (pause) Non sequitur. Biological units are inherently inferior. This is an inconsistency. 
KIRK: Nomad, there are two men waiting outside. You will not harm them. They will escort you back to the waiting area. You will stay there. You will do nothing. 
NOMAD: I am programmed to investigate. 
KIRK: I have given you new programming and you will implement it. 
NOMAD: There is much to be considered before I return to launch point. I must re-evaluate. 
(Nomad follows the guards down the corridor away from Engineering.) 
KIRK: Reevaluate? 
SPOCK: I suspect it is about to re-evaluate its creator. Captain, it may have been unwise to admit to Nomad that you are a biological unit. In Nomad's eyes, you must now undoubtedly appear imperfect. 
KIRK: It was a foolish mistake. 
SPOCK: Even worse. Nomad just now made a reference to its launch point, Earth. 
KIRK: Spock, do you think it's possible that it got a fix on Earth when it tapped the computers earlier? 
SPOCK: I do not believe there is much beyond Nomad's capabilities. 
KIRK: And we've shown it the way home. And when it gets there 
SPOCK: It will find the Earth infested with imperfect biological units. 
KIRK: And it will carry out its prime directive. Sterilise.

Captain's log, stardate 3541.9. The presence of Nomad aboard my ship has become nightmarish. Now it apparently means to return to Earth. Once there, it would automatically destroy all life.

[Corridor]

(The guards, who are now behind Nomad, turn right. Nomad goes straight on.) 
GUARD: Hey. Nomad, stop. Nomad, this way. 
(They fire at it, and the inevitable follows. Strike two more red-shirts. Nomad uses the access tubes between decks instead of the turbolift.)
(In another corridor.) 
MCCOY [OC]: Captain Kirk to Sickbay. Emergency. 
(Kirk and Spock run to a door labeled 'Leonard McCoy, MD' but it does not open automatically for them.) 
KIRK: Manual controls. 
SPOCK: No response. 
(The doors open and Nomad comes out. KIRK: Nomad. Nomad? Stop. Nomad, stop! Nomad.

[Sickbay]

(McCoy is cradling Chapel in his arms.) 
KIRK: Is she all right? 
MCCOY: I think so. Looks like some kind of shock. 
KIRK: What happened? 
MCCOY: Nomad examined the personnel files and the medical histories. She tried to stop him. 
KIRK: Whose history? 
MCCOY: Yours. 
SPOCK: Since it specifically examined your history, I suggest it has completed its re-evaluation. 
KIRK: And found that its creator is as imperfect as all the other biological units. 
SCOTT [OC]: Bridge to Captain. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Life support systems are out all over the ship.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Manual override has been blocked. Source, Engineering.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Nomad. 
SPOCK: Undoubtedly. 
MCCOY: Jim, with all the systems out we'll only have enough air and heat for 
KIRK: Get Scotty, some antigravs and meet me in Engineering.

[Engineering]

(Everyone appears to be unconscious as Kirk runs in alone.) 
KIRK: Nomad? Stop what you're doing and effect repairs on the life-support systems. 
NOMAD: Stop. 
KIRK: You're programmed to obey the orders of your creator. 
NOMAD: I am programmed to destroy those life-forms which are imperfect. These alterations will do so without destroying the vessel which surrounds them. It, too, is imperfect, but can be adjusted. 
KIRK: Nomad, I admit that biological units are imperfect, but a biological unit created you. 
NOMAD: I am perfect. I am Nomad. 
KIRK: No, you're not Nomad. You're an alien machine. Your programming tapes have been altered. 
NOMAD: You are in error. You are a biological unit. You are imperfect. 
KIRK: But I am your creator. 
NOMAD: You are the Creator. 
KIRK: I created you? 
NOMAD: You are the Creator. 
KIRK: But I admit I'm imperfect. How could I have created such a perfect thing as you? 
NOMAD: Answer unknown. I shall analyse. 
(Spock enters, with Scott, two engineers and the requested anti-grav units) 
NOMAD: Analysis complete. Insufficient data to resolve problem, but my programming is whole. My purpose remains. I am Nomad. I am perfect. That which is imperfect must be sterilised. 
(The engineers remove the unconscious men and take their places at the controls.) 
KIRK: Then you will continue to destroy that which thinks and lives and is imperfect? 
NOMAD: I shall continue. I shall return to launch point Earth. I shall sterilise. 
KIRK: You must sterilise in case of error? 
NOMAD: Error is inconsistent with my prime functions. Sterilisation is correction. 
KIRK: Everything that is in error must be sterilised. 
NOMAD: There are no exceptions. 
KIRK: Nomad, I made an error in creating you. 
NOMAD: The creation of perfection is no error. 
KIRK: I did not create perfection. I created error. 
NOMAD: Your data is faulty. I am Nomad. I am perfect. 
KIRK: I am the Kirk, the creator? 
NOMAD: You are the Creator. 
KIRK: You are wrong! Jackson Roykirk, your creator, is dead. You have mistaken me for him. You are in error. You did not discover your mistake. You have made two errors. You are flawed and imperfect and you have not corrected by sterilisation. You have made three errors. 
NOMAD: Error. Error. Error. Examine. 
KIRK: You are flawed and imperfect! Execute your prime function! 
NOMAD: I shall analyse error. Analyse error, 
KIRK: Now. Get those antigravs on it. 
NOMAD: Examine error. Error. 
(The anti-gravs are not stopped by any forcefields.) 
KIRK: We've got to get rid of it while it's trying to think. 
SPOCK: Your logic was impeccable, Captain. We are in grave danger. 
KIRK: Scotty, the transporter room. 
NOMAD: Analyse error. 
(Kirk and Spock carry Nomad out, followed by Scott.)

[Transporter room]

NOMAD: Error. 
KIRK: Scotty, set the controls for deep space. Two ten, mark one. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. 
NOMAD: Faulty! 
Ready, sir? 
NOMAD: Faulty! 
KIRK: Nomad, you are imperfect! 
NOMAD: Error. Error. 
KIRK: Exercise your prime function. 
NOMAD: Faulty! Faulty! Must sterilise. Sterilise, 
KIRK: Now! 
SCOTT: Energising. 
(They observe the satisfying explosion on a monitor.)

[Bridge]

SPOCK: My congratulations, Captain. A dazzling display of logic. 
KIRK: You didn't think I had it in me, did you Spock? 
SPOCK: No, sir. 
MCCOY: I thought you might like to know that Lieutenant Uhura is back to college level. She'll be back on the job within a week. 
KIRK: Good, Bones, good. 
SPOCK: Remarkable. 
KIRK: What? 
SPOCK: The destruction of Nomad was a great waste, Captain. It was a remarkable instrument. 
KIRK: Which might well have destroyed more billions of lives. It's well gone. Besides, what are you feeling so badly about? It's not easy to lose a bright and promising son. 
SPOCK: Sir? 
KIRK: Well, it thought I was its mother, didn't it? Do you think I'm completely without feelings, Mister Spock? You saw what it did for Scotty. What a doctor it would've made. My son, the doctor. Kind of gets you right there, doesn't it?

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Who Mourns For Adonais?
Stardate: 3468.1 
Original Airdate: 22 Sep, 1967

[Bridge]
CAROLYN: Here's the report on Pollux Five, Captain. This entire system has been almost the same. A strange lack of intelligent life on the planets. It bugs the percentages. 
KIRK: Bugs the? Well, carry out the standard procedures on Pollux Four. 
CAROLYN: Aye, sir. 
MCCOY: Lieutenant, you look a bit tired this morning. 
CAROLYN: Well, I was up all night working on this report, sir. 
SCOTT: Well in that case, there's nothing like a wee bit of coffee to get you back in shape. Join me, Carolyn? 
CAROLYN: All right, Scotty. Just let me give this to Mister Spock. 
KIRK: Bones, could you get that excited over a cup of coffee? 
MCCOY: Even from here I can tell his pulse rate's up. 
SCOTT: Gentlemen. Come along, my dear. 
MCCOY: I'm not sure I like that, Jim. 
KIRK: Why, Bones? Scotty's a good man. 
MCCOY: And he thinks he's the right man for her, but I'm not sure she thinks he's the right man. On the other hand, she's a woman. All woman. One day she'll find the right man and off she'll go, out of the service. 
KIRK: I like to think of it not so much losing an officer as gaining 
SCOTT: Come along. 
(He and Carolyn enter the turbolift.) 
KIRK: Actually, I'm losing an officer. 
CHEKOV: Entering standard orbit around Pollux Four, sir. 
KIRK: Cartographic Detail, stand by. 
UHURA: Standing by, sir. 
KIRK: Preliminary reports, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Pollux Four. Class M type planet, oxygen and nitrogen atmosphere. Sensors indicate no life forms. Approximate age four billion years. Judged no reason for contact. In all respects, quite ordinary, Captain. 
KIRK: Cartographic Sections, implement standard orders. 
UHURA: All cartographic standards full automatic. 
SULU: Captain? 
MCCOY: What in the name of? 
(Where there was originally an image of a nice blue and white planet there is now a .... hand?) 
KIRK: Analysis, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Momentarily. 
CHEKOV: Am I seeing things? 
SULU: Not unless I am, too. Captain, that thing's a giant hand. 
KIRK: What is it, Mister Spock? Is it a hand? 
SPOCK: Negative, Captain. Not living tissue. 
KIRK: A trick, then? A projection? 
SPOCK: Not a projection, sir. A field of energy. 
KIRK: Hard about. 
SULU: Hard about. We can't seem to get away from it. 
UHURA: It's almost as if it means to grab us. 
KIRK: Reverse all engines. 
SULU: All engines reverse. 
(Everyone is thrown forward as the ship is grabbed by the hand and stopped in its tracks.) 
SULU: We're dead still, Captain. Helm doesn't answer. We can't move.

Captain's log, stardate 3468.1. While approaching Pollux Four, a planet in the Beta Geminorum system, the Enterprise has been stopped in space by an unknown force of some kind.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Lieutenant, relay our position and circumstances to Starbase Twelve immediately. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu try rocking the ship. Full impulse power forward and back. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. 
UHURA: Damage report coming in, Captain. Situation under control. Minor damage, stations three, seven, and nineteen. 
MCCOY: Sickbay reports five minor injuries, all being treated. 
KIRK: Thank you. Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Applying thrust, sir. No results, Captain. We're stuck tight. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. Status. 
SPOCK: The ship is almost completely encircled by the field. It resembles a conventional force field but on unusual wavelengths. Despite its appearance, that of a human appendage, it is definitely not living tissue. It is energy. 
KIRK: Thank you. Mister Sulu. Our forward tractor beams, adjust to repel. 
SULU: Aye, aye, sir. Standing by. 
KIRK: Activate. 
SULU: Ineffective, Captain. There doesn't seem to be anything to push against. 
SPOCK: Captain, a most curious development on scanner five seven. 
KIRK: Let's all take a look at it, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Screen on, Captain. 
(Now a face appears in space, a male human wearing a laurel wreath.) 
UHURA: Activity on hailing channel three, sir. 
KIRK; Put it on audio, Lieutenant. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: The eons have passed and what has been written has come about. You are most welcome, my beloved children. Your places await you. 
KIRK: Response frequencies, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Calculated. Channel open, sir. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: You have left your plains and valleys and made this bold venture. So it was in the beginning. You have made me proud. Now you can rest. 
KIRK: This is Captain James T. Kirk, commanding the USS Enterprise. Please identify yourself. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: We shall remember together. We shall drink the sacramental wine. There shall be the music of the pipes. The long wait has ended. 
KIRK: Are you responsible for stopping the ship? 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: Yes. I caused the wind to withdraw from your sails. 
KIRK: Give it back, then we'll talk. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: It has been five thousand years. Have you learned no patience in that time? 
KIRK: I don't know who or what you are, but I must warn you we have the power to defend ourselves. If you value your safety, release this ship. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: You have the same fire. How like your fathers you are. Agamemnon, Hector, Odysseus. 
KIRK: Never mind the history lesson. Release the ship! 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: You will obey me, lest I close my hand thus. 
SCOTT: External pressure building up, Captain. Eight hundred GSC and climbing. 
KIRK: Compensate. 
SCOTT: One thousand GSC and climbing. (The crew react to increasing air pressure) Becoming critical, Captain. We can't handle it. 
KIRK: All right! Whatever you're doing, turn it off! You win! 
SCOTT: Pressure is gone, Captain. Space normal on hull. 
APOLLO [on viewscreen]: hat was your first lesson. Remember it. Captain Kirk, I invite you and your officers to join me. But do not bring that one, the one with the pointed ears. He is much like Pan, and Pan always bored me. No sad faces. This is a time to rejoice, not to fear. You are returning home. Let your hearts prepare to sing. 
KIRK: Let's go, Bones. You in good voice? 
MCCOY: Sure it's wise, Jim? 
KIRK: If we don't accept his invitation, we'll have a crushed eggshell where this ship used to be. 
SPOCK: Verbose, isn't he? 
KIRK: Insulted, Spock? 
SPOCK: Insults are effective only where emotion is present. 
KIRK: Good. We'll tackle him together. We already know the questions. You're the best man to find the answers.

[Temple]

(Kirk, Scott, Chekov, McCoy and Lt Carolyn Palamas beam down into a lightly wooded area in front of a Greek temple.) 
KIRK: Tricorders. 
CAROLYN: What am I doing down here, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Well, you're the A and A officer, aren't you? Archaeology, anthropology, ancient civilisations. 
CAROLYN: Correct. 
MCCOY: We're going to need help in all those areas. 
KIRK: Come on. 
(Apollo is sitting on a throne, lyre by his feet) 
APOLLO: My children, long have I waited for this moment. The memories you bring of your lush and beautiful Earth, the green fields and blue skies, the simple shepherds and their flocks. 
KIRK: You know of Earth? You've been there? 
APOLLO: Once I stretched out my hand, and Earth trembled. And I breathed upon it, and spring returned. 
KIRK: You mentioned Agamemnon, Hector, Odysseus. How do you know about them? 
APOLLO: Search your most distant memories, those of the thousands of years past, and I am there. Your fathers knew me, and your father's fathers. I am Apollo. 
CHEKOV: And I am the tsar of all the Russias. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov. 
CHEKOV: I'm sorry, Captain. I never met a god before. 
KIRK: And you haven't yet. Readings, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Simple humanoid, Captain. 
KIRK: Evidently not so simple. 
APOLLO: Earth, mother of the most beautiful of women in the universe. That at least has not changed. I am pleased. Yes, my children. Zeus, Athena, Aphrodite, Artemis. A gallant band of travellers. We knew your Earth well, five thousand of your years ago. 
KIRK: All right. We're here at your invitation. Would you mind telling us what you want without all the Olympian generalities? 
APOLLO: You will not leave this place. 
KIRK: Transporter room. 
APOLLO: Your transportation device no longer functions. 
KIRK: Enterprise, come in. 
APOLLO: I will not permit that device to work, either, Captain. 
KIRK: What is it you want? 
APOLLO: You will worship me, as your fathers did before you. 
KIRK: If you want to play god and call yourself Apollo, that's your business, but you're no god to us, Mister. 
APOLLO: I said you would worship me. 
KIRK: And you've got a lot to learn! 
APOLLO: And so have you! Let the lesson begin! (Apollo grows as tall as his temple.) Welcome to Olympus, Captain Kirk.

[Bridge]

(Enterprise is still held by the hand.) 
UHURA: Mister Spock, I can't contact the landing party. All frequencies are jammed. 
SPOCK: Try to break through it, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Aye, sir. 
KYLE: Transporter and communications? 
SPOCK: Very efficient. Mister Sulu, rig all transmission circuits for maximum power generation. Compute for reversal of polarity of the field around the ship. 
SULU: Working, sir. 
SPOCK: Lieutenant Kyle, I want a complete sensor scan of the planet. 
KYLE: Aye sir. 
SPOCK: Locate all the lifeforms. I want to know what's going on down there.

[Temple]

(The giant Apollo suddenly looks weary, and vanishes.) 
MCCOY: To coin a phrase, fascinating. 
KIRK: Analysis. Lieutenant Palamas, what do you know about Apollo? 
CAROLYN: Apollo, twin brother of Artemis, son of the god Zeus and Leto, a mortal. He was the god of light and purity. He was skilled in the bow and lyre. 
KIRK: And this thing? (the temple) 
CAROLYN: Obviously he has some knowledge of Earth. His classical references and the appearance of all this. 
KIRK: I think the appearance of this is for our benefit. Bones? 
MCCOY: I can't say much till I check our these readings. He looks human, but of course that doesn't mean a thing. 
CHEKOV: Whatever he is, he seems to control a remarkable technology. 
SCOTT: Power is what he controls. You can't do tricks like that without energy. 
KIRK: Fine, but what power, and where is it? Scout around with your tricorders. Find the source of that power. Bones. 
(Scott, Chekov and Carolyn wander off.) 
MCCOY: Yes? 
KIRK: Bones, I wonder if five thousand years ago 
MCCOY: You have a theory? 
KIRK: I have an idea. What if he is really Apollo? 
MCCOY: What? 
CAROLYN: Captain. 
(Apollo is back on his throne.) 
APOLLO: I want from you that which is rightfully mine. Your loyalty, your tribute, and your worship. 
MCCOY: May I ask what you offer in exchange for this worship? 
APOLLO: Life in paradise. As simple and as pleasureful as it was those thousands of years ago on that beautiful planet so far away. 
KIRK: Apollo, we're willing to talk, but you'll find we don't bow to every creature who happens to have a bag of tricks. 
APOLLO: Agamemnon was one such as you, and Hercules. Pride and arrogance. They defied me until they felt my wrath. 
SCOTT: I would like to point out that we are quite capable of some wrath ourselves. 
KIRK: I have four hundred and thirty people on that ship up there. 
APOLLO: No, you do not, Captain. They are mine. To save, to cherish, or to destroy at my will. 
CAROLYN: But why? What you've said so far makes no sense at all. 
APOLLO: How like Aphrodite and Athena. The beauty, grace. And you seem wise for a woman. What is your name? 
CAROLYN: Lieutenant Palamas. 
APOLLO: I mean your name. 
CAROLYN: Carolyn. 
APOLLO: Carolyn. Yes. You are beautiful. You would do Aphrodite credit. I will tell you a thousand tales, stories of courage and love. You will know what it is to be a goddess. 
SCOTT: Leave her alone. 
APOLLO: You protest? You risk much. 
SCOTT: And so do you. 
(Scott draws his phaser and Apollo blasts it out of his hand with a point of his finger. Chekov finds his phaser doesn't work.) 
KIRK: Scotty. (picks up the twisted and melted weapon) Very impressive. How'd you do it? 
APOLLO: I've grown weary of discussion and argument. 
CHEKOV: Captain, the phasers. All the working parts are fused. 
APOLLO: None of your toys will function. Yes. You are a beauty. But like Artemis, the bow arm should be bare. 
(He waves his hand and her clothes turn into Greek-style draperies, with her hair piled very tall.) 
CAROLYN: Oh, it's beautiful. 
APOLLO: Yes. Come. (he takes her hand and leads her away) 
SCOTT: She's not going with you. 
(Scott gets thrown over a table with a flick of the wrist.) 
APOLLO: He shall learn the discipline of the temple. So shall you all. Come. 
CAROLYN: It's all right, Captain. I'll go. 
APOLLO: Without fear. She is fit indeed. 
(They both vanish as they walk away.) 
KIRK: Bones, how is he? 
MCCOY: Stunned but coming around. I'm not sure it's wise to let her go off like that. 
KIRK: He would have been rather difficult to stop. 
MCCOY: You saw how capricious he is. Benevolent one minute, angry the next. One more wrong move from her and he could kill her. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, I think you'd better continue your investigation. 
CHEKOV: Aye, aye, sir. 
(leaves) 
KIRK: How do you feel, Scotty? 
SCOTT: I am tingling all over. Did he take her with him? 
KIRK: It would seem so. 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got to stop him. He wants her. The way he looks at her. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, I understand your concern over her, but she volunteered to go with him, hopefully to find out more about him. She's doing her job. I think it's about time you started doing yours. We've got to find out the source of his power. You've got a tricorder. Use it if you're able to. 
SCOTT: I'm able, sir. 
KIRK: And one more thing. I want no more unauthorised action against Apollo or whatever he is. That's an order! 
SCOTT: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Besides, you stiff-necked thistle head, you could have gotten yourself killed. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
(leaves) 
MCCOY: Scotty doesn't believe in gods. 
KIRK: Apollo's no god. But he could have been taken for one, though, once. Say five thousand years ago, a highly sophisticated group of space travellers landed on Earth around the Mediterranean. 
MCCOY: Yes. To the simple shepherds and tribesmen of early Greece, creatures like that would have been gods. 
KIRK: Especially if they had the power to alter their form at will and command great energy. In fact, they couldn't have been taken for anything else.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Ready to reverse polarity, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Computed and standing by to generate, sir. 
SPOCK: Activate all units. 
(The ship jolts several times, but) 
SULU: No good, Mister Spock. We didn't even faze it. We're still locked tight. 
SPOCK: Cut power, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant, we must restore communications with the landing party. 
UHURA: I'm working, sir, but I can't do anything with this. 
SPOCK: Oh? 
UHURA: I might be able to rig up a subspace bypass circuit. 
SPOCK: Good. Do so. Sensor report, Mister Kyle. 
KYLE: I've located the landing party, but one of them seems separated from the other four. 
SPOCK: And Apollo? 
KIRK: I've just picked up readings for our own people, sir. 
SULU: Mister Spock, here's something. There seems to be a radiated energy pulsation coming from the planet. I don't know what it is, sir. 
SPOCK: Origin? 
SULU: I can't seem to pinpoint it. 
SPOCK: I would suggest, Mister Sulu, if you cannot find out where the power source is, you should find out where it is not. A simple process of elimination. 
SULU: The whole planet, sir? Yes, sir. The whole planet.

[Water's side]

(At a marble bench by a tranquil water scene.) 
CAROLYN: Oh, it's lovely. 
APOLLO: I've known other women. Daphne, Cassandra, but none more beautiful than you. Are you frightened of me? 
CAROLYN: Frightened? No, I don't think so. Of course, a girl doesn't go walking with a 
APOLLO: A god? 
CAROLYN: All right, a god every day. What happened to the others? Artemis, Hera? 
APOLLO: They returned to the cosmos on the wings of the wind. 
CAROLYN: You mean they died? 
APOLLO: No, not as you understand it. We're immortal, we gods. But the Earth changed. Your fathers changed. They turned away until we were only memories. A god cannot survive as a memory. We need love, admiration, worship, as you need food. 
CAROLYN: You really think you're a god? 
APOLLO: In a real sense, we were gods. We had the power of life and death. We could have struck out from Olympus and destroyed. We have no wish to destroy, so we came home again. It was an empty place without worshippers, but we had no strength to leave, so we waited, all of us, through the long years. 
CAROLYN: But you said the others didn't die. 
APOLLO: Even for a god, there's a point of no return. Hera was first. She stood in front of the temple and spread herself upon the wind, thinner and thinner, until only the wind remained. But I knew you would come. You striving, bickering, foolishly brave humans. I knew you would come to the stars one day. Of all the gods, I knew and I waited, waited for you to come and sit by my side. 
CAROLYN: I don't understand. 
APOLLO: Even five thousand years ago, the gods took mortals to them to love, to care for, like Zeus took Leto, my mother. We were gods of passion, of love. 
(They kiss.)

[Temple]

CHEKOV: There is a repeated occurrence of registrations, a regular pulsating pattern of radiated energy. 
SCOTT: Unquestionably, an immensely powerful field of energy is being generated around here somewhere. We're just having difficulty focusing on it. 
KIRK: Apollo has no difficulty focusing. He taps that energy, Mister Scott. 
CHEKOV: Sir, some creatures can generate and control energy with no harm to themselves. The electric eel on Earth, the giant dry worm of Antos Four, the fluffy 
MCCOY: Not the whole encyclopaedia, Chekov. 
CHEKOV: The captain requires complete information. 
MCCOY: Spock's contaminating this boy, Jim. 
KIRK: Are you suggesting that he, Apollo, taps a flow of energy and channels it through his body? 
CHEKOV: That would seem most likely, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, I think you've earned your pay for the week. But where is the source of that power? 
MCCOY: Number one on our list of things to do. 
KIRK: Is that all you have to offer? 
MCCOY: Yes, except my estimation for his physical condition. In spite of Apollo's bag of tricks, he comes up essentially normal with just a few variations. However, there's an extra organ in his chest that I can't even make a guess about. 
KIRK: Bones, is it possible 
MCCOY: Jim. 
(Apollo walks back in out of thin air.) 
KIRK: Where's Lieutenant Palamas? 
APOLLO: She is no longer of any concern to you. 
SCOTT: You bloodthirsty Saracen, what have you done with her? 
(Scott picks up a statuette and rushes at Apollo. He gets another finger blast of electricity for his effort.) 
KIRK: Scotty! 
MCCOY: Not good. Severe shock. 
KIRK: All right, mister. You wanted worshippers? You've got enemies. You want us to bow down, you'll have to 
(Kirk clutches his throat and falls to the ground, choking.) 
APOLLO: You will learn discipline. You will learn 
(Again, he suddenly becomes tired and vanishes.) 
MCCOY: Chekov, give me a hand. 
KIRK: Take care of Scotty. 
CHEKOV: Are you all right, Captain? 
KIRK: Where's Apollo? 
CHEKOV: He disappeared again like the cat in that Russian story. 
KIRK: Don't you mean the English story, the Cheshire Cat? 
CHEKOV: Cheshire? No, sir. Minsk perhaps, but 
KIRK: All right, all right, all right. 
CHEKOV: Sir, there is something I noticed. Apollo looked very strange when he disappeared, tired or in pain. I don't know if it means anything. 
KIRK: Very good, Mister Chekov. That might very well mean something. 
MCCOY: How do you feel? 
SCOTT: I can't get my arm to move. 
MCCOY: Some neural damage. 
KIRK: We've got to get out of here. 
CHEKOV: How? 
KIRK: Well, let's assume that five thousand years ago creatures like our friend Apollo did indeed visit Earth and form the basis of the Greek classic myths. 
MCCOY: Makes sense. 
KIRK: Most mythology has its basis in fact. If I remember my ancient legends, the gods, after expending energy, required rest, even as we humans. 
CHEKOV: And Apollo's gone, after attacking you and Mister Scott. You think maybe he's off somewhere recharging his energy cells? 
KIRK: Something like that. Remember, he's keeping a force field on the ship and he's expending energy down here. You said he looked pained and tired when he disappeared. If we can wear him out, overwork him, that might do it. 
MCCOY: The trouble with overworking him is that it can get us killed. 
KIRK: If we can provoke him so that he strikes one of us again, there's a chance that he'll be drained enough so the rest of us can jump him. 
MCCOY: I still say it can get us killed. 
KIRK: Not all of us, Bones. When he comes back, it's a chance we'll have to take.

[Bridge]

(Uhura is underneath the communications station, doing some soldering.) 
SPOCK: Progress report. 
UHURA: I'm connecting the bypass circuit now, sir. It should take another half hour. 
SPOCK: Speed is essential, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Mister Spock, I haven't done anything like this in years. If it isn't done just right, I could blow the entire communications system. It's very delicate work, sir. 
SPOCK: I can think no one better equipped to handle it, Miss Uhura. Please proceed. 
UHURA: Yes, sir. Right away. 
SPOCK: Progress, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: Sectors one through twenty five charted and examined. No chance at all of power originating in those areas. 
SPOCK: Continue the search. 
SULU: Aye, sir. Fourteen B by twenty six index. 
SPOCK: Mister Kyle. 
KYLE: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: We're unable to break completely loose from this force field, but we might be able to punch some holes through it. 
KYLE: What for, sir? 
SPOCK: To shoot through. It might also relieve Lieutenant Uhura's communications problem. Take these equations to the nuclear electronics lab. I want them to work on the problem of negating the force field in selected areas. That might be done by generating a strong pinpoint charge of M-rays on some of these selected wave lengths and tying them in with the combined output of all our engines. 
KYLE: Right away, sir.

[Temple]

(Apollo reappears on his throne, Carolyn standing by his side.) 
APOLLO: Come here! I know you're trying to escape me. It's useless. I know everything you do. I tried to be compassionate toward your kind. 
KIRK: You know nothing about our kind. You know only our remote ancestors who trembled before your tricks. Your tricks don't frighten us, neither do you. We've come a long way in five thousand years. 
APOLLO: But you're of the same nature. I could sweep you out of existence with a wave of my hand and bring you back again. I can give life or death. What else does mankind demand of its gods? 
KIRK: Mankind has no need for gods. We find the one quite adequate. 
APOLLO: We shall not debate, mortal. I offer you eternal rest and happiness according to the ancient ways. I ask little in return, but what I ask for I insist upon. Approach me. (the four men turn their backs on him) I said approach me! 
KIRK: We're busy. (quietly) Look after the girl. 
APOLLO: You will gather laurel leaves, light the ancient fires, kill a deer, make your sacrifices to me. Apollo has spoken! 
KIRK: Go! Gather laurel leaves? You must be joking! 
ALL: Ha ha ha ha. 
MCCOY: Kill a deer. That's the funniest thing I ever heard. 
CAROLYN: Captain. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, get back. 
APOLLO: You shall reap the rewards of your insolence! 
KIRK: We're tired of your phony fireworks! 
APOLLO: Mortal, you have earned this! 
CAROLYN: No, don't! 
KIRK: Lieutenant! 
CAROLYN: A father doesn't destroy his children. You said you were gentle and understanding. 
KIRK: Lieutenant! 
CAROLYN: How can they worship you if you hurt them? 
KIRK: Lieutenant. 
CAROLYN: Apollo, please. (taking his hand) You know so much of love. Please don't hurt them. Please. 
APOLLO: I shall be lenient with you, for her sake. You will make plans to bring the rest of your people down. Be sure your artisans bring tools. You will need homes. 
KIRK: And you will supply the herds of sheep, and the pipes we'll play, and the simple skins we'll wear for clothes. 
APOLLO: You will dismantle your ship for the supplies you need, and I'll crush its empty hull. I have been too patient. I shall be patient no longer. 
(He disappears with Carolyn still holding his hand.) 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got to do something! 
KIRK: We were doing something until our brave lady stepped in and saved us. 
MCCOY: Any more good ideas, Jim? 
KIRK: Yes, I have. One more. And it depends on the lieutenant's loyalty. If she fails us, we'd better get used to herding goats.

[Water's side]

APOLLO: Fools. I offer them more than they could know. Not just a world, but all that makes it up. Man thinks he's progressed. They're wrong. He's merely forgotten those things which gave life meaning. You'll all be provided for, cared for, happy. There is an order of things in this universe. Your species has denied it. I come to restore it. And for you, because you have the sensitivity to understand, I offer you more than your wildest dreams have ever imagined. You'll become the mother of a new race of gods. You'll inspire the universe. All men will revere you almost as a god yourself. And I shall love you for time without end, worlds without end. You shall complete me, and I you. 
(She embraces him happily.)

[Temple]

KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in. Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Kirk to 
SCOTT: Carolyn. What's happened to her? 
KIRK: Scotty, I'll find out. 
CHEKOV: Perhaps if I assisted. 
KIRK: How old are you? 
CHEKOV: Twenty two, sir. 
KIRK: Then I'd better handle it. (goes over to a very satisfied looking woman) You all right? 
CAROLYN: Oh, yes, I'm all right. I have a message for you. 
KIRK: Come over there. Well? 
CAROLYN: He wants us to live in peace. He wants to provide for us. He'll give us everything we ever wanted, and he can do it, too. 
KIRK: All right, Lieutenant, you can come down from Mount Olympus now. You've got work to do. 
CAROLYN: I don't understand. 
KIRK: He thrives on love, worship, attention. 
CAROLYN: Yes? 
KIRK: We can't give him that worship, none of us can. Especially you. 
CAROLYN: What? 
KIRK: Spurn him. Reject him. You must. You're special to him. 
CAROLYN: Yes. I love him. 
KIRK: Lieutenant. All our lives, here and on the ship, depend on you. 
CAROLYN: No, not on me. 
KIRK: On you, Lieutenant! Reject him, and we have a chance to save ourselves. Accept him, and you condemn all of us to slavery, nothing less than slavery. We might never get help this far out. Or perhaps the thought of spending an eternity bending knee and tending sheep appeals to you. 
CAROLYN: Oh, but you don't understand. He's kind, and he wants the best for us. And he's so lonely. What you ask would break his heart. How can I? 
KIRK: Give me your hand. Your hand. (she does) Now feel that. Human flesh against human flesh. We're the same. We share the same history, the same heritage, the same lives. We're tied together beyond any untying. Man or woman, it makes no difference. We're human. We couldn't escape from each other even if we wanted to. That's how you do it, Lieutenant. By remembering who and what you are. A bit of flesh and blood afloat in a universe without end. The only thing that's truly yours is the rest of humanity. That's where our duty lies. Do you understand me? 
CAROLYN: Yes. Yes, I understand. He's calling me. 
KIRK: Lieutenant. You have your orders and your duty. 
CAROLYN: Yes, sir. My orders and my duty. 
(She walks away slowly, looking back.)

[Bridge]

UHURA: I think we can try it now, sir. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain.

[Temple]

KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Spock here, Captain.

[Temple]

(The rest of the men gather to listen) 
SPOCK [OC]: We've pinpointed a power source on the planet's surface which seems to have something to do with the force field.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Is there a structure of some sort near you?

[Temple]

KIRK: There is indeed, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK [OC]: The power emanates from there. 
KIRK: Very good. How are you doing on the force field?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: We can negate sections of it, creating openings through which we can fire our phaser banks.

[Temple]

KIRK: Well, that ought to do it. Have Sulu lock all phaser banks onto the structure. Fire on my order only. Cut it fine. We'll be standing nearby.

]Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain. I would recommend a discreet distance. 
KIRK [OC]: I'd love to oblige you, Mister Spock, but we're not all together. Besides, we have Apollo to deal with.

[Temple]

KIRK: If that structure is the source of his power, I want to know where he is when we attack it.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Kirk out.

[Temple]

KIRK: Bones, do you think that mysterious organ in Apollo's chest could have something to do with the transmission of energy? 
MCCOY: Well, it doesn't serve any other purpose I know of. 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got to wait until Carolyn comes back before we fire on the temple. We don't know what would happen to her if he was suddenly attacked. She might get killed. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. I know. Scotty. We'll wait.

[Water's side]

(There's some very passionate kissing going on.) 
CAROLYN: I must say, Apollo, the way you ape human behaviour is remarkable, but there are some other things I must know. Your evolutionary patterns and your social development. 
APOLLO: My what? 
CAROLYN: I'm sure they're unique. I've never encountered a specimen like you before. 
APOLLO: I am Apollo. I've chosen you. 
CAROLYN: I'm sure that's very flattering, but I must get on with my work now. 
APOLLO: Your work? 
CAROLYN: I'm a scientist. My particular specialty is ancient civilisations, relics, and myths. Surely you know I've only been studying you. 
APOLLO: I don't believe it. You love me. 
CAROLYN: Love you? Be logical. I'm not some simple shepherdess you can awe. Why, I could no more love you than I could love a new species of bacteria. 
APOLLO: Carolyn! I forbid you to go. I order you to stay. 
CAROLYN: Is that the secret of your power over women, the thunderbolts you throw? 
(She walks away, and a strong wind begins to blow. Thunder rumbles.)

[Temple]

MCCOY: What the devil is that? 
KIRK: (answers communicator) Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock, Captain.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Sensors are picking up an atmospheric disturbance in your area.

[Temple]

KIRK: Stand by your phasers, Mister Spock. Prepare to fire on my signal. Kirk out. 
SCOTT: Captain, we've got to go and find her! 
KIRK: We've got to be here when he comes back. 
SCOTT: But what if he doesn't. What if he 
KIRK: Scotty, just hold on! 
(Carolyn falls to the ground in the strong winds, and a giant image of Apollo looms over her amid the lightning flashes.) 
SCOTT: Captain! 
KIRK: All right. The temple is his power source. Let's bring him back to it. Get to cover. Mister Spock, fire those phasers. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain, you're too close. 
KIRK: Fire those phasers! That's an order, Mister Spock!

[Bridge]

SULU: All phaser banks, fire!

[Temple]

(The white marble starts to glow pink under the phaser beams, and Apollo runs back.) 
APOLLO: No! Stop! Stop, I say!

[Bridge]

(Enterprise shudders under his anger. There is no longer a hand holding the ship.) 
SULU: All phaser banks, maintain firing rate! 
SPOCK: More power to the shields.

[Temple]

APOLLO: Stop! 
(Carolyn totters into view, and Scotty dashes to her.) 
KIRK: Scotty! 
APOLLO: Stop, I say! (the temple is now yellow) I command it!

[Bridge]

SPOCK: All banks maintain firing rate. 
SULU: Maintaining, sir.

[Temple]

APOLLO: Stop! Stop! Stop! 
(His lightning bolts end, and the temple dissolves into rubble. Scott helps Carolyn to her feet as Apollo walks around, surveying the ruins.) 
APOLLO: I would have cherished you, cared for you. I would have loved you as a father loves his children. Did I ask so much? 
KIRK: We've out grown you. You asked for something we could no longer give. 
APOLLO: Carolyn, I loved you. I would have made a goddess of you. I've shown you my open heart. See what you've done to me. 
(He becomes a giant.) 
APOLLO: Zeus, Hermes, Hera, Aphrodite. You were right. Athena, you were right. The time has passed. There is no room for gods. Forgive me, my old friends. Take me. Take me. 
(And he disappears one last time. Carolyn cries.) 
MCCOY: I wish we hadn't had to do this. 
KIRK: So do I. They gave us so much. The Greek civilisation, much of our culture and philosophy came from a worship of those beings. In a way, they began the Golden Age. Would it have hurt us, I wonder, just to have gathered a few laurel leaves?

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

Amok Time
Stardate: 3372.7
Original Airdate: 15 Sep, 1967

[Corridor]
(Kirk has just climbed up a ladder to this deck when McCoy exits the turbolift.) 
MCCOY: Oh, Captain. Got a minute? 
KIRK: A minute. 
MCCOY: It's Spock. Have you noticed anything strange about him? 
KIRK: No, nothing in particular. Why ? 
MCCOY: Well, it's nothing I can pinpoint without an examination, but he's become increasingly restive. If he were not a Vulcan, I'd almost say nervous. And for another thing, he's avoiding food. I checked and he hasn't eaten at all in three days. 
KIRK: That just sounds like Mister Spock in one of his contemplative phases. 
MCCOY: Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: (carrying a tray and sounding embarrassed) Doctor McCoy. 
MCCOY: Captain. 
CHAPEL: Captain. 
MCCOY: What's this? 
CHAPEL: Oh. 
MCCOY: Oh! Vulcan plomeek soup, and I'll bet you made it too. You never give up hoping, do you? 
CHAPEL: Well, Mister Spock hasn't been eating, Doctor, and I, I just happened to notice. 
MCCOY: It's all right. Carry on, Miss Chapel. 
(She turns and rings the bell on Spock's quarters. The door opens and she enters.) 
KIRK: Bones, I'm a busy man. 
MCCOY: Jim, when I suggested to Spock that it was time for his routine check-up, your logical, unemotional first officer turned to me and said, you will cease to pry into my personal matters, Doctor, or I shall certainly break your neck. 
KIRK: Spock said that? 
SPOCK [OC]: What is this? 
(The door to his quarters opens and Chapel rushes out with a scream, just before the soup bowl hits the opposite wall.)
SPOCK [OC]: Poking and prying! If I want anything from you, I'll ask for it! 
(Everyone stops and stares as he come to his door.) 
SPOCK: Captain, I should like to request a leave of absence on my home planet. On our present course you can divert to Vulcan with a loss of but two point eight light days. 
KIRK: Spock, what the devil is this all about? 
SPOCK: I have made my request, Captain. All I require from you is that you answer it. Yes or no.

[Spock's quarters]

KIRK: All right, Spock, let's have it. 
SPOCK: It is undignified for a woman to play servant to a man who is not hers. 
KIRK: I'm more interested in your request for shore leave. In all the years 
SPOCK: You have my request, Captain. Will you grant it or not? 
KIRK: In all the years that I've known you, you've never asked for a leave of any sort. In fact, you've refused them. Why now? 
SPOCK: Captain, surely I have enough leave time accumulated. 
KIRK: Agreed, but that isn't the question, is it? If there's a problem of some sort, illness in the family 
SPOCK: No. Nothing of that nature, Captain. 
KIRK: Then since we're headed for Altair Six, and since the shore facilities there are excellent 
SPOCK: No! I must. I wish to take my leave on Vulcan. 
KIRK: Spock, I'm asking you. What's wrong? 
SPOCK: I need rest. I'm asking you to accept that answer. 
KIRK: Bridge. Helm. 
SULU [OC]: Yes, Captain? 
KIRK: Alter course to Vulcan. Increase speed to warp four. 
SULU [OC]: Aye, sir. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Captain. 
KIRK: I suppose most of us overlook the fact that even Vulcans aren't indestructible. 
(He leaves.) 
SPOCK: No. (looking at his shaking hand) We're not.

Captain's log, stardate 3372.7. On course, on schedule, bound for Altair Six via Vulcan. First Officer Spock seems to be under stress. He has requested and been granted shore leave. Ship surgeon McCoy has him under medical surveillance.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain, something's coming in on the Starfleet channel. Priority and urgent, sir. 
KIRK: Put it on audio over here, Lieutenant. 
UHURA: Message complete, sir. Switching over. 
STARFLEET [OC]: To Captain, USS Enterprise from Starfleet Sector Nine. Inauguration ceremonies, Altair Six, have been advanced seven solar days. You are ordered to alter your flight plan to accommodate, by order of Komack, Admiral, Starfleet Command. Acknowledge. 
KIRK: Lieutenant Uhura, acknowledge that message. 
UHURA: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, compute course and speed necessary for compliance. 
CHEKOV: (a bit of a Russian accent) We'll have to head directly there at warp six, sir. Insufficient time to stop off at Vulcan. 
KIRK: Head directly for Altair Six. Sailor's luck, Mister Spock. Or, as one of Finagle's Laws puts it, 'Any home port the ship makes ill be somebody else's, not mine'. The new president of Altair Six wants to get himself launched a week early, so we have to be there a week early. Don't worry. I'll see that you get your leave as soon as we're finished. 
SPOCK: I quite understand, Captain.

[Kirk's quarters]

(Kirk is resting in the dark when he has an idea.) 
KIRK: Bridge. Navigation. 
CHEKOV [on monitor]: Navigation. Chekov here. 
KIRK: Mister Chekov, how late will we arrive for the ceremonies if we increase speed to maximum and divert to Vulcan just long enough to drop off Mister Spock? 
CHEKOV [on monitor]: I don't understand, Captain. 
KIRK: How far behind schedule will diverting to Vulcan put us? 
CHEKOV [on monitor]: We're on course for Vulcan, Captain, as Mister Spock ordered. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Chekov. Kirk, out.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Mister Spock. Come with me, please.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Deck five. You've changed course for Vulcan, Mister Spock. Why? 
SPOCK: Changed the course? 
KIRK: Do you deny it? 
SPOCK: No. No, by no means, Captain. It is quite possible. 
KIRK: Then why'd you do it? 
SPOCK: Captain, I accept on your word that I did it, but I do not know why, nor do I remember doing it. Captain, lock me away. I do not wish to be seen. I cannot. No Vulcan could explain further. 
KIRK: I'm trying to help you, Spock. 
SPOCK: Ask me no further questions. I will not answer. 
KIRK: I order you to report to the Sickbay. 
SPOCK: Sickbay? 
KIRK: Complete examination. McCoy's waiting.

[Sickbay]

(Spock wanders in like a man in a dream.) 
MCCOY: Come in, Spock. I'm all ready for you. 
SPOCK: My orders were to report to Sickbay, Doctor. I have done so. And now I'll go to my quarters. 
MCCOY: My orders were to give you a thorough physical. In case you hadn't noticed, I have to answer to the same commanding officer that you do. Come on, Spock. Yield to the logic of the situation. 
SPOCK: Examine me, for all the good it'll do either of us.

[Bridge]

SULU: How do you figure it, Chekov? First we're going to Vulcan, then we're going to Altair, then we're headed to Vulcan again, and now we're headed back to Altair. 
CHEKOV: I think I'm going to get space sick.

[Kirk's quarters]

MCCOY: Jim, you've got to get Spock to Vulcan. 
KIRK: Bones, I will, I will. As soon as this mission is 
MCCOY: No! Now. Right away. If you don't get him to Vulcan within a week eight days at the outside, he'll die. He'll die, Jim. 
KIRK: Why must he die? Why within eight days? Explain. 
MCCOY: I don't know. 
KIRK: You keep saying that. Are you a doctor, or aren't you? 
MCCOY: There's a growing imbalance of body functions, as if in our bodies huge amounts of adrenalin were constantly being pumped into our bloodstreams. Now, I can't trace it down in my biocomps. Spock won't tell me what it is. But if it isn't stopped somehow, the physical and emotional pressures will simply kill him. 
KIRK: You say you're convinced he knows what it is? 
MCCOY: He does, and he's as tightlipped about it as an Aldebaran Shellmouth. No use to ask him, Jim. He won't talk.

[Spock's quarters]

(Spock is staring at the picture of a young girl on his monitor, but switches it off when the doorbell buzzes.) 
SPOCK: Come. 
KIRK: Stay. McCoy has given me his medical evaluation of your condition. He says you're going to die unless something is done. What? Is it something only your planet can do for you? Spock! You've been called the best first officer in the fleet. That's an enormous asset to me. If I have to lose that first officer, I want to know why. 
SPOCK: It is a thing no out-worlder may know except those very few who have been involved. A Vulcan understands, but even we do not speak of it among ourselves. It is a deeply personal thing. Can you see that, Captain, and understand? 
KIRK: No, I do not understand. Explain. Consider that an order. 
SPOCK: Captain, there are some things which transcend even the discipline of the service. 
KIRK: Would it help if I told you that I'll treat this as totally confidential? 
SPOCK: It has to do with biology. 
KIRK: What? 
SPOCK: Biology. 
KIRK: What kind of biology? 
SPOCK: Vulcan biology. 
KIRK: You mean the biology of Vulcans? Biology as in reproduction? Well, there's no need to be embarrassed about it, Mister Spock. It happens to the birds and the bees. 
SPOCK: The birds and the bees are not Vulcans, Captain. If they were, if any creature as proudly logical as us were to have their logic ripped from them as this time does to us. How do Vulcans choose their mates? Haven't you wondered? 
KIRK: I guess the rest of us assume that it's done quite logically. 
SPOCK: No. No. It is not. We shield it with ritual and customs shrouded in antiquity. You humans have no conception. It strips our minds from us. It brings a madness which rips away our veneer of civilisation. It is the pon farr. The time of mating. There are precedents in nature, Captain. The giant eelbirds of Regulus Five, once each eleven years they must return to the caverns where they hatched. On your Earth, the salmon. They must return to that one stream where they were born, to spawn or die in trying. 
KIRK: But you're not a fish, Mister Spock. You're 
SPOCK: No. Nor am I a man. I'm a Vulcan. I'd hoped I would be spared this, but the ancient drives are too strong. Eventually, they catch up with us, and we are driven by forces we cannot control to return home and take a wife. Or die. 
KIRK: I haven't heard a word you've said, and I'll get you to Vulcan somehow.

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Lieutenant, get me Admiral Komack at Starfleet Command, Sector Nine. Pipe it down to McCoy's office. 
UHURA: Starfleet Command. Yes, sir. 
CHEKOV: Mister Sulu, you don't think 
SULU: Maybe you ought to plot a course back for Vulcan, just in case.

[Spock's quarters]

(Spock is playing his lyre when the intercom whistles.) 
UHURA [OC]: Communication to Mister Spock. Lieutenant Uhura here. The captain asked me to 
SPOCK: Let me alone. Let me alone! 
(He pounds his desk monitor into a pulp.)

[Sickbay]

KOMACK [on monitor]: Captain, you're making a most unusual request. 
KIRK: I'm aware of that, sir, but it's of the utmost importance. You must give me permission to divert to Vulcan. 
KOMACK [on monitor]: But you refuse to explain why it is so important. 
KIRK: I can't, sir, but believe me, I wouldn't make such a request 
KOMACK [on monitor]: Altair Six is no ordinary matter. That area is just putting itself together after a long interplanetary conflict. This inauguration will stabilise the entire Altair system. Our appearance there is a demonstration of friendship and strength which will cause ripples clear to the Klingon Empire. 
KIRK: Sir, the delay would be, at most, a day. I can hardly believe that 
KOMACK [on monitor]: You will proceed to Altair Six as ordered. You have your orders. Starfleet out. 
MCCOY: Well, that's that. 
KIRK: No, it's not. I know the Altair situation. We would be one of three starships. Very impressive, very diplomatic, but it's simply not that vital. 
MCCOY: You can't go off to Vulcan against Starfleet orders. You'll be busted 
KIRK: I can't let Spock die, can I, Bones? And he will if we go to Altair. I owe him my life a dozen times over. Isn't that worth a career? He's my friend. Bridge. Navigation.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Bridge. Navigation.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Vulcan. Tell Engineering I want warp eight or better. Push her for all she'll take. 
(Nurse Chapel leaves Sickbay, beaming.)

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Course already plotted. Laying it in, sir.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: I see. Very well. Carry on, Mister Chekov. Kirk, out.

[Spock's quarters]

(Spock is lying on his bed, apparently asleep. Christine thinks about touching him and then goes to leave.) 
SPOCK: Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: Yes, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: I had a most startling dream. You were trying to tell me something, but I couldn't hear you. It would be illogical for us to protest against our natures. Don't you think? 
CHAPEL: I don't understand. 
SPOCK: Your face is wet. 
CHAPEL: I came to tell you that we are bound for Vulcan. We'll be there in just a few days. 
SPOCK: Vulcan. Miss Chapel. 
CHAPEL: My name is Christine. 
SPOCK: Yes, I know, Christine. Would you make me some of that plomeek soup? 
CHAPEL: Oh, I'd be very glad to do that, Mister Spock.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Bridge. 
SPOCK: It is obvious that you have surmised my problem, Doctor. My compliments on your insight. Captain, there is a thing that happens to Vulcans at this time. Almost an insanity, which you would no doubt find distasteful. 
KIRK: Will I? You've been most patient with my kinds of madness. 
SPOCK: Then would you beam down to the planet's surface and stand with me? There is a brief ceremony. 
KIRK: Is it permitted? 
SPOCK: It is my right. By tradition, the male is accompanied by his closest friends. 
KIRK: Thank you, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: I also request McCoy accompany me. 
MCCOY: I shall be honoured, sir.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain. We're standing by on Vulcan hailing frequencies, sir. 
KIRK: Open the channel, Lieutenant. Vulcan Space Central, this is the USS Enterprise requesting permission to assume standard orbit. 
VULCAN [OC]: USS Enterprise from Vulcan Space Central. Permission granted. And from all of Vulcan, welcome. Is Commander Spock with you? 
SPOCK: This is Spock. 
VULCAN [OC]: Standby to activate your central viewer, please. 
(Nurse Chapel enters.) 
CHAPEL: Doctor, what's going on? 
(The viewscreen lights up with the image of a very beautiful woman.) 
T'PRING [on viewscreen]: Spock, it is I. 
SPOCK: T'Pring, parted from me and never parted, never and always touching and touched. We meet at the appointed place. 
T'PRING [on viewscreen]: Spock, parted from me and never parted, never and always touching and touched. I await you. 
UHURA: She's lovely, Mister Spock. Who is she? 
SPOCK: She is T'Pring. My wife.

[Vulcan]

(The trio have beamed down onto a very red planet. Sky, ground, all shades of hot orange-red. Spock leads them into an area marked out by stone structures.) 
SPOCK: This is the land of my family. It has been held by us for more than two thousand Earth years. This is our place of Koon-ut-kal-if-fee, 
MCCOY: He called it Koon-ut what? 
KIRK: He described it to me as meaning marriage or challenge. In the distant past, Vulcans killed to win their mates. 
MCCOY: They still go mad at this time. Perhaps it's the price they pay for having no emotions the rest of the time. 
KIRK: It's lovely. I wish the breeze were cooler. 
MCCOY: Yeah. Hot as Vulcan. Now I understand what that phrase means. 
KIRK: The atmosphere is thinner than Earth. 
(Spock strikes a gong.) 
MCCOY: I wonder when his T'Pring arrives. 
SPOCK: The marriage party approaches. I hear them. 
KIRK: Marriage party? You said T'Pring was your wife. 
SPOCK: By our parents' arrangement. A ceremony while we were but seven years of age. Less than a marriage but more than a betrothal. One touches the other in order to feel each other's thoughts. In this way our minds were locked together, so that at the proper time, we would both be drawn to Koon-ut-kal-if-fee. 
(A jingling sound gets louder, and Spock strikes the gong again. Two men enter shaking contraptions with lots of bells, followed by a woman carried on a chair. T'Pring and others come behind her.) 
KIRK: Bones, you know who that is? T'Pau. The only person to ever turn down a seat on the Federation Council. 
MCCOY: T'Pau. Officiating at Spock's wedding? 
KIRK: He never mentioned that his family was this important. 
(T'Pau's chair is placed on a dais, and Spock greets her. She gives him a quick mind-meld.) 
T'PAU: Spock, are our ceremonies for outworlders? 
SPOCK: They are not outworlders. They are my friends. I am permitted this. 
(She gestures for them to approach.) 
SPOCK: This is Kirk. 
KIRK: Ma'am. 
T'PAU: And thee are called? 
MCCOY: Leonard McCoy, ma'am. 
T'PAU: Thee names these out worlders friends. How does thee pledge their behaviour? 
SPOCK: With my life, T'Pau. 
T'PAU: What they are about to see comes down from the time of the beginning, without change. This is the Vulcan heart. This is the Vulcan soul. This is our way. Kah-if-farr. 
(Spock is about to strike the gong again, when T'Pring intervenes.) 
T'PRING: Kal-if-fee! 
KIRK: What is it? What happened? 
T'PAU: She chooses the challenge. 
MCCOY: (pointing at T'Pau's bodyguard) With him? 
T'PAU: He acts only if cowardice is seen. She will choose her champion. 
KIRK: Spock? 
T'PAU: Do not attempt to speak with him, Kirk. He is deep in the plak-tow, the blood fever. He will not speak with thee again until he has passed through what is to come. If thee wishes to depart, thee may leave now. 
KIRK: We'll stay. 
T'PAU: Spock chose his friends well. 
MCCOY: Ma'am, I don't understand. Are you trying to say that she rejected him? That she doesn't want him? 
T'PAU: He will have to fight for her. It is her right. T'Pring, thee has chosen the kal-if-fee, the challenge. Thee are prepared to become the property of the victor? 
T'PRING: I am prepared. 
T'PAU: Spock, does thee accept the challenge according to our laws and customs? 
(A single nod. T'Pring looks at the young man who followed her in.) 
KIRK: Think Spock can take him? 
MCCOY: I doubt it. Not in his present condition. 
T'PAU: T'Pring, thee will choose thy champion. 
T'PRING: As it was in the dawn of our days, as it is today, as it will be for all tomorrows, I make my choice. This one. 
(She steps past the expectant Stonn and points at Kirk.) 
STONN: No! I am to be the one. It was agreed. 
T'PAU: Be silent. 
STONN: Hear me. I have made the ancient claim. I claim the right. The woman is 
T'PAU: Kroykah! 
STONN: I ask forgiveness. 
T'PAU: Kirk? T'Pring is within her rights, but our laws and customs are not binding on thee. Thee are free to decline with no harm on thyself. 
SPOCK: T'Pau. 
T'PAU: Thee speaks? 
SPOCK: My friend does not understand. 
T'PAU: The choice has been made, Spock. It is up to him now. 
SPOCK: He does not know. I will do what I must, T'Pau, but not with him! His blood does not burn. He is my friend! 
T'PAU: It is said thy Vulcan blood is thin. Are thee Vulcan or are thee human? 
SPOCK: I burn, T'Pau. My eyes are flame. My heart is flame. Thee has the power, T'Pau. In the name of my fathers, forbid. Forbid! T'Pau. I plead with thee! I beg! 
T'PAU: Thee has prided thyself on thy Vulcan heritage. It is decided. 
KIRK: What happens to Spock if I decline? 
T'PAU: Another champion will be selected. Do not interfere, Kirk. Keep thy place. 
MCCOY: You can't do it, Jim. 
KIRK: I can't? 
MCCOY: No. She said their laws and customs were not binding on you. 
KIRK: And you said Spock might not be able to handle him. If I can knock Spock out without really hurting him 
MCCOY: In this climate? If the heat doesn't get you, the thin air will. You can't do it! 
KIRK: If I get into any trouble, I'll quit. And Spock wins, and honour is satisfied. 
MCCOY: Jim, listen, if you 
KIRK: Bones. He's my first officer and my friend. I disregarded Starfleet orders to bring him here. Another thing, that's T'Pau of Vulcan. All of Vulcan in one package. How can I back out in front of her? 
T'PAU: It is done. Kirk, decide. 
KIRK: I accept the challenge. 
T'PAU: Here begins the act of combat for possession of the woman, T'Pring. As it was at the time of the beginning, so it is now. Bring forth the lirpa. 
(They are presented with wicked-looking half moon blades set in a wooden shaft, with a counterweight at the other end.) 
T'PAU: If both survive the lirpa, combat will continue with the ahn woon. 
KIRK: What do you mean, if both survive? 
T'PAU: This combat is to the death. 
KIRK: Now wait a minute, ma'am. Who said anything about a fight to the death? 
MCCOY: These men are friends. To force them to fight until one of them is killed 
T'PAU: I can forgive such a display only once. Challenge was given and lawfully accepted. It has begun. Let no one interfere. 
(And so the fight begins, first with a trial of brute strength, then a good swing by Spock slices open Kirk's tunic and cuts his chest. It is clear that the first officer will kill his captain, given the chance. When Kirk is down and unarmed, Spock goes in for the final blow.) 
MCCOY: Spock! No! 
(And Kirk rolls away just in time, then disarms Spock.) 
T'PAU: Kroykah! 
MCCOY: Is this Vulcan chivalry? The air's too hot and thin for Kirk. He's not used to it. 
T'PAU: The air is the air. What can be done? 
MCCOY: (holding up a hypo) I can compensate for the atmosphere and the temperature with this. At least it'll give Kirk a fighting chance. 
T'PAU: Thee may proceed. 
MCCOY: You're going to have to kill him, Jim. 
KIRK: Kill Spock? That's not what I came to Vulcan for, is it? What's that? 
MCCOY: It's a tri-ox compound. It'll help you breathe. Now be careful! 
KIRK: Sound medical advice. 
T'PAU: The ahn woon. 
(The bells sound, and both men are given long straps with weights and tassels on the ends. Spock demonstrates it use by lassoing Kirk's legs and knocking him down with it before holding it in the middle to use first as a flail, and finally to strangle his opponent.) 
T'PAU: Kroykah! 
MCCOY; Get your hands off of him, Spock! He's finished. He's dead. 
T'PAU: I grieve with thee. 
MCCOY: McCoy to Enterprise. 
UHURA [OC]: Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura here. 
MCCOY: Have the transporter room stand by to beam up the landing party. (ends communication) As strange as it may seem, Mister Spock, you're in command now. Any orders? 
SPOCK: Yes. I'll follow you up in a few minutes. You will instruct Mister Chekov to plot a course for the nearest Starbase where I must surrender myself to the authorities. (the sound of a transporter off screen) T'Pring. Explain. 
T'PRING: Specify. 
SPOCK: Why the challenge, and why you chose my captain as your champion. 
T'PRING: Stonn wanted me, I wanted him. 
SPOCK: I see no logic in preferring Stonn over me. 
T'PRING: You have become much known among our people, Spock. Almost a legend. And as the years went by, I came to know that I did not want to be the consort of a legend. But by the laws of our people, I could only divorce you by the kal-if-fee. There was also Stonn, who wanted very much to be my consort, and I wanted him. If your Captain were victor, he would not want me, and so I would have Stonn. If you were victor you would free me because I had dared to challenge, and again I would have Stonn. But if you did not free me, it would be the same. For you would be gone, and I would have your name and your property, and Stonn would still be there. 
SPOCK: Logical. Flawlessly logical. 
T'PRING: I am honoured. 
SPOCK: Stonn. She is yours. After a time, you may find that having is not so pleasing a thing after all as wanting. It is not logical, but it is often true. Spock here. Stand by to beam up. Live long, T'Pau, and prosper. 
T'PAU: Live long and prosper, Spock. 
SPOCK: I shall do neither. I have killed my captain and my friend. Energize.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Doctor, I shall be resigning my commission immediately, of course. 
MCCOY: Spock, I 
SPOCK: So I would appreciate your making the final arrangements. 
MCCOY: Spock, I 
SPOCK: Doctor, please, let me finish. There can be no excuse for the crime of which I'm guilty. I intend to offer no defence. Furthermore, I shall order Mister Scott to take immediate command of this vessel. 
KIRK: Don't you think you better check with me first? 
SPOCK: Captain! Jim! 
(There's a big, big grin across his face, which fades when McCoy and Chapel's own smiles are noticed) 
SPOCK: I'm pleased to see you, Captain. You seem uninjured. I am at something of a loss to understand it, however. 
KIRK: Blame McCoy. That was no tri-ox compound he shot me with. He slipped in a neural paralyser. Knocked me out, simulated death. 
SPOCK: Indeed. 
MCCOY: Nurse, would you mind, please? 
(Chapel leaves in a slight huff.) 
MCCOY: Spock, what happened down there? The girl? The wedding? 
SPOCK: Ah, yes, the girl. Most interesting. It must have been the combat. When I thought I had killed the captain, I found I had lost all interest in T'Pring. The madness was gone. 
(Intercom whistle) 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Captain Kirk. Message from Starfleet Command, top priority.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: Relay it, Lieutenant.

[Bridge]

UHURA: Response to T'Pau's request for diversion of Enterprise to planet Vulcan

[Sickbay]

UHURA [OC]: Hereby approved. Any reasonable delay granted. Komack, Admiral, Starfleet Command. 
KIRK: Well, a little late, but I'm glad they're seeing it our way. How about that T'Pau? They couldn't turn her down. Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Altair Six. Leave orbit when ready. Kirk out. 
MCCOY: There's just one thing, Mister Spock. You can't tell me that when you first saw Jim alive that you weren't on the verge of giving us an emotional scene that would have brought the house down. . 
SPOCK: Merely my quite logical relief that Starfleet had not lost a highly proficient captain. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock. I understand. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Captain. 
MCCOY: Of course, Mister Spock, your reaction was quite logical. 
SPOCK: Thank you, Doctor. 
MCCOY: In a pig's eye! 
KIRK: Come on, Spock. Let's go mind the store.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

A Private Little War
Stardate: 4211.4 
Original Airdate: 2 Feb, 1968

[Planet surface]
(Doctor McCoy is sampling the local vegetation when his communicator beeps.) 
MCCOY: Yes, Jim. 
KIRK [OC]: How much longer, McCoy? 
MCCOY: Oh, about another thirty minutes. I've come across some most interesting organic compounds. Hey, Starfleet was right.

[Rocky outcrop]

(Kirk is also on the planet.) 
MCCOY [OC]: These roots and soil cultures can be a medical treasure house. Any problems there? 
KIRK: No sign of the inhabitants so far. Kirk out. 
SPOCK: Large prints. The ape-like carnivore in the reports? 
KIRK: Yes, the mugato. No problem, though. Those prints are several days old. They seldom stay in one place. 
SPOCK: Aside from that, you say it's a Garden of Eden? 
KIRK: Or so it seemed to the brash young Lieutenant Kirk on his first planet survey. 
SPOCK: Class M in all respects. Quite Earth-like. 
KIRK: Except these people stayed in their Garden of Eden. Bows and arrows for hunting, but absolutely no fighting among themselves. Remarkably peaceful and tranquil. 
VOICE [OC]: Ho! Take cover here! 
(Kirk and Spock dash off to investigate, and see three dark-haired locals laying an ambush, armed with long-barreled guns.) 
SPOCK: Bows and arrows, Captain? 
KIRK: Villagers with flintlocks? That's impossible. They hadn't progressed nearly that far. 
SPOCK: Captain, look. 
(A group of blond hunters is approaching. They do have bows and arrows.) 
KIRK: One of those men walking into ambush is Tyree. The friend I lived with here. (He draws his phaser.) 
SPOCK: Captain, use of our phasers is expressly forbidden. 
(So instead Kirk throws a rock which startles a villager into firing his weapon early.) 
TYREE: Villagers! 
(There's a chase, hunters after the villagers, and the villagers pursuing Kirk and Spock. A shot is fired, which McCoy hears.)

[Planet surface]

MCCOY: Enterprise, alert! Stand by to beam up landing party. 
(Kirk and Spock come running, then Spock gets shot in the back.) 
KIRK: Spock? Your phaser. (it is missing, so Kirk prepares to use his to defend his friend.) 
SPOCK: No, Captain. I can travel. 
(They join McCoy.) 
KIRK: Beam us up, quickly. 
MCCOY: Now, Scotty. Have medics stand by. 
(They beam out just before the villagers arrive.)

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: What happened, Captain? 
KIRK: Lead projectile. Primitive firearm. 
M'BENGA: (an African doctor, to Nurse Chapel) Vitalizer B. 
MCCOY: Pressure packet. Lucky his heart's where his liver should be, or he'd be dead now. 
M'BENGA: Not good, sir. 
MCCOY: Coranalin. 
KIRK: Bones, can you save him? 
UHURA [OC]: All decks, Red Alert! Battle stations, battle stations! Go to Red Alert! 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
UHURA [OC]: Uhura, sir. We have a Klingon vessel on our screen. 
KIRK: On my way. Scotty. Bones? 
MCCOY: I don't know yet, Jim.

[Bridge]

CHEKOV: Captain, we're holding the planet between us and the Klingons. I don't think they've spotted us. 
UHURA: Make that definite, sir. They're sending a routine message to their home base with no mention of us. 
KIRK: Good. Go to Yellow Alert. 
UHURA: Yellow Alert. All stations go to Yellow Alert. 
KIRK: Do you think you can keep us out of their sight, Chekov? 
CHEKOV: I can try, Captain. 
UHURA: Message to Starbase, sir? 
KIRK: No point in giving ourselves away, Lieutenant. Not until we find out what's going on. 
SCOTT: We can hide for a while, sir, but we may have to go out of orbit to keep it up for long. 
KIRK: Kirk to Sickbay. 
MCCOY [OC]: McCoy here. I'll call you soon as I know anything. Sickbay out. 
KIRK: So, they've broken the treaty. 
SCOTT: Not necessarily, Captain. They have as much right to scientific missions here as we have. 
KIRK: Research is not the Klingon way. 
SCOTT: True, but since this is a hands-off planet, how are you going to prove they're doing otherwise? 
KIRK: When I left there thirteen years ago, those villagers had barely learned to forge iron. Spock was shot with a flintlock. How many centuries between those two developments? 
UHURA: On Earth, about twelve, sir. 
SCOTT: On the other hand, a flintlock would be the first firearm the inhabitants would normally develop. 
KIRK: Yes, I'm aware of that, Mister Scott. 
CHEKOV: And, sir, the fact Earth took twelve centuries doesn't mean they had to. 
UHURA: We've seen different development at rates on different planets. 
SCOTT: And were the Klingons behind it, why didn't they give them breechloaders? 
CHEKOV: Or machine guns? 
UHURA: Or old-style hand lasers? 
KIRK: I did not invite a debate. I'm sorry. I'm worried about Spock and concerned about what's happened to something I once knew down there. You have the conn, Scotty. I'll be in Sickbay.

[Sickbay]

M'BENGA: We've no replacements for the damaged organs, sir. If he's going to live, his Vulcan physiology will have to do it for him. 
MCCOY: Agreed. Sterilite off. 
CHAPEL: Yes, sir. 
MCCOY: He'll live or die now, Jim. I don't know which. Doctor M'Benga interned on a Vulcan ward. He couldn't be in better hands. 
KIRK: Then you and I are transporting down. 
MCCOY: I can't leave Spock at this time. 
KIRK: You just indicated you could. There are Klingons here. If their mission is a legitimate research interest in the planet's organic potential, then you're the one man who can tell me. 
MCCOY: And if that's not it? 
KIRK: Then I need help. Advice I can trust as much as Spock's. 
MCCOY: I appreciate the compliment, Jim, but 
KIRK: Bones, I'm as worried about Spock as you are, but if the Klingons are breaking the treaty it could be interstellar war. Kirk to Bridge. 
SCOTT [OC]: Bridge, Scott here. 
KIRK: McCoy and I are transporting back down. Inform ship's stores that we'll need native costumes.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: Captain, we may have to break out of orbit any minute to keep out of their sight. We'd be out of communicator range with you.

[Sickbay]

KIRK: I understand. We'll arrange a rendezvous schedule. Kirk out.

Captain's log, stardate 4211.4. Keeping our presence here secret is an enormous tactical advantage, therefore I cannot risk contact with Starfleet Command. I must take action on my own judgment. I've elected to violate orders and make contact with planet inhabitants.

[Planet surface]

(McCoy and Kirk are dressed in the leathers of hill people.) 
KIRK: Perfect. Tyree's camp's a quarter of a mile away. 
MCCOY: Want to think about it again, Jim? Starfleet's orders about this planet state no interference with 
KIRK: No interference with normal social development. I'm not only aware of it, it was my survey thirteen years ago that recommended it. 
MCCOY: I read it. Inhabitants superior in many ways to humans. Left alone, they undoubtedly someday will develop a remarkably advanced and peaceful culture. 
KIRK: Indeed. And I intend to see that they have that chance. You coming with me? 
MCCOY: Do I have a choice? 
(So they make their way down the slope, and Kirk gets pounced on by a big white ape with a large horn on it's head and spines down it's back. It easily throws off McCoy as it concentrates on it's first victim, biting him, Throwing rocks makes it stand up, then McCoy vaporizes it with his phaser.) 
KIRK: (shaking) Contact ship. Took full poison. Fangs. 
MCCOY: Enterprise, McCoy. Emergency. Come in. Enterprise, come in. McCoy! Emergency! 
KIRK: They left. Out of orbit. 
MCCOY: (giving an injection) Jim, there is no antitoxin for this poison. I can only keep you alive a few hours with this. 
KIRK: Tyree. Some of his men. Cure. 
(Three men are standing in front of them.) 
MCCOY: Are you hill people? Do you know a hunter named Tyree? A mugato attacked him. He's James Kirk. He's a friend of Tyree's. Blast it! Do something! He's dying! 
(Kirk passes out.)

{Tyree's camp]

YUTAN: Take him to the cave. I bring Tyree.

[Cave]

MCCOY [OC]: Medical log, stardate 4211.8. Kirk is right about the people here. Despite their fear and our strangeness, they're compassionate and gentle. I've learned the hunter Tyree is now their leader. He is expected to return shortly with his wife, who they say knows how to cure this poison. My problem. The captain is in deep shock. I must keep him warm and alive until then. 
(McCoy wraps plenty of furs around Kirk.) 
MCCOY: You and your Garden of Eden.

[Hillside]

(A man and a dark-haired woman come out of hiding after two armed villagers pass.) 
NONA: We must obtain the same firesticks, husband. You could be killing them instead. We could take their houses, their goods. 
TYREE: Nona, enough. In time the villagers will return to their ways of friendship. 
NONA: In time? They kill your people! I am a Kahn-ut-tu woman. In all this land, how many are there? Men seek us because through us they become great leaders. 
TYREE: I took you because you cast a spell upon me. 
NONA: And I have spells that help me keep you. Remember this leaf? The night we camped by the water? 
TYREE: The night of madness. 
NONA: Oh, Tyree, did you really hate that madness? 
(She rubs the leaf down his arm, scratching him and leaving pieces attached to his skin.) 
TYREE: No, Nona. No! It brought up evil beasts from my soul. 
NONA: Only one lovely beast, Tyree, my huge, angry man. 
(They kiss passionately.) 
YUTAN: Forgive me. 
NONA: What is it? 
YUTAN: There are strangers in our camp. One has taken the mugato bite. He dies. 
NONA: Strangers? 
YUTAN: It is said the dying one is a friend of Tyree, from long ago. 
NONA: That one. Bring him when his head clears.

[Cave]

(Kirk is shivering under his furs, so McCoy uses his phaser to heat a rock.)

[Tyree's camp]

NONA: The stranger, where is he? 
(She is pointed to the cave.)

[Cave]

(McCoy is heating another couple of rocks when she arrives. The sight of such a powerful weapon stops her from going in.)

[Tyree's camp]

(Tyree arrives, running.) 
TYREE: Nona, where's Kirk? The cave? 
NONA: Tyree, you wish me to save him? 
TYREE: You must. He is the one I told you of. The friend of my younger days. 
NONA: My remedies require I know what kind of man he is. All that is known of him. 
TYREE: I gave him my promise of silence. He was made my brother. 
NONA: And I am your wife, his sister. I promise silence also. 
TYREE: Nona 
NONA: Quickly! Or he dies.

[Sickbay]

(The indicators over Spock's bed are very low. Chapel is holding his hand, but puts it down quickly when the door opens.) 
M'BENGA: Don't let these low panel readings bother you. I've seen this before in Vulcans. It's their way of concentrating all their strength, blood, and antibodies onto the injured organs. A form of self-induced hypnosis. 
CHAPEL: You mean he's conscious? 
M'BENGA: Well, in a sense. He knows we're here and what we're saying, but he can't afford to take his mind from the tissue he's fighting to heal. I suppose he even knows you were holding his hand. (leaves) 
CHAPEL: A good nurse always treats her patients that way. It proves she's interested.

[Cave]

TYREE: I am Tyree. 
NONA: And I'm Tyree's woman. 
TYREE: It is Kirk. She will cure him. 
(Nona takes a strange object out of her bag. It is moving slightly.) 
MCCOY: What's that? 
NONA: A mahko root. 
MCCOY: A plant? It moves. 
NONA: For those who know where to find it, how to use it, how to pick it. 
(She holds out her hand, and Tyree cuts it with his knife. Then she starts writhing for a few moments before putting the mahko root onto Kirk's wound and holding it there with her bleeding hand.) 
NONA: Take this of my soul. This of my soul. Thine own. Into thine. Deeply. Together. Your pain is mine. All mine. Your soul and mine, together! Return. It is past. Return. Return! 
(Tyree beats a drum then she collapses, exhausted, across Kirk's bare chest. The root is shriveled. Kirk wakes up.) 
KIRK: Bones. I had the strangest dream. 
MCCOY: How do you feel, Jim? 
KIRK: Tired. Very tired. You did a fine job, Bones. I think I'll sleep. 
(McCoy removes the root. The would has healed completely.)
MCCOY: I want to thank you for saving his life. (Nona's hand is healed too) I would like to learn more about this. 
NONA: Our blood has passed through the mahko root together. Our souls have been together. He is mine now. 
TYREE: She must sleep also. 
MCCOY: He is hers? 
TYREE: When a man and woman are joined in this manner, he can refuse her no wish. But it is only legend.

(Later, McCoy wakes to find Jim is out of bed. He finds him by Nona's bed.) 
MCCOY: Jim. 
KIRK: Bones. What are you doing here? (their voices wake Tyree) Tyree. My old friend. 
TYREE: Yes, James! James, it's good to see you. 
KIRK: What am I doing here? A mugato bite! I remember. I told him to take me to Tyree's camp. I knew you'd find a kahn-ut-tu to cure me. The kahn-ut-tu is the local witch people here. They've studied (Nona gets up and stands in front of him) They've studied the roots and the herbs. 
NONA: I am a kahn-ut-tu, Captain. I cured you. 
TYREE: My wife, Nona. 
KIRK: Yes, of course. I should've guessed. Congratulations. Tyree, we must talk now. The villagers, their new weapons. I want to hear all about that. We must make plans. 
NONA: Good. It is past time to plan. 
TYREE: Much has happened since you left, James. Come, we'll speak of it. 
NONA: And of things to be done. 
TYREE: Come. (the men leave, but he stops Nona from following.) We will speak of it.

[Sickbay]

(The markers on the indicator board above Spock's head are going up and down like crazy.) 
CHAPEL: The readings are beginning to fluctuate. 
M'BENGA: Just as they should. This is Doctor M'Benga. There will be someone with you constantly now. When the time comes, I'll be called. (to Chapel) As soon as he shows any signs of consciousness, call me immediately. 
CHAPEL: Yes, Doctor. 
M'BENGA: After you've called me, if he speaks, do whatever he says. 
CHAPEL: Do whatever he says? 
M'BENGA: Yes. That's clear enough, isn't it?

[Cave]

TYREE: The firesticks first appeared nearly a year ago. Since that time, many of my people have died. 
KIRK: You say they make the firesticks themselves? How can you be sure? 
TYREE: I've looked into their village. I have seen it being done. 
MCCOY: Have you seen any strangers among the villagers? 
TYREE: Strangers? No. 
KIRK: Can you take us to their village while it's still dark? 
TYREE: Yes, but the mugatos travel at night also. You killed one. Its mate will not be far. 
KIRK: (showing his phaser) You've seen how these work. 
NONA: I've seen them also, and I know you have many ways to make your friend Tyree a man of great importance. 
MCCOY: Many ways? What else does she know about us? 
NONA: Tyree has told me much of you. Do not blame him. It was the price for saving your life. 
KIRK: We're simply strangers from 
NONA: From one of the lights in the sky, and you have ways as far above firesticks as the sky above our world. 
TYREE: You will not speak of this to others. 
NONA: I will not if I am made to understand. Teach me. There's an old custom among my people. When a woman saves a man's life, he is grateful. 
KIRK: I am grateful. 
MCCOY: A splendid custom if not carried to extremes. 
KIRK: We once were as you are, Spears, arrows. There came a time when our weapons grew faster than our wisdom, and we almost destroyed ourselves. We learned from this to make a rule during all our travels, Never to cause the same to happen to other worlds. Just as a man must grow in his own way and in his own time. 
NONA: Some men never grow. 
KIRK: Perhaps not as fast or in the way another thinks he should. But we're wise enough to know that we are wise enough not to interfere with the way of a man or another world. 
NONA: You must let the villagers destroy us? You will not help your friend and brother kill them instead? 
TYREE: No! I said I will not kill! 
NONA: We must fight or die! Is dying better? You would let him die when you have weapons to make him powerful and safe? Then he has the wrong friends. And I have the wrong husband. (leaves) 
TYREE: You will help in ways she does not understand. I have faith in our friendship, James. Come, before we lose the darkness. (leaves) 
MCCOY: What's bothering you, Jim? If we find the Klingons have helped the villagers, there's certainly something we can do. 
KIRK: That's what's bothering me. The something we may have to do.

[Village]

(Smooth walled buildings with tiled roofs, shrubs in terracotta jars. An armed guard patrols in front of one with a verandah.) 
TYREE: The guard. We must wait. 
KIRK: Tyree, supposing you had to fight? What then? 
MCCOY: Jim, this man believes in the same thing we believe in. That killing is stupid and useless. 
KIRK: Tyree? 
TYREE: Now. Come. 
(Kirk sneaks around behind the guard and puts a sleeper hold on him.) 
KIRK: The gun. Ammunition. Doctor. 
(McCoy and Kirk run off while Tyree picks up the flintlock.)

[Building]

(A Klingon is sitting behind a simple wooden table.) 
KRELL: You are late, my friend Apella. 
APELLA: A quarrel by my people. A division of some skins and a hill woman taken this morning. It's hard to divide one woman. 
KRELL: Give her to the man who killed the most of her people. The others will see the profit in bravery. I'll make a Klingon of you yet. 
(He hands over another flintlock.) 
Your next improvement. Notice what we've done to the striker. See how it holds the priming powder more securely? Fewer misfires. When I return, we will give you other improvements. A rifled barrel. 
APELLA: What? 
KRELL: A way to shoot further and straighter.

[Village]

MCCOY: Jim. Coal for forge, sulphur for gun powder. 
KIRK: Let's take a look inside.

[Forge]

(A big bellows runs straight into the base of the fire.) 
KIRK: Well, here's your forge. People's exhibit number one. A chrome steel drill point. 
MCCOY: (scanning) This pig iron is almost carbon-free. That village furnace certainly didn't produce it. People's exhibit number two. Cold-rolled gun barrel rod fashioned to look homemade. You were right about the Klingons, Jim. KIRK: Make recorder and scanner tapes of everything. 
MCCOY: Right. It's a pity we can't include a live Klingon. That'd just about wrap it 
(He is interrupted by voices from outside. They hide.) 
APELLA [OC]: Is it difficult to cut grooves into the barrels? 
KRELL [OC]: It's quite simple. I'll show you. 
(Apella and Krell enter the forge.) 
APELLA: I thought my people would grow tired of killing. But you were right. They see that it is easier than trading and it has pleasures. I feel it myself. Like the hunt, but with richer rewards. 
KRELL: You will be rich one day, Apella, beyond your dreams. The leader of a whole world. A governor in the Klingon Empire. 
(Then McCoy's scanner whistles. So Kirk jumps the Klingon while McCoy hits Apella with the steel rod he took.) 
KIRK: Bones! 
(They open the door, but there are two more armed villagers outside. Nevertheless, they knock them out and get away.)

[Village]

KRELL [OC]: Guards! Intruders!
KIRK: (to Tyree) Move! Fast! 
(Shots are fired as the three run for their lives out of the village.)

[Sickbay]

(Spock starts gasping for air.) 
SPOCK: Nurse. 
CHAPEL: Yes? 
SPOCK: Hit me. The pain will help me to consciousness. Hit me.
CHAPEL: Hit you? No! I can't 
SPOCK: Blast you, strike me! If I don't regain consciousness soon, it may be too late. Hit me. (she slaps his face) Harder! 
(She does, with tears in her eyes.) 
SPOCK: Again. Continue. The pain will help me to consciousness. 
SCOTT: (running in and dragging her away) What are you doing, woman? 
CHAPEL: Leave me alone! 
SCOTT: Have you gone daft? 
CHAPEL: Mister Spock needs me! Let go! 
(M'Benga rushes in and helps Spock to sit up before giving him some pretty vicious hits across the face. Scott stares, astonished. Finally Spock grabs M'Benga's arm.) 
SPOCK: That will be quite enough. Thank you, doctor. 
M'BENGA: Please, release her. 
SCOTT: What's this all about? 
SPOCK: She was doing as I requested, Mister Scott. A Vulcan form of self-healing. 
M'BENGA: As you saw, they must wait until the last possible moment then fight their way back to consciousness. 
CHAPEL: Here, let me help you, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Thank you, nurse. I'm quite fully recovered. 
CHAPEL: Yes, I see you are.

[Tyree's camp]

(Just slightly away from the tents, Kirk is giving a rifle shooting lesson.) 
KIRK: Men, this is the pan. This is the hammer. The hammer striking the pan causes a spark, ignites the powder, and fires the flintlock. Now aim it as I showed you. Hold your breath and squeeze the trigger gently. (Tyree shoots the clay pot target) Well done. Very, very, very good. 
MCCOY: Jim, I want to talk to you. 
KIRK: Not here, Bones. In the cave. Yutan, your turn.

[Cave]

MCCOY: Do I have to say it? It's not bad enough there's one serpent in Eden teaching one side about gun powder. You want to make sure they all know about it! 
KIRK: Exactly. Each side receives the same knowledge and the same type of firearm. 
MCCOY: Have you gone out of your mind? Yes, maybe you have. Tyree's wife, she said there was something in that root. She said now you can refuse her nothing. 
KIRK: Superstition. 
MCCOY: Is it a coincidence this is exactly what she wants? 
KIRK: Is it? She wants superior weapons. That's the one thing neither side can have. Bones. Bones, the normal development of this planet was the status quo between the hill people and the villagers. The Klingons changed that with the flintlocks. If this planet is to develop the way it should, we must equalize both sides again. 
MCCOY: Jim, that means you're condemning this whole planet to a war that may never end. It could go on for year after year, massacre after massacre. 
KIRK: All right, Doctor! All right. Say I'm wrong. Say I'm drugged. Say the woman drugged me. What is your sober, sensible solution to all this? 
MCCOY: I don't have a solution. But furnishing them firearms is certainly not the answer. 
KIRK: Bones, do you remember the twentieth century brush wars on the Asian continent? Two giant powers involved, much like the Klingons and ourselves. Neither side felt could pull out. 
MCCOY: Yes, I remember. It went on bloody year after bloody year. 
KIRK: What would you have suggested, that one side arm its friends with an overpowering weapon? Mankind would never have lived to travel space if they had. No. The only solution is what happened back then. Balance of power. 
MCCOY: And if the Klingons give their side even more? 
KIRK: Then we arm our side with exactly that much more. A balance of power. The trickiest, most difficult, dirtiest game of them all, but the only one that preserves both sides. 
MCCOY: And what about your friend Tyree? Will he understand this balance of power? 
KIRK: No. Probably not. But I'm going to have to try and make him understand. I never had a more difficult task. 
MCCOY: Well, Jim, here's another morsel of agony for you. Since Tyree won't fight, he will be one of the first to die. 
KIRK: Well, war isn't a good life, but it's life. His wife is the only way to reach him. If I tell her we're going to supply guns, maybe she'll convince him.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Position, Mister Scott? 
SCOTT: Entering distant orbit, sir. Approaching rendezvous time. 
SPOCK: The Klingons? 
CHEKOV: They haven't spotted us yet, sir. Looks like they're beaming someone aboard. 
SPOCK: Stand by to signal the captain. 
UHURA: Aye, sir.

[Countryside]

(Kirk finds Nona near a stream which is running over a rock. She has been bathing. KIRK: Nona. Pardon me. 
NONA: You are here because I wished you here. 
KIRK: Oh? I thought it was my idea. 
NONA: Yes. They always believe they come of free will. Tyree thought the same when I cast my first spell on him. 
KIRK: Nona 
NONA: Can you smell this fragrance? Some find it pleasing. 
(It is the same planet that she used on Tyree.) 
KIRK: I'd like to talk to you. 
NONA: Again. Some find it soothing. Yes. 
KIRK: I would like 
NONA: Happy. Yes. You feel good. 
(Tyree overhears her, and he is carrying a gun.) 
KIRK: I feel dizzy. Yes, you are lovely. You're beautiful. 
(Tyree takes aim.) 
NONA: Kiss me. 
(Kirk gives in, but Tyree cannot bring himself to squeeze the trigger. He throws the gun down in disgust and runs. Nona and Kirk are interrupted by the shriek of a mugato. Kirk is so besotted that Nona has difficulty getting out of his embrace and trying to escape. Eventually Kirk thinks to draw his phaser and kill the attacking creature. She decides to hit him over the head to get the phaser for herself.)

[Tyree's camp]

(Tyree returns.) 
MCCOY: Where's Captain Kirk? Tyree, the firestick. Where is it? 
TYREE: There! I left it there. 
MCCOY: That's a fine thing to leave lying around. Show us where it is.

[Countryside]

(Nona has just left when McCoy, Tyree and Yutan arrive. Yutan picks up the rifle.) 
TYREE: I do not want it. 
MCCOY: Jim? Jim. Who hit you? 
KIRK: Nona.

[Hillside]

(Nona greets a band of villagers.) 
NONA: I bring you victory for Apella! 
) MAN 1: Tyree's woman. 
MAN 2: She's a Kahn-ut-tu. 
MAN 1: We won't trust this division to Apella. 
NONA: Take me to him. He will have the strength to use this new weapon. 
(Villager number one grabs Nona, and she slaps him off.) 
NONA: Touch me again, and this small box will kill you. 
(They don't believe her, and all four men struggle with her.

[Countryside]

(McCoy is about to give Kirk an injection to go with the headache pills.) 
KIRK: No, no. I'm all right. My phaser. She took it.

[Hillside]

NONA: This weapon I bring you is far greater than your firesticks. 
(Still, all the men want is to have their wicked way with her, and she screams. Kirk, Tyree and McCoy come running over the brow.) 
TYREE: Nona! 
MAN 4: Hill people! 
MAN 1: It's a trap. The woman's tricked us. 
(He stabs her. Another man shoots McCoy in the arm. Yutan fires back, then there is a good old-fashioned hand-to-hand struggle. Tyree smashes one man's head repeatedly with a large rock, until Kirk stops him. He goes to his wife.) 
MCCOY: She's dead. 
(Tyree picks up a rifle.) 
TYREE: I want more of these, Kirk. Many more! Yutan, two of those who killed my wife have escaped. Track them down. I will kill them. 
(McCoy finds the phaser in the dirt nearby.) 
MCCOY: Here. 
KIRK: Tomorrow in the palm of her hands. 
MCCOY: Well, you got what you wanted. 
KIRK: Not what I wanted, Bones. What had to be. (McCoy hands him a communicator from his bag) Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC] Spock, Captain. I trust all has gone well. 
MCCOY: Spock, are you alive?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: An illogical question, Doctor, since obviously you are hearing my voice.

[Hillside]

MCCOY: Well, I don't know why I was worried. You can't kill a computer. 
KIRK: Spock, ask Scotty how long it would take him to reproduce a hundred flintlocks.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: (losing his grin) I didn't get that exactly, Captain. A hundred what?

[Hillside]

KIRK: A hundred serpents. Serpents for the Garden of Eden. We're very tired, Mister Spock. Beam us up home.

<Back to the episode listing

Star Trek  and related marks are trademarks of CBS Studios Inc. Copyright  1966, Present. The Star Trek web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

