It looks right.
The nitrogen cycle, it has to be.
That is a very good question.
Where is she, Miri? Where is she, Miri? Where's Janice?
What's the matter with you? How should I know?
Where is she? Has something happened to her?
Don't you feel all right?
No, I don't feel all right! None of us feel all right! Can't you see what's going on?
Jim, I don't want anything to happen to you.
I've got to find Janice.
That's not all, Captain. We've got to find those communicators.
We're trying, Mister Spock. We're trying very hard.
That's not good enough! This could be it, but we can't test it without the ship's computers.
We've got to have those communicators, Jim.
This is the vaccine?
That's what the computers will tell us.
Without them, it could be a beaker full of death.
Did you hear them? We only have a few hours left.
I don't care.
You've got to care. Miri, I'm going to tell you something. You, your friends, all the Onlies are going to get the disease unless we succeed in what we're doing. You've seen your friends get it.
Sometimes it happens.
Not sometimes. All the times, Miri! As soon as you start growing up the way you are. Don't you know why you don't like to play games anymore, why you don't see your friends the way you used to? It's because you're becoming a young woman, and the moment you become a young woman, you get the disease. All of you.
That's not true. It just happens sometimes.
All the time, Miri! It's happening to you right now! Look at it. Look at it, Miri, it's in you!
It can't be the screen then. Definitely something out there, Captain, headed this way.
It could be these meteorites.
No, it's something else. There's still something out there.
It's coming at the speed of light, collision course. The meteorite beam has not deflected it, Captain.
Steady as we go.
They were keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way.
A ship in trouble making a forced landing, sir. That's it. No other message.
I have a fix. It comes from the Talos star group.
We've no ships or Earth colonies that far out.
Their call letters check with a survey expedition. SS Columbia. It disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago.
It would take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here.
Records show the Talos group has never been explored. Solar system similar to Earth, eleven planets. Number four seems to be Class M, oxygen atmosphere.
Then they could still be alive, even after eighteen years.
We aren't going to go, to be certain?
Not without any indication of survivors, no. Continue to the Vega Colony and take care of our own sick and injured first. You have the helm. Maintain present course.
That's right. Unless we get anything more positive on it, it seems to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent. I'd like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, too.
Oh, I concur with yours, definitely.
Good. I'm glad you do, because we're going to stop first at the Vega Colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also. What the devil are you putting in there, ice?
What makes you think I need one?
Sometimes a man'll tell his bartender things he'll never tell his doctor. What's been on your mind, Chris, the fight on Rigel Seven?
Shouldn't it be? My only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
Was there anything you personally could have done to prevent it?
Oh, I should have smelled trouble when I saw the swords and the armour. Instead of that, I let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one of their warriors.
Chris, you set standards for yourself no one could meet. You treat everyone on board like a human being except yourself, and now you're tired and you
You bet I'm tired. You bet. I'm tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives. I'm tired of deciding which mission is too risky and which isn't, and who's going on the landing party and who doesn't, and who lives and who dies. Boy, I've had it, Phil.
To the point of finally taking my advice, a rest leave?
Well, for one thing, go home. Nice little town with fifty miles of parkland around it. Remember I told you I had two horses, and we used to take some food and ride out all day.
Ah, that sounds exciting. Ride out with a picnic lunch every day.
I said that's one place I might go. I might go into business on Regulus or on the Orion colony.
The point is this isn't the only life available. There's a whole galaxy of things to choose from.
Now you're beginning to talk like a doctor, bartender.
Take your choice. We both get the same two kinds of customers. The living and the dying.
This is the captain. Our destination is the Talos star group. Our time warp, factor seven.
All decks have acknowledged, sir.
I thought I told you that when I'm on the bridge
But you wanted the reports by oh five hundred. It's oh five hundred now, sir.
She's replacing your former yeoman, sir.
She does a good job, all right. It's just that I can't get used to having a woman on the bridge. No offence, Lieutenant. You're different, of course.
We've settled into orbit, sir.
Our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, heavy with inert elements but well within safety limits.
Zero point nine of Earth.
Captain? Reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. As I read it, they polarise out as rounded metal bits. Could be parts of a spaceship hull.
Prep a landing party of six. You feel up to it?
Sorry, Number One. With little information on this planet, we'll have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us.
There's no indication of problems down there, but let's not take chances.
Yes, sir. There's a canyon to the left. We can set you there completely unobserved.
MAN: They're men. They're humans.
The same old Earth, and you'll see it very soon.
And you won't believe how fast you can get back. Well the time barrier's been broken. Our new ships can
This is Vina. Her parents are dead. She was born almost as we crashed.
We'll begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly.
That's affirmative on the
You appear to be healthy and intelligent, Captain. A prime specimen.
You must forgive her choice of words, Captain. She's lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists.
If they can spare you a moment, I'd like to make my medical report.
I think it's time to show the Captain our secret.
Their health is excellent. Almost too good.
There's a reason for our condition, but we've had some doubt if Earth is ready to learn the secret. Let the girl show you. We'll accept your judgment.
You're tired, but don't worry. You'll feel much better soon. Don't you see it? Here and here.
I don't understand.
You will. You're a perfect choice.
There is no survivors' encampment, Number One. This is all some sort of trap. We've lost the Captain. Do you read?
Can you hear me? My name is Christopher Pike, commander of the space vehicle Enterprise from a stellar group at the other end of this galaxy. Our intentions are peaceful. Can you understand me?
It appears, Magistrate, that the intelligence of the specimen is shockingly limited.
You're not speaking, yet I can hear you.
All right then, telepathy. You can read my mind. I can read yours. Now, unless you want my ship to consider capturing me an unfriendly act
If you were in here, wouldn't you test the strength of these walls, too? There's a way out of any cage, and I'll find it.
The inhabitants of this planet must live deep underground, and probably manufacture food and other needs down there. Our tests indicate the planet surface, without considerably more vegetation or some animals, simply too barren to support life.
Exactly. An illusion placed in our minds by this planet's inhabitants.
It was a perfect illusion. They had us seeing just what we wanted to see, human beings who'd survived with dignity and bravery, everything entirely logical, right down to the building of the camp, the tattered clothing, everything. Now let's be sure we understand the danger of this. The inhabitants of this planet can read our minds. They can create illusions out of a person's own thoughts, memories, and experiences, even out of a person's own desires. Illusions just as real and solid as this table top and just as impossible to ignore.
Any estimate what they might want one of us for?
They may simply be studying the Captain, to find out how Earth people are put together. Or it could be something more.
Then why aren't we doing anything? That entry may have stood up against hand lasers, but we can transmit the ship's power against it. Enough to blast half a continent.
Look. Brains three times the size of ours. If we start buzzing about down there, we're liable to find their mental power is so great they could reach out and swat this ship as though it were a fly.
It's Captain Pike they've got. He needs help, and he probably needs it fast.
Engineering deck will rig to transmit ship's power. We'll try blasting through that metal.
Thousands of us are already probing the creature's thoughts, Magistrate. We find excellent memory capacity.
Come on, we must hide ourselves. Come, come. Hurry. It's deserted. There'll be weapons and perhaps food.
This is Rigel Seven.
Please, we must hide ourselves.
I was in a cage, a cell, in some kind of a zoo. I must still be there.
They've reached into my mind and taken the memory of somewhere I've been.
Why, it's been a great pleasure. The things that he's learned in the last
Absolutely. To think this boy spent practically his whole life alone on that planet. Everyone killed, just a few microtapes to learn from.
How many humans like me on this ship?
Like a whole city in space, Charlie. Over four hundred in the crew of a starship, aren't there, Captain?
Four hundred and twenty eight, to be exact. Is there anything we can do for you, Captain? Medical supplies, provisions?
Hundreds. All human, like me. That's exciting. Is that the right word?
That's perfect. It's the exact word.
You see. We'd like to keep Charlie with us, but with his closest living relatives on Colony Five and your vessel going that way, why
I'd like to see your ship now. All of it. The people and everything.
You keep interrupting, Mister Evans. That's considered wrong.
We have a large supply of entertainment tapes, gentlemen.
No, we've a tight schedule to make, Captain. Just twenty of us, we're making out fine.
This must be a space first. A transport ship that doesn't need anything?
We're fine, thank you. Pleasant journey, Captain.
Yeoman Rand, this is Charles Evans. Show him to his quarters and drop his records off at Doctor McCoy's office, if you will.
Yes, sir. Come with me, please.
Are you a girl? Is that a girl?
That's a girl.
Tell me. The ship's supply of food concentrates couldn't have lasted fourteen years.
After that I found other things to eat, just growing around.
And you learned to talk by just listening to the ship's tapes?
The memory banks still worked. They talked to me, and I talked back.
Why does he call me Mister Evans?
Because that's your name.
He's not, well, he isn't like Captain Ramart.
Well, no. Captain Kirk is one of a kind, Charlie.
Do you like me?
Some, the other ship, they didn't like me. I tried. I'm trying to make people like me. I want them to like me.
Most seventeen year olds do. Come on, let's go. I'll show you to your quarters.
I brought you a present.
Oh, thank you. I really appreciate it, but, but I have to go. I'm on duty.
Do you like that kind?
Yes, I, it's my favourite. Where did you get it? They don't have any in the ship's stores.
It's a present.
I know, but where did? Gee, I'm late, Charlie. I really have to go.
Can't you stay and talk a little while?
Look, I'm off duty at fourteen hundred. Why don't you join me in recreation room six, deck three.
I thought. Don't be angry. I didn't, I wanted.
Charlie, you, you, you just don't go around slapping girls on the. It's okay, but er, just don't do it again.
Don't be angry.
Look, why don't you tell Captain Kirk or Doctor McCoy what you did. They'll explain it to you. Okay?
But tell me, what reason would he have to lie if there are Thasians?
That is a very intriguing question. Scanners show no disturbances in this quadrant, Captain.
Good. Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock is working out
Thank you. He's working out a training programme for Charlie Evans. Earth history, his own background, that sort of thing. I'd like you to give him the necessary medical orientation on the problems of, um, er, adolescence.
Well, don't you think it'd be better for a strong father image like you? He already looks up to you.
The job is yours, Bones. Flattery will get you nowhere.
Doctor, didn't the boy make any reference at all to Thasians?
Do you believe the legend, Mister Spock, that Thasians still exist on that planet in some form?
Charlie's very existence proves in fact there must be some intelligent form of life on Thasus. He could not possibly have survived alone. The ship's food concentrates would have been exhausted in a year or so.
Probes of Thasus indicate very little edible plant life.
And probes have been known to be wrong, Spock.
Doctor, are you speaking scientifically or emotionally?
Gentlemen, the fact is the boy is here and he's alive and he needs our help.
And he needs a guide and he needs a father image, Jim.
Hmm. I'll depend on your astute abilities to supply him with that, or find him one.
I'm sorry. I did it again, didn't I.
Well, how did you do that?
Oh, I can do a lot of card tricks. One of the men on the Antares showed me.
I don't believe this!
On Earth today, it's Thanksgiving. If the crew has to eat synthetic meat loaf, I want it to look like turkey. Charlie.
Captain? I'm supposed to ask you something. Why shouldn't I? I don't know how to explain it.
Say it right out, Charlie. That usually works.
Me. I see. Well, um, er, there are things you can do with a lady, er, Charlie, that you er. There's no right way to hit a woman. I mean, man to man is one thing, but, er, man and woman, er, it's, er, it's, er. Well it's, er, another thing. Do you understand?
I don't know.
I'm on my way to the Bridge now.
Can I come with you?
I don't think so, Charlie.
I won't get in the way.
Can you boost your power, Antares. We're barely reading your transmission.
They're not transmitting.
It wasn't very well constructed.
Sweep the area of the Antares transmission with our probe scanners, Mister Spock.
You think something happened to the Antares, Charlie?
I don't know.
Picking up some debris on our scanners, Captain.
The debris is what's left of the Antares.
Chief, have you been
Your mind is not on the game, Captain. Check. The Antares?
A survey ship with twenty men aboard lost. No reason. Obviously, Captain Ramart was not aware of any trouble. I can't figure it.
My own concern is more immediate. The boy.
I can usually follow you, Mister Spock, but this time?
He seemed to know what happened to the Antares before we did.
I'd call it a pretty long reach for evidence, Mister Spock. Come in, Charlie.
Your illogical approach to chess does have its advantages on occasion, Captain.
I prefer to call it inspired.
As you wish. At any rate, the game is yours.
I place you in the hands of our chess master.
I know what it is. Let's play.
This shouldn't be happening. This man should be getting stronger. You sure the respirator's functioning properly?
Why is this man dying? Hypo.
He's dead, Doctor.
The wounds were not that severe.
Uhura, monitor communications. Tell McCoy I'll be there when I can.
Planet breakup is imminent, Captain. Shrinking in size at an increasing rate. As the planet continues to shrink in size, its surface moves away from us.
Forcing us to spiral down to maintain the same distance from it.
Exactly. We must be prepared to respond instantly to any sudden change.
Tie into the helm, Scotty. If we should call for power, we'll want it fast.
Rate of compaction seems constant.
Then I'll go see what the good doctor wants. Keep me informed of any change, Mister Spock.
Don't know if it's this planet or what happened with Joe. I'm sweating like a bridegroom.
Hey, why don't you come down to the gym with me, Kevin m'lad?
Why not? Light workout will take the edge off.
Sulu, what about. Hey, Sulu, don't be a fool!
Intestinal damage wasn't that severe. I got to him in plenty of time. That man should still be alive. The only reason he died, Jim, is he didn't want to live. He gave up.
That's a supposition, Doctor, not a fact.
Well, that may be. Maybe. I've lost patients before, but not like that. Not Joe's kind. That kind of man doesn't give up.
You mean that Joe was down on the planet surface and you're gonna ask me if it's connected.
That's exactly what I was going to ask.
Jim, he was decontaminated. He's been medically checked. We've run every test we know for everything we know.
That's not good enough.
Well, we're doing everything that's possible.
Why isn't Mister Sulu at this station?
You haven't answered my question. Where is Mister Sulu?
Have no fear, O'Riley's here. One Irishman is worth ten thousand of you
You're relieved, Mister Riley. Lieutenant Uhura, take over this station.
Now that's what I like. Let the women work too. Universal suffrage.
Report to Sickbay, Mister Riley.
Sickbay? Exactly where I was heading, sir.
Security. Mister Riley is headed for Sickbay. See to it he arrives. Captain Kirk to the Bridge.
He died, didn't he.
I know he was a friend of yours. This must be a terrible shock.
You know what Joe's mistake was? He wasn't born an Irishman.
What were their symptoms?
Nonviolent at this stage. Slightly disoriented. Riley seemed rather pleased with himself, as if he were
Both Sulu and Riley, locate and confine. I want every crewman who comes in contact with them medically checked.
Sir, level two, corridor three reports a disturbance. Mister Sulu chasing crewmen with a sword.
Gravity pull increasing. We've shifted to two percent and should stabilise our position.
Helm is not answering to control.
Warp us out of here.
Impulse power then. Blast us out of this orbit.
Engine room, we need power!
Mister Scott, acknowledge. Our controls are dead. Take her.
Sulu, give me that.
I'll protect you, fair maiden.
I'd like you to teach me that sometime.
Take D'Artagnon here to Sickbay.
Scotty, we need power. Engine room, acknowledge!
This is Captain Kevin Thomas Riley of the starship Enterprise.
This is Captain Kirk. Get out of the engine room, navigator. Where's Mister Scott?
Clear that tube, will you?
Captain. At our present rate of descent, we have less than twenty minutes before we enter planet atmosphere.
He ran in, said you wanted us on the Bridge.
He's cut off both helm and power.
Can't you get to the auxiliary?
I can't. He's hooked everything through the main panel in there. Get up to my office and pull the plans for this bulkhead. The only way to get that door open is to cut through these wall circuits here.
Mister Spock, a fight in the aft wardroom. Security reports incidents among the crewmen are increasing.
Go to Alert Baker two. Seal off main sections.
All decks, alert system B two. Repeat, go to alert condition Baker two. Seal off all main sections. Stand by.
We're going to seal off, Captain, if we can minimise the spread of whatever this is.
I can't, sir. He's cut off the alert channels.
I can't, sir. There's no way to do it.
Sickbay to Bridge.
Can you tie me in to the Sickbay?
I'm getting you, Jim. Look, can you keep this beast level? I've got Sulu tranquillized and we're running tests on him.
Riley's the immediate problem, Doctor. Is there any way, anything you can do to snap him out of it?
Negative, until I can get a little farther on these tests.
In the future, all female crew members will wear their hair loosely, about their shoulders.
I've set the jumpers up there. Stand by 'til I give you a signal.
And tears bedim your loving eyes. Oh,
Engineering to Bridge. Try your helm. You'll have enough power to keep her stabilised. Here, let's have a look at that.
Sixteen minutes left, Captain. We've stabilised, but still spiraling down.
Get me Sickbay.
I have no intercom for Sickbay. He keeps switching channels on me.
See what you can do to help Doctor McCoy. Better check Scotty first. Move him faster. He's got to get through that bulkhead.
Mister Spock, I'm trying to get to the Bridge and this crewman won't let me by.
Oh, yes, sir. I'll take you home again, Janice
Tell him I'm doing my best. If I cut through the wrong circuits
We have fourteen minutes left.
At the rate you're proceeding, calculations show that you'll take a minute and a half more than we have left. You can't afford a safety factor.
Biopsy lab. Biopsy, where's my report? Biopsy, come in! Harrison, where's my report? I'm going to the lab.
Oh, good. I'll need him conscious now. Continue to examine him on circuits K one and three.
Get him out of here.
I would have gotten here sooner, sir but Crewman Moody stopped me in the hallway.
Sir, if I could cut him off, don't you think I
Yes, sir. I'll keep trying.
We've got twelve minutes left. It'll take at least two or three of them to get the engines up to power now.
Call me when you've cut through. I want to be there. Kirk out.
Nurse? Where is Doctor McCoy?
He's gone to the lab.
What is it, Nurse?
Nurse, you should
Christine, please. I see things, how honest you are. I know how you feel. You hide it, but you do have feeling. Oh, how we must hurt you, torture you.
I'm in control of my emotions.
The others believe that. I don't. I love you. I don't know why, but I love you. I do love you just as you are. Oh, I love you.
I am sorry.
I'll take. No dance tonight.
Get him out of here.
Scotty, we haven't got much time left.
What is it?
He's turned the engines off. Completely cold. It will take thirty minutes to regenerate them.
I can't change the laws of physics. I've got to have thirty minutes.
Scotty, we've got six.
Captain, you can't mix matter and antimatter cold. We'd go up in the biggest explosion since
We can balance our engines into a controlled implosion.
That's only a theory. It's never been done.
Bridge, have you found Mister Spock yet?
If you wanted to chance odds of ten thousand to one, maybe, assuming we had a row of computers working weeks on the right formula.
Mister Spock is not on the Bridge, Captain.
McCoy to Bio. We've isolated it. Start preparing serum.
It's water. Somehow on this planet, water's changed to a complex chain of molecules.
Doc, will you let me out of here? I'm all right.
Where have you been? What happened?
My mother. I could never tell her I loved her.
We've got four minutes, maybe five.
We've got to risk implosion. It's our only chance.
It's never been done.
Don't tell me that again, Science Officer! It's a theory. It's possible. We may go up into the biggest ball of fire since the last sun in these parts exploded, but we've got to take that one in ten thousand chance!
Yes, I found Mister Spock! I'm talking to Mister Spock, do you understand?
I've got it, the disease. Love. You're better off without it, and I'm better off without mine. This vessel, I give, she takes. She won't permit me my life. I've got to live hers.
I have a beautiful yeoman. Have you noticed her, Mister Spock? You're allowed to notice her. The Captain's not permitted
Jim, there is an intermix formula.
Now I know why it's called she.
It's never been tested. It's a theoretical relationship between time and antimatter.
Flesh woman to touch, to hold. A beach to walk on. A few days, no braid on my shoulder.
Stand by to intermix. I'll call the formulae in from the Bridge.
Engine room. We're set. Hyperbolic course.
Direction. Direction. It doesn't matter. The way we came.
That'll take four minutes.
We haven't the time. We'll have to risk it. Bridge, we're ready.
Are you all right, Jim?
We found a cure. We're over that part of it.
Obviously, we were successful. The engines imploded.
Captain, my velocity gauge is off the scale.
Engine power went off the scale as well. We're now travelling faster than is possible for normal space.
Time warp. We're going backward in time. Helm, begin reversing power. Slowly.
We're back to normal time, Captain.
The time warp. What did it do to us?
We've regressed in time seventy one hours. It is now three days ago, Captain. We have three days to live over again.
This does open some intriguing prospects, Captain. Since the formula worked, we can go back in time, to any planet, any era.
We may risk it someday, Mister Spock. Resume course to our next destination, Mister Sulu.
Steady as she goes.
That should make a good specimen.
Yeah. At night it gets down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero.
I fell off that bank, sir. Cut my hand.
Let's see it. Get back to the ship. Report to the Sickbay.
Yes, sir. Geological Technician Fisher. Ready to beam up.
I don't know. Some kind of yellow ore.
That acted like a burnout.
Yes, I'm all right. Just a little dizzy.
Let me give you a hand.
I can't get through there. Nothing serious. Don't leave the transporter room unattended.
Wilson will be right back, sir.
Captain? Are you all right, sir? Can I give you a hand, sir? Captain?
All right, Engineer, I'll have my engines looked to.
Ship's manifests, sir. I think they're in order now.
You picked a good day, Fisher. Business has been lousy. What'd you do, take a fall on purpose so you could get a little vacation?
What can I do for you, Jim?
Come in. Yes, Mister Spock, what is it?
Is there something I can do for you, Captain?
Well, Doctor McCoy seemed to think I should check on you.
That's nice. Come on, Spock, I know that look. What is it?
Well, our good doctor said that you were acting like a wild man, demanded brandy.
Our good doctor's been putting you on again.
Hmm. Well, in that case, if you'll excuse the intrusion Captain, I'll get back to my work.
I'll tell him you were properly annoyed.
What is it, Scotty?
A few seconds after they sent this one up through the transporter, that duplicate appeared. Except it's not a duplicate, it's an opposite. Two of the same animal, but different. One gentle, this. One mean and fierce, that. Some kind of savage, ferocious opposite. Captain, we don't dare send Mister Sulu and the landing party up. If this should happen to a man.
Jim will do here, Janice.
Me? My yeoman said that? I've been resting here since you left me. Alone, Mister Spock.
Doctor McCoy reports that you demanded this brandy in Sickbay and left with it. I found this bottle in Yeoman Rand's quarters.
Not true. I haven't been to the Sickbay. Let's find out what's going on.
Then he kissed me and he said that we, that he was the Captain and he could order me. I didn't know what to do. When you mentioned the feelings we'd been hiding, and you started talking about us.
Well, he is the captain. I couldn't just. You started hurting me. I had to fight you, and scratch your face.
Yeoman, look at me. Look at me, look at my face. Are there any scratches?
I was sure I scratched you. I was frightened. Maybe
Yeoman. I was in my room. It wasn't me.
If it hadn't been. I can understand. I don't want to get you into trouble. I wouldn't have even mentioned it!
It wasn't me!
It was you, sir.
Do you know what you're saying?
Yes, I know what I'm saying.
Back to that bed, bucko. Come on, let's go.
How did all this happen?
I don't know sir, but when Fisher came up, his suit was covered with a soft yellow ore that had highly unusual properties. It may have caused an overload. Can't tell, not yet.
Yes sir, but we don't dare bring up the landing party. It might be duplicated like this animal.
How long will it take you to find the trouble?
Can't say, sir.
We just can't leave those four men down there. It's getting dark. They'll die. The surface temperature of that planet goes down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero at night.
We're doing everything we can, sir.
About your double, Captain.
Yes, er, yes, we'll have to find him. Search parties, Mister Spock. Organise search parties.
We can't take a chance on killing it. We have no previous experience, no way of knowing what would happen to you.
Yes, that's right. We don't know, but the men have to be armed. The men are to be armed, with their phasers locked, I repeat, locked, on setting number one. There can't be any chance of him being killed. He's to be taken without. If the men are forced to fire, he can't be killed.
How shall we explain it to them, Captain? The search parties are to capture you?
Yes, I'll make an announcement to the entire crew, tell them what happened. It's a good crew. They deserve to know.
Captain, no disrespect intended, but you must surely realise you can't announce the full truth to the crew. You're the Captain of this ship. You haven't the right to be vulnerable in the eyes of the crew. You can't afford the luxury of being anything less than perfect. If you do, they lose faith, and you lose command.
Yes, I do know that, Mister Spock. What I don't know is why I forgot that just now. Mister Spock, if you see me slipping again, your orders, your orders are to tell me.
Section chiefs, assign personnel to the search. All search parties
About the phaser weapons to be set for stunning force and locked.
Oh, yes, yes. All hand phasers must be set on base cycle, stunning force.
I'm Captain Kirk!
Wilson, give me your phaser.
How have you been?
It's already twenty degrees below zero. Can't exactly
Isn't there any way we can help them?
Thermal heaters were transported down. They duplicated. They won't operate.
Then we've got to get those men up.
We've got to find him before he, but how?
Apparently, this double, however different in temperament, has your knowledge of the ship, its crew, its devices. This being the case, perhaps we can outguess him by determining his next move. Knowing how the ship is laid out, where would you go to elude a mass search?
Set and locked on base cycle to stun, not to kill. What about your phaser, Captain? Don't you think we ought to get some help, Captain?
No. I don't want anyone else to see the
Captain, you ordered me to tell you.
Mister Spock, if I'm to be the Captain, I've got to act like one.
You can't hurt me. You can't kill me. You can't. Don't you understand? I'm part of you. You need me. I need you.
He'll be regaining consciousness soon, and not knowing what his physical state is, I don't think I dare give him a tranquilizer of any kind. I think we'd better bind him.
Yes. yes, all right. What's the matter with me?
Judging from my observations, Captain, you're rapidly losing the power of decision.
You have a point, Spock?
Yes, always, Doctor. We have here an unusual opportunity to appraise the human mind, or to examine, in Earth terms, the roles of good and evil in a man. His negative side, which you call hostility, lust, violence, and his positive side, which Earth people express as compassion, love, tenderness.
It's the Captain's guts you're analysing. Are you of that, Spock?
Yes, and what is it that makes one man an exceptional leader? We see indications that it's his negative side which makes him strong, that his evil side, if you will, properly controlled and disciplined, is vital to his strength. Your negative side removed from you, the power of command begins to elude you.
What is your point, Mister Spock?
If your power of command continues to weaken, you'll soon be unable to function as Captain. You must be prepared for that.
You have your intellect, Jim. You can fight with that!
If I seem insensitive to what you're going through, Captain, understand it's the way I am.
Can you give us a status report, Captain? Temperature's still dropping. Now forty one degrees below zero.
Do you think you might be able to find a long rope somewhere and lower us down a pot of hot coffee?
I'll see what we can do.
How bad is it?
I gave everybody the afternoon off. I'm watching the store.
Oh, lovely, except that the frost is building up. We're using hand phasers to heat the rocks. One phaser quit on us, three still operating. Any possibility of getting us back aboard before the skiing season opens down here?
This is Spock, Mister Sulu. You'll have to hold on a little longer. There's no other way. Survival procedures, Mister Sulu.
Apparently the body functioning weakened during the duplication process. A fact I failed to consider.
He's not dying?
How can he die? Can I survive without him?
I don't know, Jim.
Don't be afraid. Here's my hand. Hold on. You don't have to be afraid. I won't let go. Hold on. You won't be afraid if you use your mind and think! Think! You can do it. That's it!
Jim, he is back! Jim, you can use that brandy now. In fact, I'll join you.
I have to take him back inside myself. I can't survive without him. I don't want him back. He's like an animal, a thoughtless, brutal animal, and yet it's me. Me.
Jim, you're no different than anyone else. We all have our darker side. We need it! It's half of what we are. It's not really ugly, it's human.
Yes, human. A lot of what he is makes you the man you are. God forbid I should have to agree with Spock, but he was right. Without the negative side, you wouldn't be the Captain. You couldn't be, and you know it. Your strength of command lies mostly in him.
What do I have?
You have the goodness.
Not enough. I have a ship to command.
The intelligence, the logic. It appears your half has most of that, and perhaps that's where man's essential courage comes from. For you see, he was afraid and you weren't.
What is it?
We've found a way to get the transporter working, sir.
We've attached some bypass and leader circuits to compensate for the difference. Tied directly into the impulse engines, there shouldn't be more than a five point variation in the velocity balance. I suggest we send the animal through. Captain.
Don't hurt him.
If this doesn't work, I don't know what will.
The shock of putting him back together seems to have been too much for him.
He's dead, Jim.
For once, I agree with you.
No autopsy is necessary to know that the animal was terrified, confused. It was split into two halves and suddenly thrust back together again. Thus shock induced by blind terror.
It couldn't understand. You can. You have your intelligence controlling your fear.
Could be, if, maybe. All guesswork so far. Just theory. Jim, why don't you give me a chance to do an autopsy and let Spock check the transporter circuits again.
Aren't you forgetting something, Captain?
No, I don't think I've for
Your men on the planet surface. How much time do they have left?
It doesn't make sense. There are no harmful life forms reported. Our sensors didn't pick up anything that didn't belong here.
That is correct. I am at a loss to understand it.
Take charge of the landing party, Mister Spock. I want some answers to all this.
Can she talk?
Aurelan? Aurelan, it's Jim.
Jim? Sam, he's
He's dead. But your son's still alive. You've got to help us.
You are here. It is you, Jim.
Yes, I'm here. You have to tell us what happened, Aurelan, to you and the others.
Things. Horrible things! Visitors brought them in their vessel from a planet. Ingraham B.
What kind of things?
Not the ship's crew's fault. The things made them bring their ship here.
Aurelan, it's important that you tell us. What kind of things?
Not their fault.
When she answers questions, any questions, it's as if she's fighting to get the answers out. As though something is exerting pain to stop her.
They use it to control us. They're spreading, Jim. They need us to be their arms and legs. They're forcing us to build ships for them. Don't let them! Don't let them go any further!
I'll do everything I can, Jim, to save him.
The streets are extraordinarily quiet, Captain. We've seen no other Denevans, and the ones we stunned earlier were gone when we came out.
You've seen some kind of creature? Any alien form?
A peculiar buzzing sound. We were about to investigate it.
All right. Let's go find out what it is. Set your phasers on force three, to kill. We're looking for some kind of creature, and we already know it will kill.
Incredible. Not only should it have been destroyed by our phasers, it does not even register on my tricorder.
Captain, it doesn't even look real.
It is not life as we know or understand it. Yet t is obviously alive, it exists.
And it can bear up under full phaser power.
Captain, I suggest we risk taking it aboard.
It's too close in here. It may be a trap in here. Let's move out.
Nurse. That's the second time he's come out of it. Either he's fighting us, or something inside of him is fighting us.
Doctor, the readings have never looked like that before, not even on Mister Spock.
Let's prepare to close. Nurse!
Doctor, that's not all you're going to do?
Doctor, there is more of it in him, entwined all through his body.
Miss Chapel, if you cannot assist me as required, call another nurse in here. But do one or the other now.
How is he?
Did you operate on Spock in time?
No. I just removed these for examination. His body's full of these tentacles, entwining and growing all about his nervous system.
The same. Evidently, when the creature attacks, it leaves a stinger much like a bee or wasp, leaving one of these in the victim's body. It takes over the victim very rapidly, and the entwining is far, far too involved for conventional surgery to remove.
I'm sorry, Jim. The lab, the science departments, we're all stumped.
Bridge, this is Sickbay. Tell Doctor McCoy Mister Spock just left here.
I must take the ship.
Down! I must take it down.
Get him back to the Sickbay. Use security restraints.
These restraints will no longer be necessary. Nor will your sedatives, Doctor. I'll be able to return to duty. I apologise for my weakness earlier when I tried to take control of the ship. I simply did not understand.
I am a Vulcan, Doctor. Pain is a thing of the mind. The mind can be controlled.
Can he control it the way he says, Bones?
Who knows, Jim? I know the amount of pain the creature can inflict upon him, but whether he can control it hour to hour
I have my own will, Captain. Let me help.
I need you, Spock, but we can't take any chances. We'll keep you confined for a while longer. If you can maintain control, we'll see. My nephew. If he regains consciousness, will he go through that?
Help them. I don't care what it takes or costs. You've got to help them.
Jim, aren't you forgetting something? There are over a million colonists on that planet down there, just as much your responsibility. They need your help, too.
I am a Vulcan. I am a Vulcan. There is no pain.
Mister Spock, I thought you were still confined to Sickbay.
Here, now. Where do you think you're going?
That is an order, Mister Scott.
Aye, sir, and I'm sorry I have to disobey it. The Captain said no one was to transport down. Mister Spock.
Freeze right there, Mister Spock, or I'll put you to sleep for sure. This is Mister Scott in the transporter room. Get me the Captain.
Mister Spock, I gave you an order to stay in the Sickbay.
Until the pain was gone, Captain. It has been discontinued by me.
He said he was transporting down to the surface, sir. Your orders were that no one was to beam down unless you authorised it. And knowing Mister Spock's determination on some things, I thought I'd better hold him here until I got your orders.
One of the creatures will have to be captured and analysed, Captain. We did not have a clear opportunity to do so earlier when I was attacked. Since my nervous system is already affected, as you pointed out, Doctor, I don't believe they can do much more to me.
Jim, this is ridiculous. I don't want my patients running around. He should be in bed.
I am in complete control of myself, Doctor. The fact that I am here proves that I do not belong in bed.
Mister Spock, your logic, as usual, is inescapable. Beam him down. Stay in constant touch with us. Give him your phaser. He'll need that, too.
Jim, that man is sick. Don't give me any damnable logic about him being the only man for the job.
I don't have to, Bones. We both know he is.
You may be controlling the pain, Mister Spock, but you're far from all right.
Yes. That would answer a lot of questions.
Do you understand what I'm suggesting, Captain?
I think so. This may be one cell in a larger organism. An incredibly huge organism, in fact.
And although it is not physically connected to the other cells, it is nevertheless part of the whole creature, guided by the whole, drawing its strength from the whole, which probably accounts for its unusual resistance to our phaser weapons.
Existing so differently from any living matter or energy as we know it, that it may have come here, planet by planet, from an entirely different galaxy.
From a place where our physical laws do not apply. We may therefore find it difficult to destroy, Captain.
But not impossible, Mister Spock. The Denevan that flew into the sun cried out that he was free, that he'd won. That's the angle to work on, gentlemen. I want an analysis of all this from Medical and Life Science departments within the hour.
I'm sorry, Captain. I've tried everything I can. Variant radiation, intense heat, even as great as nine thousand degrees.
Then you're wasting your time. There has to be something that'll kill the creature without destroying the human host.
Which happens to be my point. The thing won't die, even at temperatures and radiation which would burn Spock and your nephew to ashes.
I can't accept that, Bones. We've got fourteen science labs aboard this ship. The finest equipment and computers in the galaxy.
Captain, I understand your concern. Your affection for Spock, the fact that your nephew is the last survivor of your brother's family.
No, no, Bones. There's more than two lives at stake here. I cannot let it spread beyond this colony, even if it means destroying a million people down there.
I regret I see no other choice for you, Captain. We already know this thing has destroyed three civilisations. Perhaps more.
Gentlemen, I want it stopped, too, but not at the cost of destroying over a million people.
Including myself, Doctor, and Captain Kirk's young nephew. Understandably upsetting, but once it spreads past here, there are dozens of colonies beyond and billions of people.
If killing five people saves ten, it's a bargain. Is that your simple logic, Mister Spock?
I will accept neither of those alternatives, gentlemen. I cannot let this thing expand beyond this planet, nor do I intend to kill a million or more people to stop it. I want another answer. I'm putting you gentlemen on the hot seat with me. I want that third alternative.
I'm sorry, Jim. We've been over and over it, made every conceivable test.
I therefore request permission to beam down to the planet's surface. I also suggest that your nephew accompany me.
Captain, I do not make this request lightly. I do not know how much longer I can hold out against the pain. But I do know what the boy will go through should he regain consciousness.
Request denied. There must be another answer. Something in the sun killed that thing before the Denevan died. All right. All right. We've tried heat, radiation. What other qualities or properties does the sun have?
It exists physically. It occupies space. It has mass, therefore gravity. It converts matter to energy.
Jim, we've been through it and through it. Radiation, heat
But one other thing you haven't mentioned. It's bright. It radiates a blinding light if you're close enough.
Not to us. But down on the surface, the creatures stayed in the shadows for the most part. Suppose they weren't simply hiding. Suppose they're sensitive to light. Light, like in a sun, close up.
You can't move Deneva closer to the sun, Jim.
No, but you can move the equivalent of the sun to Deneva. Mister Spock?
Good. Let's get on it.
Of course. The light of the sun at the proximity where the Denevan declared himself free was one million candles per square inch. If this works, the satellites we orbit will produce light of such intensity that even someone in a closed, darkened area will be affected by it.
Put on your masks.
It worked! We can do it. What's the matter, Jim? We can do it.
It worked in a lab. With the creature exposed to everything we can give it. But what about the people who are infected?
Well, I don't know. Maybe trial
Maybe. There's no time for maybes, Bones. We need to know now.
But I'd have to put a
Yes, we'd have to put someone who's infected under that light.
Do you have any idea of the risk?
We have to duplicate the conditions on the planet, and Spock
Captain, you'll need a host for the next step in the test to determine whether the creature can be driven from the body. I am the logical choice.
Do you know what one million candlelight per square inch can do to your optic nerves?
There's no other way, Bones. We have to duplicate the brilliance that existed at the moment the Denevan declared himself freed.
All right. I'll rig up a protective pair of goggles.
I agree completely.
Unfortunately, you're both right. It's the only thing we can do. All right, Mister Spock.
Spock, are you all right?
The creature within me is gone. I am free of it and the pain.
And I'm also quite blind. An equitable trade, Doctor. Thank you.
Doctor, the results of the first tests on the creature's remains.
What is it?
I threw the total spectrum of light at the creature. It wasn't necessary. I didn't stop to think that only one kind of light might've killed it.
Interesting. Just as dogs are sensitive to certain sounds which humans cannot hear, these creatures evidently are sensitive to light which we cannot see.
Are you telling me that Spock need not have been blinded?
I didn't need to throw the blinding white light at all, Jim. Spock, I
Doctor it was my selection as well. It is done.
Satellite control, this is the Captain. Energise all satellites.
The things are dying, sir. It's working.
Tell Spock it worked.
Yes, Captain. He'll be happy to hear that.
Bones, it wasn't your fault.
Yeoman, record this for Starfleet Command.
The alien creatures on Deneva have been destroyed
Spock. You can see.
The blindness was temporary, Jim. There's something about his optical nerves which aren't the same as a human's.
Mister Spock. Regaining eyesight would be an emotional experience for most. You, I presume, felt nothing?
Quite the contrary, Captain. I had a very strong reaction. My first sight was the face of Doctor McCoy bending over me.
'Tis a pity your brief blindness did not increase your appreciation for beauty, Mister Spock.
If you gentlemen are finished, would you mind laying in a course for Starbase Ten, Mister Spock?
Unusual eye arrangement. I might've known he'd turn up with something like that.
I said, please don't tell Spock I said he was the best first officer in the fleet.
You've been so concerned about his Vulcan eyes, Doctor, you forgot about his Vulcan ears. Ahead warp factor one, Mister Sulu.
Stay on top of it, Mister Sulu.
We're holding orbit, sir. The helm is sluggish.
Control circuits threatening to overload, Captain.
Understood, Engineer. Mister Spock? We can't avoid these areas of turbulence.
I believe we'll have them plotted in a few more orbits, Captain.
Switching to manual, Captain. Do we maintain this orbit?
This is of great scientific importance, Captain. We're actually passing through ripples in time.
Maintain orbit. Open the channel to Starfleet Command. Precautionary measure, Lieutenant. Broadcast to Starfleet Command my past week's log entries, starting with the unusual readings we had on the instruments and how they led us here. Inform Starfleet Command that apparently something or someone down on this planet
Some heart flutter. Better risk a few drops of cordrazine.
Tricky stuff. Are you sure you want to risk
You were about to make a medical comment, Jim?
All plotted but one, Captain. Coming up on it now. Seems to be fairly heavy displacement.
Bones! Get back to your positions.
It was set for cordrazine.
Continue alert, decks four through eleven. The medical department knows as little as we do. In dosages approaching this, there's some record of wild paranoia.
Confirmed by the library record tapes, Captain. Subjects failed to recognise acquaintances, became hysterically convinced that they were in mortal danger, and were seeking escape at any cost. Extremely dangerous to himself or to anyone else who might
And the transporter at that time, Captain, was focused on the centre of the time disturbance.
So whatever's down there, McCoy is in the heart of it. Set up a landing party. Let's go get him. Kirk out.
These ruins extend to the horizon. Begin recording.
And of considerable age. On the order of ten thousand centuries old.
Detail, fan out. What is this thing, Mister Spock? It seems to be pulsating with power of some kind. Analysis, please.
This single object is the source of all the time displacement.
I can't. For this to do what it does is impossible by any science I understand. It is operating even now. Putting out waves and waves of time displacement, which we picked up millions of miles away.
Landing party to Enterprise. No sign of Doctor McCoy. Search progressing.
Incredible power. It can't be a machine as we understand mechanics.
Then what is it?
What are you?
I am the Guardian of Forever.
Are you machine or being?
I am both and neither. I am my own beginning, my own ending.
I see no reason for answers to be couched in riddles.
I answer as simply as your level of understanding makes possible.
A time portal, Captain. A gateway to other times and dimensions, if I'm correct.
As correct as possible for you. Your science knowledge is obviously primitive.
Behold. A gateway to your own past, if you wish.
Killers! Killers! I won't let you get me! I'll kill you first! I won't let you get me! Assassins! Murderers! Killers!
Spock! If that is a doorway back through time, could we somehow take Bones back a day in time, then
Relive the accident. This time be certain that the hypo accident is avoided. Look at the speed with which the centuries are passing, Captain. To step through on precisely the day we wish
Guardian. Can you change the speed at which yesterday passes?
I was made to offer the past in this manner. I cannot change.
Strangely compelling, isn't it? To step through there and lose oneself in another world.
I am a fool. My tricorder is capable of recording even at this speed. I've missed taping centuries of living history which no man before has ever
Where is he?
He has passed into what was.
Captain, I've lost contact with the ship. I was talking to them. Suddenly, it went dead. No static, just nothing.
Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty.
Nothing wrong with the communicator, sir.
Your vessel, your beginning, all that you knew is gone.
McCoy has somehow changed history.
You mean we're stranded down here?
Captain, I'm frightened.
Earth's not there. At least, not the Earth we know. We're totally alone.
I was recording images at the time McCoy left. A rather barbaric period in your American history. I believe I can approximate just when to jump. Perhaps within a month of the correct time. A week, if we're fortunate.
Make sure we arrive before McCoy got there. It's vital we stop him before he does whatever it was that changed all history. Guardian, if we are successful
Then you will be returned. It will be as though none of you had gone.
Captain, it seems impossible. Even if you were able to find the right date
Then even finding McCoy would be a miracle.
There is no alternative.
Scotty, when you think you've waited long enough. Each of you will have to try it. Even if you fail, at least you'll be alive in some past world somewhere.
I've seen old photographs of this period. An economic upheaval had occurred.
We seem to be costumed a little out of step with the time.
I'm afraid I'm going to be difficult to explain in any case, Captain.
Well, Mister Spock, if we can't disguise you, we'll find some way of explaining you.
That should prove interesting.
Let's get out of here.
Look out, will you? Why don't you watch where you're going?
Well, we'll steal from the rich and give back to the poor later. I think I'm going to like this century. Simple, easier to manage. We're not going to have any difficulty explaining
You're a police officer. I recognise the traditional accoutrements.
You were saying you'll have no trouble explaining it.
My friend is obviously Chinese. I see you've noticed the ears. They're actually easy to explain.
Perhaps the unfortunate accident I had as a child.
The unfortunate accident he had as a child. He caught his head in a mechanical rice picker. But fortunately, there was an American missionary living close by who was actually a skilled plastic surgeon in civilian life.
All right, all right. Drop those bundles and put your hands on that wall there! Come on!
Oh, how careless of your wife to let you go out that way.
Oh, yes, it's quite untidy. Here, let me help you.
You were actually enjoying my predicament back there. At times, you seem quite human.
Captain, I hardly believe that insults are within your prerogative as my commanding officer.
First, I believe we have about a week before McCoy arrives, but we can't be certain.
Arrives where? Honolulu, Boise, San Diego? Why not Outer Mongolia, for that matter?
There is a theory. There could be some logic to the belief that time is fluid, like a river, with currents, eddies, backwash.
And the same currents that swept McCoy to a certain time and place might sweep us there, too.
Unless that is true, Captain, we have no hope. Frustrating. Locked in here is the place and moment of his arrival, even the images of what he did. If only I could tie this tricorder in with the ship's computers for just a few moments.
Couldn't you build some form of computer aid here?
Yes, well, it would pose an extremely complex problem in logic, Mister Spock. Excuse me. I sometimes expect too much of you.
Excuse us, miss. We didn't mean to trespass. It's cold outside.
A lie is a poor way to say hello. It isn't that cold.
No. We were being chased by a policeman.
These clothes. We stole them. We didn't have any money.
Well, I could do with some help around here. Doing dishes, sweeping, general cleaning.
At what rate of payment? I need radio tubes and so forth. My hobby.
Fifteen cents an hour for ten hours a day. What are your names?
Mine is Jim Kirk. His is Spock.
I'm Edith Keeler. You can start by cleaning up down here.
Excuse me, Miss. Where are we?
Do you run this place?
Radio tubes and so on. I approve of hobbies, Mister Spock.
You'll be sorry.
Now, as I'm sure somebody out there has said, it's time to pay for the soup.
Shut up. Shut up. I want to hear what she has to say.
Development of atomic power is years away, and space flight years after that.
I find her most uncommon, Mister Spock.
Prepare for tomorrow. Get ready. Don't give up.
Mister Kirk. You are uncommon workmen. That basement looks like it's been scrubbed and polished.
Then we can report back for other work?
Yes. Seven o'clock in the morning. Do you have a flop for the night?
You really are new at this, aren't you? A flop is a place to sleep.
There's a vacant room at the place where I live for two dollars a week. If you want to I'll take you there.
We have a flop.
We have a what, Captain?
A place to sleep.
One might have said so in the first place.
Captain, I must have some platinum. A small block would be sufficient, five or six pounds. By passing certain circuits through there to be used as a duodynetic field core...
Mister Spock, I've brought you some assorted vegetables, baloney in a hard roll for myself, and I've spent the other nine tenths of our combined salaries for the last three days on filling this order for you. Mister Spock, this bag does not contain platinum, silver or gold, nor is it likely to in the near future.
Captain, you're asking me to work with equipment which hardly very far ahead of stone knives and bearskins.
McCoy'll be along in a few days, perhaps sooner. There's no guarantee that these currents in time will bring us together. This has to work.
Captain. Captain, in three weeks at this rate, possibly a month, I might reach the first mnemonic memory circuits.
If you can leave immediately, I can get you five hours work at twenty two cents an hour. What? What on Earth is that?
I am endeavouring, ma'am, to construct a mnemonic memory circuit using stone knives and bearskins.
Captain. Tools for finely detailed work.
That toolbox was locked with a combination lock and you opened it like a real pro. Why did you do it?
I needed the fine tools for my radio work. They'd have been returned in the morning.
I'm sorry, I can't
If Mister Spock says that he needs the tools and that they'll be returned tomorrow morning, you can bet your reputation on that, Miss Keeler.
On one condition. Walk me home? I still have a few questions I'd like to ask about you two. Oh, and don't give me that questions about little old us? look. You know as well as I do how out of place you two are around here.
Interesting. Where would you estimate we belong, Miss Keeler?
You? At his side, as if you've always been there and always will. And you? You belong in another place. I don't know where or how. I'll figure it out eventually.
I'll finish with the furnace.
Captain. Even when he doesn't say it, he does.
Why does Spock call you Captain? Were you in the war together?
We served together.
And you don't want to talk about it? Why? Did you do something wrong? Are you afraid of something? Whatever it is, let me help.
Let me help. A hundred years or so from now, I believe, a famous novelist will write a classic using that theme. He'll recommend those three words even over I love you.
Centuries from now? Who is he? Where does he come from er, where will he come from?
Silly question. Want to hear a silly answer?
A planet circling that far left star in Orion's belt. See?
How are the stone knives and bearskins?
I may have found our focal point in time.
I think you may also find you have a connection burning someplace.
Yes. I'm overloading those lines. I believe we'll have our answer on this screen, Captain.
And, Captain, you may find this a bit distressing.
Let's see what you have.
I've slowed down the recording we made from the time vortex.
We know her future. Within six years from now, she'll become very important. Nationally famous.
Or Captain, Edith Keeler will die this year. I saw her obituary. Some sort of traffic accident.
You must be mistaken. They both can't be true.
Captain, Edith Keeler is the focal point in time we've been looking for, the point that both we and Doctor McCoy have been drawn to.
She has two possible futures then, and depending on whether she lives or dies, all of history will be changed. And McCoy
In his condition, what does he do? Does he kill her?
Or perhaps he prevents her from being killed. We don't know which.
Get this thing fixed. We must find out before McCoy arrives.
Captain, suppose we discover that in order to set things straight again, Edith Keeler must die?
Why? What is so funny about man reaching for the moon?
How do you know?
I just know, that's all. I feel it. And more, I think that one day they'll take all the money they spend now on war and death
And make them spend it on life?
I'm glad you got away, too. Why do you think they want to kill us?
Look, fella, you take a sip too much of that old wood alky, and, and almost anything seems like it
Where? Where are we? Earth? The constellations seem right, but. Explain! Explain this trick.
I'll need at least two more days before I dare make another attempt.
McCoy could have been in the city a week now for all we know, and whatever he does that affects her and changes history could happen tonight or tomorrow morning.
Captain, our last bit of information was obtained at the expense of thirty hours work in fused and burned circuits.
I must know whether she lives or dies, Spock. I must know what to do.
You look terrible! You'd better sit down. Come on.
I can't. I got to keep moving. I can't let them find me.
There's a cot in the back room. They won't find you there. Come on.
But she was right. Peace was the way.
And all this because McCoy came back and somehow kept her from dying in a street accident as she was meant to. We must stop him, Jim.
How did she die? What day?
We can estimate general happenings from these images, but I can't trace down precise actions at exact moments, Captain. I'm sorry.
Spock, I believe I'm in love with Edith Keeler.
Jim, Edith Keeler must die.
Hey, now, come on. You're not ready to take on any tigers just yet. Lie down.
The most common question to ask would be, where am I? I don't think I'll ask it.
I am unconscious, or demented.
I have a friend that talks about Earth the same way that you do. Would you like to meet him?
I'm a surgeon, not a psychiatrist. I am Leonard McCoy, Senior Medical Officer aboard the USS Enterprise.
I don't mean to disbelieve you, but that's hardly a Navy uniform.
It's quite all right. It's quite all right dear, because I don't believe in you, either.
Are you following me, sir?
Captain, I did not plan to eavesdrop.
No, of course you didn't.
I must point out that when she stumbled, she might have died right there, had you not caught her.
It's not yet time. McCoy isn't here.
We're not that sure of our facts. Who's to say when the exact time will come? Save her, do as your heart tells you to do, and millions will die who did not die before.
I thought you might like to see the evening paper.
No, not particularly. You know, I've convinced myself that this is all in a cordrazine hallucination, but I've decided you're not.
But if you're not, what are you?
A friend. When you showed up here, you looked like you could use one.
I don't doubt it. What about this place? Do you run it?
I try to.
Well, it was for me, at least. You may have saved my life.
Lots of people drink from the wrong bottle sometimes.
Not as wrong as the bottle I drank from. Allow me to show my gratitude. Perhaps there's something I can do around here to thank you.
We can talk about that later. I have to go. My young man is taking me to a Clark Gable movie.
A who movie?
A Clark Gable. Don't you know?
That's very strange. You get some rest. I'll see you later.
If we hurry, maybe we can catch the Clark Gable movie at the Orpheum.
Yes. He's in the Mission. He's
What is it?
McCoy! He's in
You deliberately stopped me, Jim. I could have saved her. Do you know what you just did?
We were successful.
Time has resumed its shape. All is as it was before. Many such journeys are possible. Let me be your gateway.
Captain, the Enterprise is up there. They're asking if we want to beam up.
Let's get the hell out of here.
What was that?
What my instruments read is totally unbelievable, Captain. Twice, for a split second each time, everything within range of our instruments seemed on the verge of winking out.
I want facts, not poetry.
I have given you the facts, Captain. The entire magnetic field in this solar system simply blinked. The planet below, the mass of which we're measuring, attained zero gravity.
That's impossible. What you're describing
All stations to immediate alert status. Stand by.
You just did a complete life survey five minutes ago. How are you just picking it up now?
Inexplicable, Captain. This reading began at approximately the moment that the pulsation phenomenon began to subside.
Well, what is it, this object? Its physical makeup?
Speculation. Could this being present any danger to the ship?
Lieutenant Uhura, notify Security to have an armed detachment of men ready to beam down with us. Let's go. Any word comes through from Starfleet Command, pipe it down immediately. Communications, priority one.
You came! Thank the heavens. There's still time. It's not too late. We can still stop him. But I, but I, need, need your help.
Whatever that phenomenon was, it drained almost all of our crystals completely. It could mean trouble.
Nothing. Illogical. An effect of such proportions, unexplainable by any established physical laws that I'm aware of. I have been able to ascertain one fact. Though the effect, whatever it was, was unquestioningly widespread, it was strongest here on the planet beneath us.
Invasion status. All hands, this is the Captain. Battle stations. I repeat, battle stations. This is no drill.
I'll talk to him later. Thank you. Kirk out.
Thank you, sir. I have considered all the alternatives. My best guess is it could be a prelude to invasion.
I see. You mean, we're the bait.
From the top, Mister Spock. First, the phenomenon came from the planet below. Secondly, the danger is apparently real and imminent.
Third, a closer examination of the planet's surface would be in order. My job, sir?
Yes. Meanwhile, I'll talk to our unexpected guest. Maybe he can provide some answers.
That's how I came to be down there, Captain, pursuing the devil's own spawn, a thing I've chased across the universe. He's humanoid outside, but inside, he's a hideous, murdering monster. I'll get him, Captain. I swear it.
You say this one man
Thing destroyed your entire civilisation.
How did you escape?
I was inspecting magnetic communications satellites. You believe me, don't you?
Before we picked you up, our ship sustained a number of incredible effects.
Is he the thing that attacked you?
Yes. I give you my word. I swear it.
We don't have any other facts, any information.
Then you'll join me in my holy cause? Help me in visiting justice and vengeance upon him.
My only cause is the safety of my ship and the mission we're on. You'll beam down with me and I'll check your story out.
Negative, Captain. Anything from our guest?
According to him, there's a creature of some sort down here, a humanoid.
Captain, you yourself said there were no other explanations. Why do you give credence to this man?
I fail to comprehend your indignation, sir. I've simply made the logical deduction that you are a liar.
Let's have it. The truth this time.
No! You've come back in, is it? Well, don't stop. Here I am. Come at me again. We'll finish it!
Can you identify that?
I'm trying, Captain.
Come! Come! It'll do you no good. I'll chase you to the very fires of hell!
I saw it again. The thing. It attacked me.
Let's get out of here.
Captain, readings of the effect indicate it centred here on this planet, almost on this very spot.
I told you it was a thing. All white, black and empty. A terrible emptiness.
Let's get back to the ship.
He'll kill us all if we don't kill him first! Kill! Kill! Kill! Kill! Kill!
Negative, Captain. I can no more explain the occurrence of the second phenomenon than I can the first.
If there's a shred of truth to what Lazarus said
That a single creature, a humanoid could be responsible for an effect of such magnitude?
Hard to believe.
But the rest of his story seems to fit. His wounds testify to an apparent confrontation with something.
Assuming there is a humanoid, a something, how does he do it? He has no weapons, no power.
Captain, I only know for certain that the occurrence of the phenomenon coincides exactly with the moments that Lazarus has his alleged confrontations.
Doctor McCoy asking to see you in sickbay, Captain.
I don't know, Jim. Maybe I'm imagining things, and maybe I'm not. You tell me.
You tell me. That's why you brought me down here, isn't it.
Well, as you know, we both brought Lazarus in here and I treated a deep abrasion on his forehead, right?
Then I bandaged it, I stepped into this room for just a moment
Bones, I've got a lot of things to do. Get to the point.
Well, say he's got the constitution of a dinosaur, recuperative powers ditto. As we both know, I'm a bright young medic with a miraculous touch. Why then, when I returned, there wasn't a trace of that wound on his forehead. Not even a bruise. It was like he had never been injured.
Where is he?
I don't know, Jim. This is a big ship. I'm just a country doctor.
Lazarus, are you all right?
Yes. But impatient. Have you decided to help me yet?
No. I have a ship's physician with a strange sense of humour.
This is no joke, Jim. I know what I saw.
On my way. Lazarus, you're with me. Bones, if I had time, I'd laugh.
Source of radiation, Captain.
How is it the scanners didn't pick it up before?
Because it is not there.
What I mean, Captain, is that according to our usual scanning procedures, there is nothing there that could be causing that effect.
But it is there.
Affirmative. I confess I am somewhat at a loss for words. It may be described, though loosely and inaccurately, as a rip in our universe.
A kind of physical warp, Captain, in which none of our established physical laws apply with any regularity. However, with the dilithium crystals, I was able to localise it.
Yes! That's it! The dilithium crystals. With their power we could do it.
You refer to the humanoid?
Yes. We've got him, Captain, we've got him.
What do the crystals have to do with it? All they show us the point of radiation.
That's just it, that's the key. That's the way to trap him. That's the solution. Captain, I beg of you. I plead, I demand. Give me the crystals.
Out of the question. Those crystals are the very heart of the power of my ship.
You fool! There won't be any ship if we don't kill him. He'll destroy all of you.
I warn you, Captain. You'll give me the crystals.
Don't threaten me, Lazarus.
No threat intended. Captain, I'll have my vengeance.
I'll check, sir.
Captain. The chamber will be ready in ten minutes, sir. My assistant and I will
Fact. You said you needed the crystals. Fact. An hour after you said you must have them, they were missing. Fact. Two of my crewmen were attacked.
And fact, Captain. I didn't take the crystals. I'm not the one. Find my enemy, find the beast, and you'll find the crystals.
How'd this beast get aboard my ship?
He did. Isn't that enough?
No. He didn't transport up. A report would've been made.
I tell you we're dealing with a creature capable of destroying worlds.
Why does he need the crystals? For what reason?
For the same reason that I do. Listen to me. He's humanoid. Why, he he can pilot a spaceship. He can compute formulas to destroy races. He can steal an energy source for his vehicle so he can escape from me. Are you deaf as well as blind?
Sit down. The crystals certainly aren't here. There's an unexplained radiation source on the planet. Obviously some connection. We'll check it out. Organise a search party immediately. Mister Lazarus will beam down with us.
You may not have reason to thank me, depending on what we find.
What do you believe now, Captain?
I believe the missing crystals aren't in your ship. Mister Spock?
Unable to locate the source of radiation.
Why not? You had it spotted on the Enterprise.
It has simply disappeared, Captain.
I want every inch of this terrain checked. Look for footprints, movement, anything. Call out if you spot anything. Don't be afraid to use your weapons.
He's coming out of it now.
It's all right. You're on board the Enterprise.
The rock, I
How's your head?
You saved my life down there. I want to thank you.
Why shouldn't I?
I have some questions I want to ask you.
Go ahead. It's all right.
This is a computer report of the evidence you gave at your first screening. It calls you a liar, Lazarus. For one thing, there's no planet at the location you said you came from. There never has been. If you want help from us, you'd better start telling the truth.
You wouldn't believe me if I told you.
I'll have the truth now.
My planet, my Earth, or what's left of it, is down there beneath us.
What are you saying?
And this thing you search for is a time traveler, too?
Oh, yes. He's fled me across all the years, all the empty years to a dead future on a murdered planet he destroyed. Help me! Give me the tools I need to kill him! The crystals! Don't let him get away! Don't let him get away.
Lazarus, you're hurt. I know. I sympathise, but I've got four hundred and thirty other men to worry about. Now where are those crystals?
I told you, he's got them. He took them. The thing! The thing!
He's in a lot of pain.
Sometimes pain can drive a man harder than pleasure. I'm sure you know that, Doctor.
Well, don't worry, he's not going anywhere. Not this time.
True, Captain, but more significant to me is the fact that our ship's instruments are specifically designed to locate and identify any object in our universe, be it energy or matter.
But by using those instruments you were unable to identify the source of the radiation on the planet.
Correct. Which would seem to be impossible.
Then what you say leads obviously to one alternative. The source of radiation is not from our universe.
You are concerned?
He is my friend.
You have a poor choice of friends. He will be examined. If he is lying, he will die. If he is telling the truth, he will find that business has taken a turn for the worse. Take him. You do not like to be pushed. Very good. You may be a man I can deal with, Baroner. Come with me.
From this day on, no public assemblages of more than three people. All publications to be cleared through this office. Neighbourhood controls will be established, hostages selected. A somewhat lengthy list of crimes against the state.
He is what he claims to be, Commander, a Vulcanian merchant named Spock. His main concern seems to be how he would carry out his business under our occupation.
The usual. A certain amount of apprehension regarding us. The mind is remarkably disciplined.
You are sure?
I used force four, which is sufficient to break down any pretence.
Very well, Lieutenant. Would you like to try our little truth finder?
I don't understand.
And you're proud of it.
It is a tool, a weapon. Somewhat drastic, but very efficient.
Are you sure you're all right?
Perfectly, Baroner. But it was an interesting experience.
All right, Vulcan, you may go. But you are an enemy alien. You will be under our scrutiny at all times. If I have to warn you
Not necessary, Commander. I understand you very well.
Return to your council, Baroner. You will receive our official notifications as soon as they are published. In the meantime keep the people in order. It is your responsibility.
Or I will be killed.
That is exactly right. You will be killed.
That mindsifter can't be all the terror they think it is.
I'll try and avoid it.
I'm sorry, sir. We did not notice you.
Captain, I strongly suggest we direct our energies toward the immediate problem. Accomplishing our mission here.
You didn't really think I was going to beat his head in, did you?
I thought you might.
You're right. But as you say, we still have a job to do.
We'll receive no help from the Organians.
Maybe, but sooner or later they'll start resenting how the Klingons run things. If we could prove to them they could do something to strike back, to keep the Klingons off balance.
Verbal persuasion seems to be ineffective. Perhaps a more direct approach?
That's exactly what I had in mind. Mister Spock Did I or did I not see something that looked like a munitions dump outside of Kor's headquarters?
I think it's time we did a little simple and plain communicating. Tonight.
A very meritorious idea, Captain.
We're short of tools.
I'm certain the Klingons will provide whatever is necessary. It's a pleasure doing business with you, Mister Spock.
With a delayed action fuse.
These crates contain chemical explosives. They should make a most satisfactory display.
You were right, Mister Spock. A most satisfactory display.
But that was violence.
We did it to show you that you can fight back. You don't have to be sheep, you can be wolves.
Terrible to destroy.
History is full of examples of civil populations fighting back successfully against a military dictatorship. We may not be able to destroy the Klingons, but we can tie them up. Blow up their installations, disrupt their communications, make Organia useless to them.
Our fleet will eventually arrive. In the meantime, the battle is ours. It can be a successful one.
Captain, I implore you never to do such a thing again.
Why? Are you afraid of retribution? Does your personal freedom mean so little to you?
How little you understand us, Captain.
All I understand is that you apparently don't have the backbone to fight and protect your loved ones.
You speak of courage. Obviously you do not know the difference between courage and foolhardiness. Always it is the brave ones who die. The soldiers. I hope you will continue to savour the sweetness of your life. You disgust me.
What are you going to do with him, Commander?
There's no need to use your machine on him, commander. I can tell you his name. It is Captain James T. Kirk.
For some reason, he feels that he must destroy you, Commander, just as you feel you must destroy him.
That's going to be rather difficult now. Isn't it, Captain? What an admirable people. Do you always betray your friends?
I didn't want you to harm him. I'm sorry, Captain. It was for the best. No harm would come of it.
I'm used to the idea of dying, but I have no desire to die for the likes of you.
I don't blame you, Captain. Lock up the Vulcan. Take the Captain to my office. We'll have a talk before I do what must be done.
You'll have a drink with me, Captain?
What do you want from me?
Oh, a very great deal, but first I want to talk. Just talk.
You think I'm going to sit here and just talk with the enemy?
Something was destroyed? Nothing inconsequential, I hope.
Hardly. They were quite important to us, but they can be replaced. You of the Federation, you are much like us.
We're nothing like you. We're a democratic body.
Come now. I'm not referring to minor ideological differences. I mean that we are similar as a species. Here we are on a planet of sheep. Two tigers, predators, hunters, killers, and it is precisely that which makes us great. And there is a universe to be taken.
It's a very large universe, Commander, full of people who don't like the Klingons.
Excellent. Then it shall be a matter of testing each other's wills. Of power. Survival must be earned, Captain. Tell me about the dispersal of your Starfleet.
It will take a lot longer than that, Commander.
Longer than that I will not wait. I respect you, Captain, but this is war, a game we Klingons play to win. Take him to the cell with his friend. And watch him closely.
It's no use, Jim. There's no way out.
How much of the twelve hours do we have left?
Six hours, forty three minutes, if the Klingons are punctual.
I think we can count on them being punctual. Blowing that munitions dump wasn't enough. If we get out of here, we've got to carry the attack directly to Kor. These Organians
They do not seem to understand. Most peculiar.
Nevertheless, our orders still stand. We've got to make some attempt to neutralise the Klingon occupation.
We may not get the chance, Captain. These walls are very thick.
And there are guards every few feet down the hall.
Oh, there you are, gentlemen. I trust you are in good health? Shall we go?
We'll receive no help from the Organians.
Maybe, but sooner or later they'll start resenting how the Klingons run things. If we could prove to them they could do something to strike back, to keep the Klingons off balance.
Verbal persuasion seems to be ineffective. Perhaps a more direct approach?
That's exactly what I had in mind. Mister Spock Did I or did I not see something that looked like a munitions dump outside of Kor's headquarters?
I think it's time we did a little simple and plain communicating. Tonight.
A very meritorious idea, Captain.
We're short of tools.
I'm certain the Klingons will provide whatever is necessary. It's a pleasure doing business with you, Mister Spock.
With a delayed action fuse.
These crates contain chemical explosives. They should make a most satisfactory display.
You were right, Mister Spock. A most satisfactory display.
But that was violence.
We did it to show you that you can fight back. You don't have to be sheep, you can be wolves.
Terrible to destroy.
History is full of examples of civil populations fighting back successfully against a military dictatorship. We may not be able to destroy the Klingons, but we can tie them up. Blow up their installations, disrupt their communications, make Organia useless to them.
Our fleet will eventually arrive. In the meantime, the battle is ours. It can be a successful one.
Captain, I implore you never to do such a thing again.
Why? Are you afraid of retribution? Does your personal freedom mean so little to you?
How little you understand us, Captain.
All I understand is that you apparently don't have the backbone to fight and protect your loved ones.
You speak of courage. Obviously you do not know the difference between courage and foolhardiness. Always it is the brave ones who die. The soldiers. I hope you will continue to savour the sweetness of your life. You disgust me.
What are you going to do with him, Commander?
There's no need to use your machine on him, commander. I can tell you his name. It is Captain James T. Kirk.
For some reason, he feels that he must destroy you, Commander, just as you feel you must destroy him.
That's going to be rather difficult now. Isn't it, Captain? What an admirable people. Do you always betray your friends?
I didn't want you to harm him. I'm sorry, Captain. It was for the best. No harm would come of it.
I'm used to the idea of dying, but I have no desire to die for the likes of you.
I don't blame you, Captain. Lock up the Vulcan. Take the Captain to my office. We'll have a talk before I do what must be done.
You'll have a drink with me, Captain?
What do you want from me?
Oh, a very great deal, but first I want to talk. Just talk.
You think I'm going to sit here and just talk with the enemy?
Something was destroyed? Nothing inconsequential, I hope.
Hardly. They were quite important to us, but they can be replaced. You of the Federation, you are much like us.
We're nothing like you. We're a democratic body.
Come now. I'm not referring to minor ideological differences. I mean that we are similar as a species. Here we are on a planet of sheep. Two tigers, predators, hunters, killers, and it is precisely that which makes us great. And there is a universe to be taken.
It's a very large universe, Commander, full of people who don't like the Klingons.
Excellent. Then it shall be a matter of testing each other's wills. Of power. Survival must be earned, Captain. Tell me about the dispersal of your Starfleet.
It will take a lot longer than that, Commander.
Longer than that I will not wait. I respect you, Captain, but this is war, a game we Klingons play to win. Take him to the cell with his friend. And watch him closely.
It's no use, Jim. There's no way out.
How much of the twelve hours do we have left?
Six hours, forty three minutes, if the Klingons are punctual.
I think we can count on them being punctual. Blowing that munitions dump wasn't enough. If we get out of here, we've got to carry the attack directly to Kor. These Organians
They do not seem to understand. Most peculiar.
Nevertheless, our orders still stand. We've got to make some attempt to neutralise the Klingon occupation.
We may not get the chance, Captain. These walls are very thick.
And there are guards every few feet down the hall.
Oh, there you are, gentlemen. I trust you are in good health? Shall we go?
Yes. Your captors plan to do violence to you. That we cannot permit. I came to take you away.
You turned us over to them. You expect us to trust you now?
Is there really a choice, Captain? I offer you safety.
We can't stay here. This is the first place they'll look.
They will not come here, Captain. You may believe me.
First you turn us in, then get us out. What are you doing now, waiting for the Klingons to post a reward so you can turn us in again and collect it?
How little you understand us, Captain.
Nor do we understand what happened to the guard at the citadel.
Please do not concern yourself about them.
What happened to them?
Why, nothing happened to them, Captain. Nothing at all.
Don't you see I'm busy?
The two Federation prisoners. They're gone.
You mean they've escaped?
I swear. No one was at fault. The guards, ten of them were constantly on duty watching the cell. Then when they opened it to give them food, they simply weren't there, and there was no way out.
If you're lying to me.
Is that's all you can do, smile?
You are free, Captain.
I want to know how I'm free, and why.
Indeed, there are several questions I would like to ask as well.
This idiotic placidity of yours, your refusal to do anything to protect yourselves
We have already answered that question. To us, violence is unthinkable.
They will be returned immediately. So that you will know we mean what we say, listen.
Those are Klingon phasers. Take the door. Get down, gentlemen.
In the courtyard of my headquarters,
Did you hear them?
Yes, of course, Captain. But nothing has changed.
Well, Mister Spock. It seems it's up to you and me.
It would appear so, Captain.
The Federation has invested a great deal of money in our training. They're about due for a small return. We have two hours with which to do it in.
But only two. More Organians will die.
No. No more will die on account of us, Mister Spock. Where are those phasers?
I cannot tell you.
You've told us a great deal about how you hate violence. Unless you tell me where those phasers are, you're going to have more violence than you know what to do with.
You mean you would actually use force?
It's entirely up to you.
Ayelborne, this is of no matter. Perhaps you'd better let him have what he wants. He
Very well, but it will do you no good. They're in that cabinet.
Gentlemen, I have no great love for you, your planet, your culture. Despite that, Mister Spock and I are going to go out there and quite probably die, in an attempt to show you that there are some things worth dying for.
There are only two of you against an army. Don't you realise that what you intend to do will be hopeless?
Come on, Mister Spock, let's get out of here.
Of course, we cannot allow it. To stop them is very bad.
It is necessary. They may harm one another.
They will wait until darkness.
We will wait.
Mister Spock, can we get those two guards? What would you say the odds on our getting out of here?
That's a pretty close approximation.
I endeavour to be accurate.
You do quite well. Set your phaser on stun. We're after the top dog, not the members of the pack.
But if the situation calls for it, we kill, is that clear?
I'll take the one on the left. Fire.
It has begun.
It will be hard.
I cannot understand these people.
They know what death is, don't they?
They do not seem to be worried about anything.
Bad enough to be a military governor, but to govern a population of sheep! Very well, Lieutenant, round up two hundred more.
If you don't tell me what I want to know, I'll kill you here and now. Is that clear?
I am to gather two hundred more.
Well, what are the odds now?
Less than seven thousand to one, Captain. It's remarkable we've got this far.
Less than seven thousand to one. Well, getting better. Getting better.
Just stay where you are, Commander.
You have done well to get this far through my guards.
So, you are here. You will be interested in knowing that a Federation fleet is on its way here at the moment. Our fleet is preparing to meet them.
Shall we wait and see the results before you kill me?
I don't intend to kill you unless I have to.
Sentimentality, mercy. The emotions of peace. Your weakness, Captain Kirk. The Klingon Empire shall win. Think of it, as we sit here, in space above us the destiny of the galaxy will be decided for the next ten thousand years. Can I offer you a drink? We can toast the victory of the Klingon fleet.
You may be premature. There are many possibilities.
Today we conquer. If some day we are defeated, well, war has its fortunes good and bad. Do you know why we are so strong? Because we are a unit. Each of us is part of the greater whole, always under surveillance. Even a commander like myself, always under surveillance, Captain. If you will note.
What is it, Spock?
Inexplicable, Captain. Extreme heat. Not only the weapons but the bodies as well.
We are terribly sorry to be forced to interfere, gentlemen, but we cannot permit you to harm yourselves.
What are you talking about?
We have put a stop to your violence.
You are stopping this? You?
All instruments of violence on this planet now radiate a temperature of three hundred and fifty degrees. They are inoperative.
I suggest you contact them. You too, Captain. Your ship is now within range of your communications device.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
I can't explain it. We were just closing in on the Klingon fleet when
My fleet, it's helpless.
What have you done?
As I stand here, I also stand upon the home planet of the Klingon Empire, and the home planet of your Federation, Captain. I'm putting a stop to this insane war.
You're talking nonsense.
It is being done.
You can't just stop the fleet. What gives you the right?
You can't interfere. What happens in space is not your business.
Unless both sides agree to an immediate cessation of hostilities, all your armed forces, wherever they may be, will be immediately immobilised.
We have legitimate grievances against the Klingons. They've invaded our territory, killed our citizens. They're openly aggressive. They've boasted that they'll take over half the galaxy.
Why not? We're the stronger! You've tried to hem us in, cut off vital supplies, strangle our trade! You've been asking for war!
You're the ones who issued the ultimatum to withdraw from the disputed areas!
They are not disputed! They're clearly ours. And now you step in with some kind of trick.
It is no trick, Commander. We have simply put an end to your war. All your military forces, wherever they are, are now completely paralysed.
We find interference in other people's affairs most disgusting, but you gentlemen have given us no choice.
You should be the first to be on our side. Two hundred hostages killed.
No one has been killed, Captain.
No one has died here in uncounted thousands of years.
You are liars. You are meddling in things that are none of your business.
Even if you have some power that we don't understand, you have no right to dictate to our Federation
How to handle their interstellar relations! We have the right
To wage war, Captain? To kill millions of innocent people? To destroy life on a planetary scale? Is that what you're defending?
Well, no one wants war. But there are proper channels. People have a right to handle their own affairs. Eventually, we would have
Oh, eventually you will have peace, but only after millions of people have died. It is true that in the future, you and the Klingons will become fast friends. You will work together.
Your emotions are most discordant. We do not wish to seem inhospitable, but gentlemen, you must leave.
Yes, please leave us. The mere presence of beings like yourselves is intensely painful to us.
What do you mean, beings like yourselves?
Millions of years ago, Captain, we were humanoid like yourselves, but we have developed beyond the need of physical bodies. That of us which you see is mere appearance for your sake.
Captain, it's a trick. We can handle them. I have an army.
I've been transmitting a contact signal every five minutes. All I get is dead air. Shall I continue?
Maintain transmission pattern until we've established orbit.
Mister Spock, there were one hundred and fifty men, women, and children in that colony. What are the chances of survivors?
Absolutely none, Captain. Berthold rays are such a recent discovery. We do not yet have full knowledge of their nature. It is known, however, that living animal tissue disintegrates under exposure. Sandoval's group could not have survived after three years.
Are you saying that those people built a future in a place knowing they might not survive?
I am saying they knew there was a risk.
And what about us? Can we afford to send people to the planet's surface?
The breakdown of tissue does not develop immediately. We can risk a limited exposure.
We've established orbit, sir, and I've pinpointed a settlement.
Thank you, Mister Painter. Mister Spock, equip a landing party of five to accompany me to the planet's surface. Include Doctor McCoy and a biologist. I'll want them in ten minutes.
Another dream that failed. There's nothing sadder. It took these people a year to make the trip from Earth. They came all that way and died.
Hardly that, sir. Welcome to Omicron Ceti Three. I'm Elias Sandoval.
We haven't seen anyone outside our group for four years since we left Earth. We've been expecting someone for some time. Our subspace radio didn't work properly, and I'm afraid we didn't have anyone who could master its intricacies.
Actually, Mister Sandoval, we didn't come here because of your silent radio.
It makes little difference, Captain. You're here. We're happy to see you. Come, let me show you our settlement.
On pure speculation, just an educated guess, I'd say that man is alive.
Captain, this planet is being bombarded by Berthold rays, as our reports indicated. At this intensity, we'll be safe for a week if necessary. But
But these people shouldn't be alive.
Is it possible that they're not?
You shook hands with him, Jim. His flesh was warm. He's alive. There's no doubt about that.
There's also no question of the fact that Berthold rays are incontrovertibly deadly. There's no miracle connected with it, Doctor, you know that. No cures, no serums, no antidotes. If a man is exposed long enough, he dies.
Gentlemen, we're debating in a vacuum. Let's go get some answers.
There are two other settlements, but we have forty five colonists here.
What was the reason for the dispersal?
We felt three groups would have better potential. If disease were to strike one group, the others would be less likely to be affected. You see, Omicron is an ideal agricultural planet. We determined not to suffer the fate of expeditions that went before us.
Leila, come meet our guests. This is Leila Kalomi, our botanist. This is Captain Kirk, Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock.
Mister Spock and I have met before. It's been a long time.
Mister Sandoval, we do have a mission here. Examinations, tests.
By all means, make them. I think you'll find our settlement an interesting one. Our philosophy is a simple one, that men should return to a less complicated life. We have few mechanical things here. No vehicles, no weapons. We have harmony here. Complete peace.
We'll try not to interfere with your work.
What exactly are we looking for anyway, sir?
Whatever doesn't look right, whatever that is. When it comes to farms, I wouldn't know what looked right or wrong if it were two feet from me.
What is it?
No cows. This barn isn't even built for them, Just for storage.
Come to think of it, we haven't seen any animals. No horses, no pigs, not even a dog. Nothing.
You've known the Vulcanian?
Did you love him?
If I did, it was important only to myself.
How did he feel?
Mister Spock's feelings were never expressed to me. It is said he has none to give.
Would you like him to stay with us now, to be as one of us?
There is no choice, Elias. He will stay.
That'll be all. Thank you very much.
Spock here, Captain. There seems to be a total absence of life on the planet, with the exception of the colonists and various types of flora.
Not at the moment, sir. I am conducting various tests with the tricorder, but results are inconclusive.
No animals. That's peculiar.
Yes, especially in view of the fact that the records for this expedition indicate that they did have some for breeding and food purposes. Apparently, none of them survived.
I'd like to see the medical records on the expedition.
Yes, I thought you might.
Captain, I've been looking for you. You haven't seen our fields and crops. I'd like to show you and the Doctor what we've accomplished here.
I'm afraid I'll have to bow out. I have to continue with these medical examinations. However, if I find everyone else's health to be as perfect as yours, I
He promised to throw away his shingle.
You'll find no weaklings here. Captain.
This is the reason, Captain. This soil will grow anything we plant in it. It's a perfect world. We have a moderate climate, moderate rains all year round. It gives us all we need. It is perfect.
I have work to attend to myself, Captain.
I heard Sandoval saying they could grow anything here. That's true, sir. They've got a variety of crops in. Grains, potatoes, beans.
Make your point.
Well, sir, for an agricultural colony, they have actually very little acreage planted. There's enough to sustain the colony, but very little more.
It's like a jigsaw puzzle all one colour. No key to where the pieces fit in. Why?
This is McCoy, Jim. I think you'd better get back here.
No, but I'd like you to see this for yourself.
On my way.
Sandoval's medical record, four years ago when the expedition left Earth. He registered scar tissue on his lungs from lobar pneumonia suffered when he was a child. No major operations, but there was an appendectomy. Received all required inoculations, et cetera.
Nothing, but I examined that man no more than two hours ago. You know what his readings were? Perfect, perfect, and perfect. Just like everyone else I've examined here.
No. I thought of that and tested it on myself. It accurately recorded my lack of tonsils and those two broken ribs I had once. It did not record the scar tissue on Sandoval's lungs, but it did record a healthy appendix where one was supposedly removed.
Nothing. Not even insects. Yet your plants grow, and you've survived exposure to Berthold rays.
That can be explained.
I have never understood the female capacity to avoid a direct answer to any question.
And I never understood you. Until now. There was always a place in here where no one could come. There was only the face you allow people to see. Only one side you'd allow them to know.
I would like to know how your people have managed to survive here.
I missed you.
Logically, you should all be dead.
If I tell you how we survived, will you try to understand how we feel about our life here? About each other?
Emotions are alien to me. I'm a scientist.
Mister Sandoval, within the hour I've received orders from Starfleet Command to evacuate all personnel from this colony. Naturally, you'll inform your people to begin preparations. We will have accommodations for you aboard the Enterprise.
It's not an arbitrary decision on my part. I have my orders.
Captain, it's entirely unnecessary. We're in no danger here.
We've explained the Berthold rays to you and their effect. Can't you understand?
Doctor, how can I make you understand? Your own instruments have shown that we're all in perfect health. We've had no deaths here.
What about your animals?
That doesn't answer my question, sir. Why did all your animals die?
Captain, you stress very unimportant matters. We will not leave.
It's not much further.
You've not yet explained the nature of this thing.
Its basic properties and elements are not important. What is important is it gives life, peace, love.
What you're describing was once known in the vernacular as a happiness pill. And you, as a scientist, should know that that's not possible.
Come. I was one of the first to find them. The spores.
It shouldn't hurt.
No, I can't. Please, don't!
Not like this. It didn't hurt us.
I am not like you.
Now. Now, you belong to all of us and we to you. There's no need to hide your inner face any longer. We understand.
I love you. I can love you.
Captain, your arguments are very valid, but they do not apply to us.
You're being unreasonable.
Excuse me. My orders are to remove all the colonists. That's exactly what I intend to do, with or without your help.
Would you like to use a butterfly net on him, Captain?
No, I think we'll use a
Captain, we've checked out everything. It all seems normal, except for the absence of any animals.
We have orders to evacuate all colonists to Starbase Twenty Seven.
We haven't seen them since we began our check.
DeSalle said he was going to examine some native plants he found. Did Spock call in at all?
That one looks like a dragon. You see the tail and the dorsal spines?
I've never seen a dragon.
I have. On Berengaria Seven. But I've never stopped to look at clouds before. Or rainbows. You know, I can tell you exactly why one appears in the sky, but considering its beauty has always been out of the question.
Yes, what did you want?
Yes, Captain. What did you want?
I don't believe I want to tell you.
Spock, I don't know what you think you're doing, but this is an order. Report back to me at the settlement in ten minutes. We're evacuating all colonists to Starbase Twenty Seven.
No, I don't think so.
You don't think so, what?
I don't think so, sir.
Spock, report to me immediately.
Spock. The frequency is open, but he doesn't answer.
That didn't sound at all like Spock, Jim.
No. I thought you said you might like him if he mellowed a little.
I didn't say that.
How will you find Spock?
The frequency is open. It'll act as a homing device. Contact DeSalle. Have him meet you here. Make sure the landing party work in teams of two. I don't want anybody left alone down here.
What are you doing with those things, DeSalle?
I want you to take a close look at these, Doc. They're very interesting.
Mister Spock. Are you out of your mind? You were told to report to me at once.
I didn't want to, Jim.
You? Yes, I can see that. Miss Kalomi, you'll have to come back to the settlement and prepare to transport up to the ship.
There'll be no evacuation, Jim, but perhaps we should go back and get you straightened out.
Mister Sulu, Mister Spock is under arrest, and he's in your custody until we get back to the Enterprise.
Very well. Come with me.
Mister Sulu understands, don't you, Mister Sulu?
Yes, I see now. Of course we can't remove the colony. It'd be wrong.
I don't know what these plants are or how they work, but you're all going back to the settlement with me, and those colonists are going aboard the ship.
I can see the Captain is going to be difficult.
How many of those did you beam up?
Oh, must be nigh onto a hundred by now.
This is the Captain. Beam me up.
Lieutenant, put me through to Admiral Komack at Starfleet.
Oh, I'm sorry, Captain. I can't do that.
What do you mean, you can't do that. Follow standard procedure. That's an order.
Oh, I know it is, Captain, but you see, all communications are out.
Get back to your stations. Get back to your stations.
I'm sorry, sir. We're all transporting down to join the colony.
I said get back to your station.
This is mutiny, mister.
I've heard that word a lot lately. Perfect. Everything's perfect.
I'll bet you've even grown your tonsils back.
Look, Bones, I need your help. Can you run tests, blood samples, anything at all to give us a lead on what these things are, how to counteract them?
Who wants to counteract paradise, Jim boy?
Almost the entire ship's complement has beamed down.
I'm very pleased. The entire landing operation is proceeding quite well.
He went off to create something called a mint julep. That's a drink, Jim.
Captain, why don't you join us?
In your own private paradise.
The spores have made it that.
Where did they originate?
It's impossible to say. They drifted through space until they finally landed here. You see, they actually thrive on Berthold rays. The plants act as a repository for thousands of microscopic spores until they find a human body to inhabit.
In return, they give you complete health and peace of mind.
We have no need or want, Captain.
It's a true Eden, Jim. There's belonging and love.
No wants. No needs. We weren't meant for that. None of us. Man stagnates if he has no ambition, no desire to be more than he is.
We have what we need.
You don't understand, Jim, but you'll come around sooner or later. Join us. Please.
I'm going back to the ship.
Engineering? Scotty? Biochemistry lab? Security? Is there anyone on board? This is the Captain.
Enterprise to Mister Spock.
Yes, Jim. What is it now?
I've joined you. I understand now.
Wonderful, Jim. When will you beam down?
There are some things in my quarters I want to pack.
Good. Leila and I will meet you at the beam down point.
What's keeping you, Jim? We've been waiting.
I've been packing some things, and I realise there's some equipment here that we should have down at the settlement.
Do you want me to beam up a party?
No, I think you and I can handle it. Why don't you beam up now?
Just a moment. It won't take long. Do you mind?
Ready to beam up, Jim.
Oh, must be nigh onto a hundred by now.
This is the Captain. Beam me up.
Lieutenant, put me through to Admiral Komack at Starfleet.
Oh, I'm sorry, Captain. I can't do that.
What do you mean, you can't do that. Follow standard procedure. That's an order.
Oh, I know it is, Captain, but you see, all communications are out.
Get back to your stations. Get back to your stations.
I'm sorry, sir. We're all transporting down to join the colony.
I said get back to your station.
This is mutiny, mister.
I've heard that word a lot lately. Perfect. Everything's perfect.
I'll bet you've even grown your tonsils back.
Look, Bones, I need your help. Can you run tests, blood samples, anything at all to give us a lead on what these things are, how to counteract them?
Who wants to counteract paradise, Jim boy?
Almost the entire ship's complement has beamed down.
I'm very pleased. The entire landing operation is proceeding quite well.
He went off to create something called a mint julep. That's a drink, Jim.
Captain, why don't you join us?
In your own private paradise.
The spores have made it that.
Where did they originate?
It's impossible to say. They drifted through space until they finally landed here. You see, they actually thrive on Berthold rays. The plants act as a repository for thousands of microscopic spores until they find a human body to inhabit.
In return, they give you complete health and peace of mind.
We have no need or want, Captain.
It's a true Eden, Jim. There's belonging and love.
No wants. No needs. We weren't meant for that. None of us. Man stagnates if he has no ambition, no desire to be more than he is.
We have what we need.
You don't understand, Jim, but you'll come around sooner or later. Join us. Please.
I'm going back to the ship.
Engineering? Scotty? Biochemistry lab? Security? Is there anyone on board? This is the Captain.
Enterprise to Mister Spock.
Yes, Jim. What is it now?
I've joined you. I understand now.
Wonderful, Jim. When will you beam down?
There are some things in my quarters I want to pack.
Good. Leila and I will meet you at the beam down point.
What's keeping you, Jim? We've been waiting.
I've been packing some things, and I realise there's some equipment here that we should have down at the settlement.
Do you want me to beam up a party?
No, I think you and I can handle it. Why don't you beam up now?
Just a moment. It won't take long. Do you mind?
Ready to beam up, Jim.
What makes you think you're a man? You're an overgrown jackrabbit, an elf with a hyperactive thyroid.
Jim, I don't understand.
Of course you don't understand. You don't have the brains to understand. All you have is printed circuits.
Captain, if you'll excuse me.
My mother was a teacher. My father an ambassador.
Your father was a computer, like his son. An ambassador from a planet of traitors. A Vulcan never lived who had an ounce of integrity.
Captain, please don't
You're a traitor from a race of traitors. Disloyal to the core, rotten like the rest of your subhuman race, and you've got the gall to make love to that girl.
Had enough? I didn't realise what it took to get under that thick hide of yours. Anyhow, I don't know what you're so mad about. It isn't every first officer who gets to belt his Captain several times.
You did that to me deliberately.
Believe me, Mister Spock, it was painful in more ways than one.
The spores. They're gone. I don't belong anymore.
You said they were benevolent and peaceful. Violent emotions overwhelm them, destroy them. I had to make you angry enough to shake off their influence. That's the answer, Mister Spock.
That may be correct, Captain, but trying to initiate a brawl with over five hundred crewmen and colonists is hardly logical.
I had something else in mind. Can you put together a subsonic transmitter. Something we can hook into the communications station and broadcast over the communicator?
It can be done.
Good. Let's get to work.
Captain. Striking a fellow officer is a court martial offence.
Well, if we're both in the Brig, who's going to build the subsonic transmitter?
That is quite logical, Captain.
Well now, it's a little early to be counting stars, Miss Leila.
I'm waiting for Mister Spock and the Captain to transport down. They had some equipment to be moved. But it's been so long. I wish he'd come back.
Well, now, I think I can fix that for you. Enterprise?
This is Leila. I borrowed the doctor's communicator. I was worried something might have happened to you.
Yes. Yes. I'm quite well.
Can I come aboard? I've never seen a starship before
Are you still at the beam down point, and is the doctor there?
Yes to both questions.
Give your communicator back to Doctor McCoy. You won't need it to beam up. It'll take a few moments. Just wait there. Out.
Mister Spock, Miss Kalomi is strictly your concern, but should you talk to her while she's still under the influence of the spores?
I'll be back shortly, Captain.
You're no longer with us, are you? I felt something was wrong.
It was necessary.
Come back to the planet with me. You can belong again. Come back with me, please.
I have lost you, haven't I? And not only you, I've lost all of it. The spores. I've lost them, too.
And this is for my good? Do you mind if I say I still love you? You never told me if you had another name, Mister Spock.
They'll not hear this, of course. It'll be more a sensation of feeling it.
As though somebody had put itching powder on their skin.
Precisely. It should begin to work on their nerves in a few minutes.
What do you think you're doing?
I said I was sorry.
More like you're clumsy.
If you hadn't gotten in my way
Come on. Break it up. Break it up.
Well, Doctor, I've been thinking about what sort of work I could assign you to.
What do you mean, what sort of work? I'm a doctor.
Not any more, of course. We don't need you. Not as a doctor.
Oh, no? Would you like to see how fast I can put you in a hospital?
I am the leader of this colony. I'll assign you whatever work I think suitable.
We've done nothing here. No accomplishments, no progress. Three years wasted. We wanted to make this planet a garden.
You can't stay here. You can't survive without the spores. After you've cleared at the Starbase, you could be relocated. It depends upon what you want.
I think I'd, I think we'd like to get some work done. The work we started out to do.
This is McCoy. Sandoval would like to talk to the Captain.
Just a moment. They're all beginning to call in, Captain. Rather contritely, I should say. Sandoval wishes to speak to you.
Start making preparations, Mister Sandoval. We'll begin transporting your people aboard as soon as more of our crew checks in.
Well, Jim, I've just examined the last of the colonists, and they're all in absolutely perfect, perfect health. A fringe benefit left over by the spores.
Well, that's the second time man's been thrown out of paradise.
No, no, Bones. This time we walked out on our own. Maybe we weren't meant for paradise. Maybe we were meant to fight our way through. Struggle, claw our way up, scratch for every inch of the way. Maybe we can't stroll to the music of the lute. We must march to the sound of drums.
We haven't heard much from you about Omicron Ceti Three, Mister Spock.
I have little to say about it, Captain, except that for the first time in my life I was happy.
Nothing, Captain. Hailing frequencies are open.
Have you received an answer to your message yet, Captain?
Nothing yet, Ambassador. We're awaiting a reply. Today's the first time we've had any evidence they've picked up our signal.
Are you sure?
Positive. It repeats over and over.
Is that supposed to mean something?
You will disregard that signal, Captain.
Mister Fox, it is their planet.
Captain, in the past twenty years, thousands of lives have been lost in this quadrant. Lives that could have been saved if the Federation had a treaty port here. We mean to have that port and I'm here to get it.
I'm quite prepared to take that risk.
You are. I'm thinking about this ship, my crew.
I have my orders, Captain, and now you have yours. You will proceed on course. Achieve orbit status and just leave the rest to me. You're well aware that my mission gives me the power of command. I now exercise it. You will proceed on course. That's a direct order.
That you can, sir, but I won't lower the screens.
Your name will figure prominently in my report to the Federation Central.
Well, Scotty, now you've done it.
Won't you join me in a drink, Captain? You'll find our trova most interesting.
I didn't come to drink.
I assume that is what you used to destroy disintegration chamber number twelve.
A very efficient weapon. I'm not afraid of using it.
My first impression was correct. You are a barbarian.
Don't sound so incredulous, Captain. Of course you are. We all are. A killer first, a builder second. A hunter, a warrior, and let's be honest, a murderer. That is our joint heritage, is it not?
What do you want, Captain?
I want to contact my ship. Where are my communicators?
You take a lot of chances, Councilman.
You're worried about your ship, Captain. I'm trying to save a world.
If I were you, I'd think about saving my life.
Won't you have a drink, Captain?
And then we can discuss our differences.
I'm not interested in discussing our differences. You don't seem to realise the risk you're taking. We don't make war with computers and herd the casualties into suicide stations. We make the real thing, Councilman. I could destroy this planet.
Why do you think I don't let you talk to your ship ?
I don't need the ship for that.
You mean, all by yourself with a disruptor, you can destroy this planet?
That's exactly what I mean.
I had no idea you were so formidable.
You seem to think I'm joking. Where are the communicators?
If I told you, Captain, would you walk right out and get them?
Something like that.
Very well, Captain. They're in the War Room. Go left down the corridor, left again. They are unguarded.
Is he alive? Pity. Man like that would have preferred to die fighting. Take him to the Council Room.
I am Robert Fox. Have I the honour of addressing Anan Seven?
Welcome to Eminiar, Mister Ambassador.
Mister Ambassador, I am truly sorry for what must happen.
I beg your pardon?
You and your party have been declared war casualties. You will be taken immediately to one of our casualty stations so that your deaths may be recorded.
You mean we are to be killed?
That is correct, Mister Ambassador. I regret it very much, but there is nothing I can do about it.
Spock to Enterprise, come in.
Mister Scott, it's Mister Spock.
The Captain is overdue. We've suffered no casualties among us. This is important. Under no circumstances shall any one beam down from the Enterprise. They'd be killed the moment they arrived.
I knew it had a rotten ring to it.
Orbit out to maximum phaser range and stand by for further orders. Spock out.
What are you going to do, Mister Spock?
Find the Ambassador and the Captain. Yeoman Tamula, you stay here and prevent this young lady from immolating herself. Knock her down if necessary. This is a killing situation. Do what you must to protect yourself. Clear?
What are you doing? I'm a representative of the United Federation of Planets! A special representative!
Please, Mister Fox. Ladies and gentlemen, please move quickly away from the chamber or you may be injured.
What are you doing, Mister Spock?
Practicing a peculiar variety of diplomacy, sir.
I'll take you to a place of comparative safety, then I must find the Captain.
They have him. The guards told us. They took him to the Council Room under heavy guard.
By now, Mister Ambassador, I'm sure you realise that normal diplomatic procedures are ineffective here.
I've never been a soldier, Mister Spock, but I learn very quickly.
Very well, sir. We need all the help we can get.
Captain, surely you can see the position we are in. If your people do not report to our disintegration chambers, it is a violation of an agreement that dates back five hundred years.
My people are not responsible for your agreements.
You will be responsible for an escalation that will destroy everything. Millions of people horribly killed. Complete destruction of our culture here and yes, the culture on Vendikar. Disaster, disease, starvation, horrible, lingering death, pain and anguish!
That seems to frighten you.
It would frighten any sane man.
Yes. You're quite right.
Don't you understand, Captain? We have done away with all that. Now you are threatening to bring it down on us again. Are those five hundred people of yours more important than the hundreds of millions of innocent people on Eminiar and Vendikar? What kind of monster are you?
I'm a barbarian. You said it yourself.
I had hoped I'd spoken only figuratively.
Oh, no. You were quite accurate. I plan to prove it to you.
Open a channel to the Enterprise. You give me no choice, Captain. We are not bandits, but you force us to act as bandits.
Enterprise, this is Anan Seven, First Councilman of the High Council of Eminiar.
Unless you immediately start transportation of all personnel aboard your ship to the surface, the hostages will be killed. You have thirty minutes. I mean it, Captain.
All that it means is that I won't be around for the destruction. You heard me give General Order Twenty Four. That means in two hours the Enterprise will destroy Eminiar Seven.
You wouldn't do this. Hundreds of millions of people.
I didn't start it, Councilman, but I'm liable to finish it.
Councilman, I received a message from Vendikar. Our time is nearly up. Our quota is short by several thousand. They accuse us of reneging on the treaty.
You see? It's started.
You're wrong. It hasn't begun.
You have less than two hours, Councilman.
What I want or don't want has nothing to do with it. Escalation is automatic. You can stop it!
Stop it? I'm counting on it.
Open a channel, Lieutenant. This is the commander of the USS Enterprise.
The entire inhabited surface of your planet will be destroyed.
You have that long to surrender your hostages.
What can I do? Somebody, please tell me.
Now we'll talk.
I had assumed you needed help. I see I'm in error.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in, Scotty.
Everything's secure here. Maintain position. If everything goes according to plan, you can beam us up in ten minutes. If you don't hear from us, carry out General Order Twenty Four on schedule.
Behave as you saw your Captain behave. It is done.
Joy be with you. Peace and contentment.
Quite all right. Be careful of Doctor McCoy.
I am formulating a theory, Captain.
You speak in strange whispers. This is not the way of Landru.
And peace and harmony. Are you of the Body?
The Body is one.
Blessed be the Body, and health to all of its parts.
This is a soulless society, Captain. It has no spirit, no spark. All is indeed peace and tranquillity. The peace of the factory, the tranquillity of the machine. All parts working in unison.
And when something unexplained happens, their routine is disrupted.
Until new orders are received. The question is, who gives those orders?
There is no Landru, Captain, not in the human sense.
You're thinking the same thing I am. Mister Spock, the plug must be pulled.
Landru must die.
That refers to a living, growing culture. Do you think this one is?
Joy to you all, friends.
The prophecy says
Never mind what the prophecy says. If you want to be liberated from Landru, we'll need your help.
You're not of the Body!
Doc, I don't want to hurt you.
Where is Landru?
Where do we find him?
We do not see him. We hear him, in the Hall of Audiences.
In this building?
Snap out of it! Start acting like men.
Spock to Enterprise. status report.
Mister Spock, I've been trying to reach you.
The orbit's still decaying. I give it six hours, more or less.
Scotty, stand by. We're doing the best we can. How's Mister Sulu?
That's an order. Watch him. Captain out.
There was war. Convulsions. The world was destroying itself. Landru was our leader. He saw the truth. He changed the world. He took us back, back to a simple time. A time of peace and tranquillity.
What happened to him?
He's still alive. He is here now. He sees. He hears. We have destroyed ourselves. Please, no more.
You said you wanted freedom. It's time you learned that freedom is never a gift. It has to be earned. Come on. We're going to find Landru.
No, no, I was wrong! I submit, I bear myself to the will of Landru!
It's too late for that.
All right, it's up to you. Take us to Landru.
This is the Hall of Audiences.
But this is Landru.
Landru! Landru. We are the Archons. We are the Archons. We've come to speak. We are the Archons. We want to talk to you.
Despite my efforts to save you, you have invaded the Body and you are causing great harm.
We have no intention of causing harm.
Obliteration is necessary. The infection is strong. For the good of the Body, you must die. It is a great sorrow.
We do not intend to die.
All who saw you, all who know of your presence here must be excised. The memory of the Body will be cleansed.
Listen to me.
Useless, Captain. A projection.
Yes, Mister Spock. Let's have a look at the projector.
Of course. It had to be. Landru.
A machine. This whole society is a machine's concept of perfection. Peace, harmony.
I am Landru. You have intruded.
Your devices have been neutralised. So it shall be with you. I am Landru.
I am Landru. I am he. All that he was, I am. His experience, his knowledge.
But not his wisdom. He may have programmed you, but he could not have given you a soul. You are a machine.
Your statement is irrelevant. You will be obliterated. The good of the Body is the Prime Directive.
The good of the Body, Captain. That's the key.
Yes. What is the good?
I am Landru.
Landru is dead. You are a machine. A question has been put to you. Answer it.
The good is the harmonious continuation of the Body. The good is peace, tranquillity. The good of the Body is the directive.
Then I put it to you that you have disobeyed the Prime Directive. You are harmful to the Body.
The body is. It exists. It is healthy.
The body is dying. You are destroying it.
Do you ask a question?
What have you done to do justice to the full potential of every individual of the Body?
Without freedom of choice, there is no creativity. Without creativity, there is no life. The body dies. The fault is yours.
Are you aiding the body, or are you destroying it?
Not necessary, Captain. They have no guidance. Possibly for the first time in their lives.
Peace, order, and tranquillity are maintained. The body lives, but I reserve creativity to me.
Then the body dies. Creativity is necessary for the health of the Body.
This is impossible.
Is this truly Landru?
What's left of him, after he built and programmed this machine six thousand years ago.
You must create the good. That is the will of Landru, nothing else.
But there is evil.
Then the evil must be destroyed. That is the Prime Directive. And you are the evil.
You are the evil. The evil must be destroyed. Fulfill the Prime Directive.
Captain, are you all right?
The heat rays are gone, Captain, and Mister Sulu's back to normal.
Excellent, Scotty. Stand by to beam up landing party. Let's go and see how the others are doing. Marplon can finish up here.
The late Landru, Captain. A marvellous feat of engineering. A computer capable of directing the lives of millions of human beings.
But only a machine, Mister Spock. The original Landru programmed it with all his knowledge but he couldn't give it his wisdom, his compassion, his understanding, his soul, Mister Spock.
You'd make a splendid computer, Mister Spock.
That is very kind of you, Captain.
How's it going?
How often mankind has wished for a world as peaceful and secure as the one Landru provided.
Maintenance Section Eighteen. The section is working on the Intrepid. Reschedule. The Enterprise is on priority one. That makes three times you've read it, Jim. Is there an error?
No. But the death of the crewman.
Regulations, Captain. And the extract from your ship's computer log confirming this sworn deposition?
Kirk to Enterprise.
Where's Mister Spock with that computer log extract?
He should have been there ten minutes ago, sir.
It's a great pity. The service can't afford to lose men like Lieutenant Commander Finney.
I agree. I waited until the last possible moment. We were on Red Alert. The storm got worse. I had to jettison the pod.
What took you so long, Mister Spock?
Captain, I believe I
I'll take that.
There you are. I just wanted one more look at you. The man who killed my father.
That's not so. He was my friend.
Your friend? You hated him all your life! That's why you killed him, you murderer! You murderer! You murderer!
Mister Spock, would you please?
Miss Finney, come with me, please.
Captain Kirk, you say you jettisoned the pod after the Red Alert?
You have my sworn deposition.
Then, Captain, I must presume you've committed willful perjury. This extract from your computer log says you jettisoned the pod before going to Red Alert. Consider yourself confined to the base. Official inquiry will determine whether a general court martial is in order.
Couple of days.
In a hurry to see me go?
Oh, I just wondered how long it'd take to get a new records officer.
You can talk plainer than that.
I can, but I think the point's been made. Ben was a friend of ours.
Come on, Jim. Let's go.
Go on. Finish. Ben was a friend of yours, and
Go on. I'm waiting to hear the rest.
Why don't you tell us?
What would be the point? You've already made up your minds. Excuse me, Bones.
If you have any doubt, that was indeed Captain James Kirk of the Enterprise.
Yes, I know. Are you a friend of his?
In these trying times, one of the few. Doctor Leonard McCoy. And you?
Areel Shaw. And I'm a friend, too. An old one.
All of my old friends look like doctors. All of his look like you. Well, you might as well join me for a drink. With this inquiry coming up, he's going to need all the friends he can get.
Recording inquiry. Matter. Captain Kirk, James T. Subject. Circumstances of death, Lieutenant Commander Finney, Benjamin.
Let us begin with your relationship with Commander Finney. You knew him for a long time, didn't you?
Yes. He was an instructor at the Academy when I was a midshipman, but that didn't stand in the way of our beginning a close friendship. His daughter Jamie, who was here last night, was named after me.
It's common knowledge that something happened to your friendship.
It's no secret. We were assigned to the same ship some years later. I relieved him on watch once and found a circuit open to the atomic matter piles that should've been closed. Another five minutes, it could have blown up the ship.
I closed the switch and logged the incident. He drew a reprimand and was sent to the bottom of the promotion list.
And he blamed you for that?
Yes. He had been at the Academy for an unusually long time as an instructor. As a result, he was late in being assigned to a starship. The delay, he felt, looked bad on his record. My action, he believed, made things worse.
Comment. Service record of Lieutenant Commander Finney to be appended this inquiry.
Now let's get into the specifics of the storm, Captain.
His name was at the top of the duty roster.
If he blamed you
He may have blamed me that he never rose to command a ship, but I don't assign jobs on the basis of who blames me. It was Finney's turn, and I assigned him. He had just checked in with me from the pod when we hit the leading edge of the storm. Not too bad at first. I signalled a Yellow Alert. Then we began encountering pressure, variant stress, force seven, the works. I finally signaled a Red Alert. Finney knew he had a matter of seconds. I gave him those seconds and more. But apparently it wasn't enough.
Then why, Captain, does the computer log from your ship, made automatically at the time, indicate that you were still on Yellow Alert when you jettisoned and not on Red?
I don't know. There's been a mistake.
It would seem so. Could the computer be wrong?
Mister Spock is running a survey right now, but the odds are next to impossible.
Stop recording. Now, look, Jim. Not one man in a million could do what you and I have done. Command a starship. A hundred decisions a day, hundreds of lives staked on you making every one of them right. You're played out, Jim. Exhausted.
Is that the way you see it?
A physical breakdown. Possibly even mental collapse.
I'd be admitting a man died because
I'm thinking of the service. I won't have it smeared.
All right. By an evident perjurer who's either covering his bad judgment, his cowardice, or
That's as far as you go, sir. I'm telling you I was there on the Bridge. I know what happened. I know what I did.
It's in the transcript, and computer transcripts don't lie. I'm telling you, Captain, either you accept a permanent ground assignment, or the whole disciplinary weight of Starfleet command is going to light right on your neck.
So that's the way we do it now? Sweep it under the rug, and me along with it? Not on your life. I intend to fight.
Draw it? I demand it. And right now, Commodore Stone. Right now.
Areel. Doctor McCoy said you were here. I should have felt it in the air, like static electricity.
Flattery will get you everywhere.
Four years, seven months, and an odd number of days. Not that I'm counting.
You look marvellous. You haven't changed a bit.
But things have changed for you, haven't they?
Oh, you've heard about that, have you?
I'm a lawyer in the Judge Advocate's office, remember?
I remember. Let's forget it. We have a lot of lost time to make up for.
You're taking it very lightly.
The confidence of an innocent man.
Are you? That's not what the rumours indicate.
Look, Let's not talk shop.
Jim, this could ruin you. Will you take some advice?
I never could talk you into anything. All right. Fire away.
The prosecution will build its case on the basis of Kirk versus the computer. Now if your attorney tries to defend on that basis, you won't have a chance.
What other choice is there?
That's up to your attorney, and that's why he's got to be a good one.
No, I'm busy.
Well, a girl with your ability should be able to handle two cases at once.
Jim, be serious. You're not an ordinary human. You're a Starship Captain, and you've stepped into scandal. If there's any way they can do it, they'll slap you down hard and permanently for the good of the service.
You still haven't made any recommendation.
Samuel T. Cogley, attorney at law. If anyone can save you, he can. He'll be paying you a visit. Jim, I've got to go.
Areel, you still haven't told me how you know so much about what the prosecution's going to do.
Because, Jim Kirk, my dear old love, I am the prosecution, and I have to do my very best to have you slapped down hard. Broken out of the service, in disgrace.
I figure we'll be spending some time together, so I moved in.
I hope I'm not crowding you.
What's the matter? Don't you like books?
Oh, I like them fine, but a computer takes less space.
A computer, huh? I got one of these in my office. Contains all the precedents. The synthesis of all the great legal decisions written throughout time. I never use it.
I've got my own system. Books, young man, books. Thousands of them. If time wasn't so important, I'd show you something. My library. Thousands of books.
And what would be the point?
You have to be either an obsessive crackpot who's escaped from his keeper or Samuel T. Cogley, attorney at law.
I'm afraid so.
This court is now in session. I have appointed as members of this court Space Command Representative Lindstrom, Starship Captains Krasnovsky and Chandra. Captain Kirk, I direct your attention to the fact that you have a right to ask for substitute officers if you feel that any of these named harbour any prejudiced attitudes to your case.
I have no objections, sir.
Do you consent to the service Lieutenant Shaw as prosecuting officer and to myself as president of the court?
Mister Spock, as a First officer, you know a great deal about computers, don't you?
It is possible for a computer to malfunction, is it not?
Do you know of any malfunction which has caused an inaccuracy in the Enterprise computer?
That answer is based on your mechanical survey of the Enterprise computer ordered by the defendant prior to this trial, is it not?
Now the stardate
But the computer is inaccurate, never the less.
Why do you say that?
It reports that the jettison button was pressed before the Red Alert.
In other words, it reports that Captain Kirk was reacting to an extreme emergency that did not then exist.
And that is impossible.
Is it? Were you watching him the exact moment he pressed the jettison button?
No, I was occupied. The ship was already on Yellow Alert.
Then how can you dispute the finding of the log?
I do not dispute it. I merely state that it is wrong.
Oh? On what do you base that statement?
I know the Captain. He is in
Please instruct the witness not to speculate.
Lieutenant, I am half Vulcanian. Vulcanians do not speculate. I speak from pure logic. If I let go of a hammer on a planet that has a positive gravity, I need not see it fall to know that it has in fact fallen.
I do not see what that has to
Gentlemen, human beings have characteristics just as inanimate objects do. It is impossible for Captain Kirk to act out of panic or malice. It is not his nature.
In your opinion.
Yes. In my opinion.
I now call the personnel officer for the Enterprise.
In the course of your duties as personnel officer of the Enterprise, you would be familiar with the service records of all aboard?
With reference to Records Officer Finney, was there in his service record a reported disciplinary action for failure to close a circuit?
And who was that officer?
Now the Captain Kirk who sits in this courtroom?
I now call Doctor McCoy to the stand.
Service rank, Lieutenant Commander. Position, Ship's Surgeon. Current assignment, USS Enterprise. Commendations, Legion of Honour. Awards of valour. Decorated by Starfleet surgeons.
You have just heard the testimony of your own personnel officer, that it was an action of the then Ensign Kirk, which placed an unerasable blot on the record of the then Lieutenant Finney. Psychologically, Doctor, is it possible that Lieutenant Finney blamed Kirk for the incident?
He could have hated Kirk down through the years, blamed him for being passed over for promotion, blamed him for never being given a command of his own, correct?
He could have.
Now, let us hypothesise, Doctor. Is it normal for a person to return affection for hatred?
Do we not tend to at first resent and then actively dislike the person who hates us?
Wait a minute. I don't quite follow you.
Hypothetically. Would not Captain Smith begin to hate Lieutenant Commander Jones once he learned that Lieutenant Commander Jones hated and detested him?
Well, yes, I suppose it could happen.
Then I ask you, is it not possible that Captain Kirk became aware of Lieutenant Commander Finney's hatred toward him and perhaps, even involuntarily, began to reciprocate?
Any normal human, Doctor. Is it possible?
But he's not that kind of a man.
Is it theoretically possible, Doctor?
Yes. It's possible.
Well, sir, the truth is, I've been holding back till we get this preliminary business out of the way. I'd like to call Captain Kirk to the stand.
May it please the court.
Court recognises counsel for the prosecution.
The prosecution concedes the inestimable record of Captain Kirk.
I wouldn't want to slow the wheels of progress. But then on the other hand, I wouldn't want those wheels to run over my client in their unbridled haste.
Awards of valour, Medal of Honour, Silver Palm with Cluster, Starfleet citation for Conspicuous Gallantry, Karagite Order of Heroism
Stop. I think that's enough. I wouldn't want to slow things up too much.
Now, Captain, despite what these machines indicate, was there indeed a Red Alert before you jettisoned the pod?
Please tell us about it.
You did the right thing, but would you do it again?
Given the same circumstances I would do the same thing without hesitation, because the steps I took in the order I took them were absolutely necessary if I were to save my ship. And nothing is more important than my ship.
The prosecution does not wish to dishonour this man, but facts are facts. I must invite the attention of the court and Captain Kirk to this visual extract from the Enterprise computer log. Play back. What you are about to see is precisely what took place on the Enterprise bridge during the ion storm.
We'll need somebody in the pod for readings.
Mister Finney is top of duty roster, Captain.
Attention, Commander Finney, report to pod for reading on ion plates.
Reverse. Stop. Go forward with magnification on the panel. Freeze that. Captain Kirk is now signalling a Yellow Alert. Go forward, normal view.
Make it fast, Ben. I may have to go to Red Alert.
Hold our course, Mister Hanson.
Stand by to get out of there, Ben.
Steady as she goes, Mister Hanson.
Freeze that! If the court will notice, the log plainly shows the defendant's finger pressing the jettison button. The condition signal reads Yellow Alert. Not red alert, but simply Yellow Alert. When the pod containing Lieutenant Commander Finney was jettisoned, the emergency did not as yet exist.
But that's not the way it happened.
Computers don't lie.
Are you suggesting that I did?
I'm suggesting that maybe you did have a lapse. It was possible, you know, with the strain you were under. There's still time to change our plea. I could get you off.
Two days ago, I would've staked anything on my judgment.
I spent my whole life training for decisions just like that one. My whole life. Is it possible that when the moment came? No. I know what I did. You can pull out if you want to.
There's no place to go, except back to court and hear the verdict.
I've run a complete megalyte survey on the computer.
I'll tell you what you found. Nothing, right?
Not bitter enough to forget to thank you for your efforts.
No. It's not all bad, Mister Spock. Who knows. You may be able to beat your next captain at chess. Kirk out.
Jamie. This is Lieutenant Commander Finney's daughter.
Mister Cogley, we've got to stop this. Make him take a ground assignment. I realise it wasn't his fault. I won't make any trouble. Make him change his plea.
It's too late for that, Jamie, but I'm glad you don't blame me anymore for what happened.
I was just so upset that night. I'm sorry.
Don't say any more.
But I have to. I never realised how close you and Dad had been until I read through some papers he wrote, letters to Mother and me. I don't know how I ever could've thought that you. Mister Cogley, ruining Jim won't change what's happened.
That's very commendable, Miss Finney, but most unusual. After all, Captain Kirk is accused of causing your father's death, and the evidence would indicate his guilt.
I was just thinking of Jim.
I know, and I thank you. I have to go and change. You ready?
Well, I had to see it to believe it.
They're about to lop off the captain's professional head, and you're sitting here playing chess with the computer.
That is true.
Why, thank you, Doctor. I've just won my fourth game.
Observe for yourself. Rook to king's pawn four.
Exactly. I programmed it myself for chess some months ago. The best I should have been able to attain was a draw.
Well, why are you just sitting there?
Transporter room, stand by. We're beaming down.
Court is now in session. The board will entertain motions before delivering its verdict. Counsel for the prosecution?
Counsel for the defence?
Sir, some new evidence has just been brought to my attention. I'd like to ask the court to
Objection! Counsel for the defence has rested his case.
Of what nature is this evidence?
I can't tell you, I'll have to show you.
Is saving an innocent man's career a theatric? i
Counsels will kindly direct their remarks to the bench.
All but one. The most devastating witness against my client is not a human being. It's a machine, an information system. The computer log of the Enterprise. Can ask this court adjourn and reconvene aboard that vessel.
And I repeat, I speak of rights. A machine has none. A man must. My client has the right to face his accuser, and if you do not grant him that right, you have brought us down to the level of the machine. Indeed, you have elevated that machine above us. I ask that my motion be granted, and more than that, gentlemen. In the name of humanity, fading in the shadow of the machine, I demand it. I demand it!
How many games of chess did you win from the computer, Mister Spock?
I personally programmed the computer for chess months ago. I gave the machine an understanding of the game equal to my own. The computer cannot make an error and assuming that I do not either, the best that could normally be hoped for would be stalemate after stalemate, and yet I beat the machine five times. Someone, either accidentally or deliberately, adjusted the programming and therefore the memory banks of that computer.
Could that have had an effect on the visual playback we saw?
Object! The witness would be making a conclusion.
Hypothetically, Mister Spock. Hypothetically, Miss Shaw. If what you suggest had been done, it would be beyond the capabilities of most men. Is that true?
What man aboard ship would it not be beyond?
And at the moment, you have no records officer.
Affirmative. Until he was lost, our records officer was Lieutenant Commander Finney.
Captain Kirk, will you tell the steps you took to find Mister Finney after the storm?
It's a painstaking, thorough attempt in and around the ship to find a man who's presumably injured and unable to respond.
It presupposes, does it not, that a man wishes to be found?
I beg your pardon?
If you start a search for a man, you assume, don't you, that he wants to be found? He's not hiding?
On a ship of this size, could a man evade such a search?
Standing by to warp, sir.
Shall I make a full report to Spacefleet Command, sir?
Not yet. They may trace our beam. Wait until we're well out of range.
Can we know his range is, Captain?
We can take an educated guess. At the point we entered their solar system.
Still no sign of pursuit. Instruments clear, sir.
May I take a moment to change?
Yes, I think you might. Turn in your glass slippers. The ball is over.
Hard to believe it ever happened.
Captain, we're about to warp.
Hard to port, Mister Sulu.
That was the planet Gothos, Captain.
With us as the mouse.
There it is again. Dead ahead.
Ninety degrees to starboard, Mister Sulu.
Turning, Captain. Nut not veering off from it.
Or it toward us.
Captain, you're not beaming down.
Yes, I am, Doctor McCoy. I am going to see our playful Mister Trelane and whatever it takes to make him give up our ship. Stand by communications. Mister Spock. If you don't receive a message from me within the hour, leave the vicinity at once. No turning back.
Any attempt at demonstrations will weigh against you with the court, and this time my instrumentality is unbreakable.
I've had enough of your games.
I haven't come to plead in your court, Trelane.
I warn you. Anything you might say has already been taken down in evidence against you.
I've come for one purpose. To get back my ship.
We've made you angry with our will to survive, haven't we?
Then vent your anger on me alone. I was the one who led the others. I was the one who shot out your mirror machine.
And did you really think that was the only medium of instrumentality at my command?
I took that chance. I'm willing to pay the price for chancing wrong.
Oh, then you do admit to the charge?
Yes, anything! Just allow the Enterprise to continue its journey. You pompous
Those people have done you no harm.
We're living beings, not playthings for your amusement.
Silence! This trial is over. You are guilty. On all counts, you are guilty. And according to your own laws, this court has no choice in fixing punishment. You will hang by the neck, Captain, until you are dead, dead, dead!
I'm glad you weren't disappointed.
Why, Captain, you're still angry. Would that I could have sustained that moment. Ah, no matter. Do you have a last request?
Trelane, if you think I'm going to cheerfully and obediently stick my head in that noose
You still haven't learned. You have no choice. Oh, this is becoming quite tiresome. It's all so very easy.
That's your problem, Trelane. Everything is easy. It's given you a bad habit. You're not aware of it, but you have it. You don't think, Trelane. That's your problem. You miss opportunities, like your anger before and mine right now. Oh, you enjoy it, but you couldn't have accomplished it without me, and you know why? Because you're a bumbling, inept fool.
Here you have an opportunity to experience something really unique, and you're wasting it. You want to commit murder? Go ahead, but where's the sport in a simple hanging?
Yes. The terror of murder. The suspense. The fun.
Oh, I'm intrigued. Go ahead, Captain. What do you suggest?
A personal conflict between us. Not like the duel before, but the real thing. The stakes, a human life. Mine.
That's the idea.
Yes, but you can do better than that. There's still not enough sport in just killing me with a sword.
I know. That will be dull. We'll have to have something more fanciful. Let me see. A hunt. A royal hunt. Predator against predator. Now, you may go hide in the forest anywhere you like and I shall seek. How does that strike you, Captain?
It strikes me very well. But you'll have to make it worth my while, Trelane. Why not up the stakes?
Yes. While we're playing our game, free my ship. Let it continue on its way. In return, I'll give you a contest you'll remember.
Always back to your ship. Oh well. If it will add spice to the pursuit, I accept your terms, Captain.
Let me notify the Enterprise that it can go.
Ah ha! Captain Kirk. You must try harder, Captain. This is too easy.
Enterprise. Enterprise, can you hear me?
Touche, Captain. Touche. I must confess you scored first. But after all, I never played this game before.
And now let's have at it again!
Remember, Trelane. You promised to let my ship go.
Yes, but this is such sport. I must fetch all the others back to play. So this is victory. It has a sweet taste. Down, Captain. On your knees!
You haven't won, Trelane.
I have. I could run you through!
But you haven't won anything.
On your knees, Captain!
No! Does it still taste as sweet?
I order you. You've been beaten.
But I'm not defeated.
You've got a lot to learn about winning, Trelane.
You dare to defy me!
In fact, you've got a lot to learn about everything, haven't you?
I'll fix you for that! You cheated! You haven't played the game right. I'll show you!
No! No. You said I could have this planet.
This has gone far enough.
You always stop me when I'm having fun.
You're disobedient and cruel. We've told you before.
Time to come in now, Trelane.
But I don't want to come in, and I won't. I'm a general, and I won't listen to you.
But why? I didn't do anything wrong. I was just playing.
But I haven't finished studying my predators yet.
This is not studying them.
If you cannot take proper care of your pets, you cannot have them at all.
Oh, but I was winning. I was winning.
They're beings, Trelane. They have spirit. They're superior.
You'll grow up, Trelane. You'll understand. Now come along.
Oh, but you said I could. You promised. I never have any fun.
Stop that nonsense at once, or you'll not be permitted to make any more planets.
Oh, but you saw. I was winning. I would have won. Honest.
I would have. I would have. I would have. I would. I would. I would. I would.
Captain, we regret that the life paths of yourself and your companions have been disturbed.
Who are you? Who is Trelane?
You must forgive our child. The fault is ours for indulging him too much. He will be punished.
We would not have let him intercept you had we realised your vulnerability.
Captain to Enterprise. Captain to Enterprise.
Beam me up, Mister Spock. We're free to go.
Colony Beta Six clears us for normal approach, sir.
For the record, how do we describe him? Pure mentality? Force of intellect? Embodied energy? Superbeing? He must be classified, sir.
God of war, Mister Spock.
Then a small boy, and a very naughty one at that.
It will make a strange entry in the library banks.
Then he was a very strange small boy. One the other hand, he was probably doing things comparable to the same mischievous pranks you played when you were a boy.
Yes. Dipping little girls' curls in inkwells. Stealing apples from the neighbours' trees. Tying cans on
Forgive me, Mister Spock. I should have known better.
I shall be delighted, Captain.
Captain to shuttlecraft Galileo. Stand by, Mister Spock.
I remind you, Captain, I'm entirely opposed to this delay. Your mission is to get those emergency medical supplies to Makus Three in time for their transfer to the New Paris colonies.
I don't like to take chances. The plague is out of control on New Paris. We must get those drugs there on time.
No problem. Captain to Galileo. All systems cleared for take off.
Three point seven. Sir, I
Make up your mind please, Mister Latimer.
That's to be expected, Mister Spock. Quasars are extremely disruptive. Just how much, we don't know.
Mister Spock, radiation is increasing.
I can't, sir. Nothing happens.
Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise. Come in, please.
We're being drawn right into it.
Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise. We are out of control, being pulled directly into the heart of Murasaki three one two. Being hit by violent radiation on outer hull. Course three point two five
Try and get me a fix on the Galileo.
Scanners are blank, Captain. We're getting a mass of readings I've never seen. Nothing makes sense.
Negative ionic concentration one point six four times ten to the ninth power metres, Radiation wave length three hundred seventy angstroms. Harmonics upward along entire spectrum.
What is it, Captain?
That thing out there has ionized this complete sector. None of our instruments work. At least four complete solar systems in the immediate vicinity. And out there somewhere, a twenty four foot shuttlecraft, off course, out of control. Finding a needle in a haystack would be child's play.
I was opposed to this from the very beginning. Our flight to Makus Three is of the very highest priority.
I'm aware of that, Commissioner. At the same time I have certain scientific duties I must perform, and investigating the Murasaki effect is one.
Yes, but you've lost your crew.
We have two days to find them.
What would you have me do, turn around and leave them there?
You shouldn't have sent them out in the first place.
Yes, I agree. If we stand by and do nothing, we're just giving them an invitation to come down and slaughter us.
I'm frequently appalled by the low regard you Earthmen have for life.
Well, we're practical about it. I say we hit them before they hit us.
Seems logical to me.
It does, indeed. It seems logical to me, also. But to take life indiscriminately,
I am not interested in the opinion of the majority, Mister Gaetano. Components must be weighed. Our danger to ourselves as well as our duties to other life forms, friendly or not. There's a third course.
That could get us killed.
I think not. Doctor McCoy.
You and Yeoman Mears return to the ship. Assist Mister Scott in any way possible. We'll be back shortly.
Gentlemen, you'll follow my orders to the letter, firing only when so instructed, and at my designated targets.
Now you're talking.
We'll fire to frighten, Mister Gaetano, not to kill.
Oh, for the. You saw what they did to Latimer!
I am in command, Mister Gaetano. The orders and the responsibility will be mine. Follow me.
The mists. I can't see them.
I hear them. They're directly ahead of us. Several, I believe. Direct your phasers to two o'clock and to ten o'clock.
Yes, I know. But fortunately, I'm giving the orders. Take aim please, and fire when I give a signal.
I still say we should have killed them.
It was not necessary. Fear will do for us what needs to be done. Mister Boma, you will return with me to the Galileo. Mister Gaetano, you remain on guard here. Keep in contact with the ship.
Did you find them?
Yes, we found them. They won't bother us again.
I hope not. Scotty has an idea.
It's dangerous, but it might work.
I can adjust the main reactor to function with a substitute fuel supply.
That's all very well, but we don't have a substitute supply.
Aye, we do. Our phasers. I can adapt them and use their energy. It'll take time, but it's possible.
Trouble is, they happen to be our only defence.
They would also seem to be our only hope.
They won't attack for at least several hours. By then, with luck, we'll be gone.
If I can get a full load, we should be able to achieve orbit with all hands. Not that we can maintain it long.
We don't have to maintain it very long, Mister Scott. In less than twenty four hours, the Enterprise will be forced to abandon its search in order to make a rendezvous. If we can't maintain orbit after that time, it won't make any difference. If we burn up in a decaying orbit or die here on the planet's surface, we shall surely die. Doctor, your phaser. Go to work, Mister Scott.
They came back all right, sir. In my opinion, the transporters are now safe for human transport.
Good. This is the captain. Landing parties one, two, and three, report to transporter room for immediate beaming down to surface of the planet. Ordinance condition One A.
Captain, it's a big planet. It'll be sheer luck if our landing parties find anything.
I'm depending on luck, Lieutenant. It's almost the only tool we have that'll work.
Take this back to Mister Scott for conversion, please Doctor.
Nobody knows what's happened to Gaetano, and you hand over his phaser like nothing's happened at all.
Just where are you going?
I have a certain scientific curiosity about what's become of Mister Gaetano. Return to the ship, please.
I don't know. He'll risk his neck locating Gaetano and if he finds him, he's just as liable to order him to stay behind. You tell me.
Do you really think the ship will ever leave?
Well, it won't unless we get these phasers back.
Well, Mister Spock, they didn't stay frightened very long, did they?
Most illogical reaction. We demonstrated our superior weapons. They should have fled.
You mean they should have respected us?
Mister Spock, respect is a rational process. Did it ever occur to you they might react emotionally, with anger?
Doctor, I am not responsible for their unpredictability.
They were perfectly predictable to anyone with feeling. You might as well admit it, Mister Spock, your precious logic brought them down on us.
Why haven't they done anything?
They're studying us, for the moment.
Studying us, Mister Spock? They seem to learn rather quickly.
All right, Spock, you have all the answers. What now?
Mister Boma, your tone is increasingly hostile.
My tone isn't the only thing that's hostile, Mister Spock!
I'm sick and tired of your logic!
We could use a little inspiration.
Strange. Step by step, I have made the correct and logical decisions. And yet two men have died.
And you've brought our furry friends down on us.
I do seem to have miscalculated regarding them, and inculcated resentment on your parts. The sum of the parts cannot be greater than the whole.
How much longer, Mister Scott?
That won't be long enough.
Doctor, a phaser can only drain so fast.
How long do you think those plates will hold out under this? We've got to do something!
You've got your hands full.
At last report they were getting some readings
I'm not interested in the last report. I want to know now.
You have two hours and forty three minutes, Captain.
Oh, yes. So you are. Well, girls, I suppose you can turn something up.
We regret that some of you've been made uncomfortable.Balance of Terror
The ceremony will be carried on all viewing screens, sir.
There was a call for you from the Bridge.
Maintain course to outpost four. Keep me informed. Kirk out.
Since the days of the first wooden vessels, all shipmasters have had one happy privilege. That of uniting two people in the bonds of matrimony. We are gathered here today with you, Angela Martine, and you, Robert Tomlinson, in the sight of your fellows, in accordance with our laws and our many beliefs so that you may pledge your
Our speed is now maximum, sir.
Position, eight minutes from Outpost four at this velocity, sir.
I've talked to my engine room, sir. We'll get more speed out of her.
There can't be much doubt who's attacking, sir.
Mister Spock, put this star sector on our screen. Now show our position. Signal this to all decks, Lieutenant.
What you do not know and must be told is that my command orders on this subject are precise and inviolable. No act, no provocation
Both these outposts and this vessel will be considered expendable. Captain out.
We know Outpost four has been attacked, sir, so if we intercept Romulans now
After a whole century, what will a Romulan ship look like, Mister Stiles? I doubt they'll radio and identify themselves.
I had no idea that history was your specialty.
Family history. There was a Captain Stiles was in the space service then. Two Commanders and several junior officers. All lost in that war, sir.
Their war, Mister Stiles. Not yours. Don't forget it.
Open a channel to our nearest command base. Quarter hour reports on our position and status.
Battle stations. All hands to battle stations. Battle stations. Battle stations. All decks acknowledge. All decks acknowledge, sir. All stations show green.
Energise main phasers, Mister Styles. All weapons to full power.
All weapons to full power. Phaser control room.
You won't get off my hook this easily. I'm going to marry you, Mister, battle or phaser weapons notwithstanding.
Well, meanwhile, temporarily at least, I am still your superior officer. So get with it, Mister.
And showing on my sensors, Captain. At least it's still there.
Sir, regaining contact with Outpost four. Switching to speakers.
Kirk here. We're minutes away, Hansen. What's your status?
Can you locate the intruder for us?
We are in the Neutral Zone. They will not enter. If you refuse, permit me the glory of the kill, Commander.
We will attack, but on my order.
Will you require assistance here?
This time, we'll handle things without your help, Vulcan.
Stiles, can you hear me? Fire! Stiles!
Captain. Standing by to beam your survivors aboard our ship. Prepare to abandon your vessel.
What purpose will it serve to die?
Are you all right, Mister Spock?
I'm alive, sir. But I wouldn't be. Mister Spock pulled me out of the phaser room. He saved my life. He risked his life after I
I saved a trained navigator so he could return to duty. I am capable of no other feelings in such matters.
We finally received an answer from Command base, sir. They say they'll support whatever decision you have to make.
It never makes any sense. We both have to know that there was a reason.
I'm all right.
Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hands.
That voice. He's back. That man on the stage. I'm certain of it. That's Kodos the Executioner.
You mean to tell me you've called me three light years off my course just to accuse an actor of being Kodos?
He is Kodos. I'm sure of it.
You said you discovered a new food concentrate. What am I supposed to put in my log, that you lied? That you diverted a starship with false information? You're not only in trouble, you've put me in trouble, too.
I did it to trap Kodos!
Kodos is dead.
We had not believed this possible. The customs and history of your race show a unique hatred of captivity. Even when it's pleasant and benevolent, you prefer death. This makes you too violent and dangerous a species for our needs.
He means that they can't use you. You're free to go back to the ship.
And that's it. No apologies. You captured one of us, threatened all of us.
Your unsuitability has condemned the Talosian race to eventual death. Is this not sufficient?
No other specimen has shown your adaptability. You were our last hope.
But wouldn't some form of trade, mutual cooperation.
Your race would learn our power of illusion and destroy itself, too.
Let's get back to the ship.
I can't. I can't go with you.
Sir, it just came on. We can't shut the power off.
You see why I can't go with you.
This is the female's true appearance.
They found me in the wreckage, dying, a lump of flesh. They rebuilt me. Everything works, but they had never seen a human. They had no guide for putting me back together.
It was necessary to convince you her desire to stay is an honest one.
You'll give her back her illusion of beauty?
Mister Spock, the system is coming on again.
Mister Spock, even if regulations are explicit, you could have come to me and explained.
Ask you to face the death penalty, too? One of us was enough, Captain.
Er, Mister Spock, when you're finished, please come back and see me. I want to talk to you. This regret table tendency you've been showing lately towards flagrant emotionalism
I see no reason to insult me, sir. I believe I've been completely logical about the whole affair.
Welcome to Starbase Eleven, Captain. The Commodore's waiting to see you. He's curious why you suddenly changed course and came here.
We received a subspace message asking us to divert here immediately.
Oh, Jim, I just can't understand this.
Mister Spock received a starbase transmission, a message from the former commander of the Enterprise, Fleet Captain Pike, urgently requesting that we divert here.
If my first officer states he received a transmission from
Jim, I'm not doubting anyone's word. I'm simply telling you it's impossible.
You don't know? You actually don't know what's happened to Captain Pike? There's been subspace chatter about it for months. I'm sorry to have to be the one to show you. He's upstairs in the medical section.
When he was promoted to Fleet Captain.
About your age. Big, handsome man, vital, active.
I took over the Enterprise from him. Spock served with him for several years.
What's his problem, Commodore?
Inspection tour of a cadet vessel. Old Class J starship. One of the baffle plates ruptured.
He went in bringing out all those kids that were still alive. Just wanted you gentlemen to be prepared.
Once more, Jose. Spock stated he received a message for us to come here. He entered same in his log. That's all the proof I require.
And what do those record tapes show? No message sent from here. No message received by your vessel.
Then I suggest the record tapes have been deliberately changed. A computer expert can change record tapes, duplicate voices, say anything, say nothing.
The fact remains that your first officer's former captain is hospitalised, horribly injured, at this base, and that same first officer seems to be the only one who heard that message.
If he had wanted to see Captain Pike he could have requested a leave. I would have granted it.
Well, that's true of course.
Who would want to divert us here? There's no trouble in the space sector we're patrolling now. No alien problems.
Oh, have I introduced Miss Piper, Jim? This is Captain Kirk, Miss Piper.
I recognized the Captain immediately. A mutual friend described you, sir. Lieutenant Helen Johansson.
She merely mentioned she knew you, sir.
You have something to report, Miss Piper?
Oh, yes, sir. I'm afraid our investigation turned up very little, Commodore. There is, of course, Mister Spock's years of service with Captain Pike. Indications of his extreme loyalty to this former commander.
Miss Piper, a Vulcan can no sooner be disloyal than he can exist without breathing. That goes for his present commander as well as his past.
We're forced to consider every possibility, sir. We can be certain Captain Pike cannot have sent a message. In his condition he's under observation every minute of every day.
And totally unable to move, Jim. His wheel chair is constructed to respond to his brain waves. Oh, he can turn it, move it forwards, or backwards slightly.
With the flashing light, he can say yes or no.
There's no way he could even have asked for that message to be sent?
Enterprise to Starbase. Request confirmation.
Sir, this is a security area. What are you doing here?
I have security clearance, Chief.
This is Mister Spock.
You will not discuss this with ship's crew or starbase personnel. Do you read?
Stand by. We'll warp out of orbit in one hour.
They've tried questioning him. He's almost agitated himself into a coma.
How long will he live?
As long as any of us. Blast medicine anyway. We've learned to tie into every human organ in the body except one. The brain. The brain is what life is all about. Now, that man can think any thought that we can, and love, hope, dream as much as we can, but he can't reach out, and no one can reach in.
No to what? They could question him for days, weeks, before they stumble on the right thing.
Bones, could this have anything to do with Spock?
I don't read you at all, Jim.
What I mean is either a message was received. It was one of two things. Either someone sent a message diverting us here, or someone on board the ship lied about receiving it. Could that someone be Mister Spock?
Jim, forgetting how well we both know Spock, the simple fact that he's a Vulcan means he's incapable of telling a lie.
He's also half human.
And that half is completely submerged. To be caught acting like us or even thinking like us would completely embarrass him.
He would not make a false entry.
There's a false entry in the log right now which doesn't jibe with the established facts. How do you explain that.
Well, what is it? Sickness? Injury? How bad is it?
Probably somebody discovered a hangnail. I'll beam up and let you know, Jim.
Oh, I'm certifying I ordered you to read it. Know anything at all about this planet?
With a half Vulcan science officer named Spock.
Commodore! Captain Pike, he's gone!
Mendez here. What is it?
Out of orbit, Mister Spock. Seems strange with no navigator on duty.
The Enterprise knows where she's going, Mister Hansen.
Someone's trying to hail us, sir.
Maintain radio silence, Lieutenant. This is First Officer Spock. Per Starfleet orders this date, I have been placed in temporary command of the Enterprise. While our destination is secret, our mission is relatively simple. Starbase Command has assigned Captain Kirk medical rest leave until our return. His instructions are that you will obey my orders as you would his. First Officer out.
What's going on around here? Who said Jim needed a medical rest leave? And this call about me being needed aboard the ship. I've checked everywhere.
Doctor, I regret they elected to keep certain things from you. Will you come with me, please.
Sir, scanners report an object following us, about the size of a starbase shuttlecraft. Shall we reverse helm?
But at our speed, they'll never catch us. In case they want to reach us
You have your orders, Mister Hansen. We'll make no contact.
Starbase Shuttlecraft one to Enterprise. Come in, please. Enterprise, Commodore Mendez and Captain Kirk. If you read me, you are ordered to reply. Repeating it on all emergency frequencies, Jim.
Spock is headed for Talos Four, all right.
Pulling ahead of us fast. Fuel is down to sixty three point three. If we turn back now, we've just got barely enough to get us back to the base.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in!
Lock on to sensors. Measure object now following the Enterprise.
Computed. Object is a Class F shuttlecraft. Duranium metal shell, ion engine power
Stop. How long before shuttlecraft's fuel supply forces return to starbase?
Computed. Shuttlecraft is already past point of safe return.
Blast you any way. You had no right to come along.
Two hours of oxygen left.
He's dead if he makes it to Talos Four. Why would he want to get Pike there? The command reports stated Talos contained absolutely no practical benefits to mankind.
Spock would have some logical reason for going there.
Maybe. Maybe he's just gone mad.
I keep wondering who might be after us in a shuttlecraft and I keep coming up with the same answers, but I can't be right, can l, Mister Spock.
Computer control. Lock on to shuttlecraft following us.
Go to tape Abel Seven Baker. Execute instructions.
Is it the captain, Mister Spock?
Sir, the engines are reversing. She's brought herself to a dead stop.
This is the First Officer speaking. Security, send an armed team to the Bridge. Transporter Room, stand by to beam Captain Kirk aboard. Effective until then, Lieutenant Hansen is in operational command.
First Officer out. Doctor, as senior officer present, I present myself to you for arrest.
The charge is mutiny, Doctor. I never received orders to take command.
Mister Spock is, er, under arrest. Is confinement to quarters enough?
Adequate, Doctor. I'll make no trouble.
All right, Captain. Locked on to you.
Transferring command to you, sir.
Accepting command. Where's Mister Spock?
In his quarters, under arrest.
His quarters, after what he's done, Lieutenant?
Reverse power. Hold this position. Tell whoever gave those orders to report
Sir, there's nobody up there giving orders. Mister Spock has the computers running the ship.
Unable to comply.
This hearing is convened. Mister Spock, you're aware of your right to counsel of your choice?
A mutiny requires a trial board of no less than three command officers. Since there are only two of that rank available
Sir, I must point out that there are three officers of command rank available. Yourself, Commodore Mendez, and Captain Christopher Pike.
Denied. Captain Pike is a complete invalid.
I believe you'll find he's still on the active duty list.
We didn't have the heart to retire him, Jim. He's got you. Whatever he's up to, he's planned it well.
Mister Spock, are you aware in pleading guilty that a further charge involving the death penalty must be held against you should this vessel enter the Talos star group?
Why? What does it accomplish to go there or to take Captain Pike there? I want to know why.
Are your comments a part of the record, sir?
Yes, it's on the record.
To comply with the request you just made, sir, that I explain the importance of going to Talos Four.
By asking why, you've opened the door to any evidence he may wish to present. Apparently what he had in mind.
Present your evidence. Screen on.
This is thirteen years ago. The Enterprise and its commander, Captain Christopher Pike.
I cannot tell you at this time, sir.
Unless the court asks a prisoner why, Commodore. You did ask that question.
You mean I was maneuvered into asking. Your evidence is out of order.
I am forced to contest that, Commodore. I want to see more.
You have that right, Captain, but just because the prisoner is your First Officer and your personal friend
That has nothing to do with it.
As I stated, gentlemen, this was thirteen years ago. We were on routine patrol when the ship's sensors detected something ahead. At first we were not certain what it was.
The meteorite beam has not deflected it, Captain.
Steady as we go.
They were keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way.
I have a fix. It comes from the Talos star group.
Their call letters check with a survey expedition. S.S. Columbia disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago.
It would take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here.
Records show the Talos group has never been explored. Solar system similar to Earth, eleven planets. Number four seems to be Class M, oxygen atmosphere.
We aren't going to go, to be certain?
Not without any indication of survivors, no. Continue to the Vega Colony and take care of our own sick and injured first. You have the helm. Maintain present course.
That's right. Unless we get anything more positive on it, it seems to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent. I'd like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, too.
Oh, I concur with yours, definitely.
Good. I'm glad you do, because we're going to stop first at the Vega Colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also. What the devil are you putting in there, ice?
What makes you think I need one?
Sometimes a man will tell his bartender things he'll never tell his doctor. What's been on your mind, Chris, the fight on Rigel seven?
Shouldn't it be? My only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
Was there anything you personally could have done to prevent it?
Oh, I should have smelled trouble when I saw the swords and the armour. Instead of that, I let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one of their warriors.
Chris, you set standards for yourself no one could meet. You treat everyone on board like a human being except yourself, and now you're tired and you
You bet I'm tired. You bet. I'm tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives. I'm tired of deciding which mission is too risky and which isn't, and who's going on the landing party and who doesn't, and who lives and who dies. Boy, I've had it, Phil.
To the point of finally taking my advice, a rest leave?
Well, for one thing, go home. Nice little town with fifty miles of park land around it. Remember I told you I had two horses, and we used to take some food and ride out all day.
Ah, that sounds exciting. Ride out with a picnic lunch every day.
I said that's one place I might go. I might go into business on Regulus or on the Orion colony.
The point is this isn't the only life available. There's a whole galaxy of things to choose from.
Now you're beginning to talk like a doctor, bartender.
Take your choice. We both get the same two kinds of customers. The living and the dying.
This is the captain. Our destination is the Talos star group.
Screen off. Mister Spock, I'm truly amazed at your technical prowess in somehow manufacturing all this. I congratulate you on your imagination. But this is a court of space law, not a theatre.
You're in no position to bargain. This is ridiculous. This man mutinied, stole your ship, abducted Captain Pike. Well, for me this has gone far enough.
We still haven't heard the full story. I vote to continue.
And I vote we do not. Deadlock, and since I'm
Not a deadlock. There's still one member of the trial board to be heard from.
We've settled into orbit, sir.
Our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, heavy with inert elements but well within safety limits.
Zero point nine of Earth.
Captain? Reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. As I read it, they polarise out as rounded metal bits. Could be parts of a spaceship hull.
Prep a landing party of six. You feel up to it?
Sorry, Number One. With little information on this planet, we'll have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us.
There's no indication of problems down there, but let's not take chances.
Yes, sir. There's a canyon to the left. We can set you there completely unobserved.
MAN: They're men. They're humans.
The same old Earth, and you'll see it very soon.
And you won't believe how fast you can get back. Well the time barrier's been broken. Our new ships can
This is Vina. Her parents are dead. She was born almost as we crashed.
We'll begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly.
Yes, affirmative on the
You appear to be healthy and intelligent, Captain. A prime specimen.
You must forgive her choice of words, Captain. She's lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists.
If they can, er, spare you a moment, I'd like to make my medical report.
I think it's time to show the Captain our secret.
Their health is excellent, almost too good.
There's a reason for our condition, but we've had some doubt if Earth is ready to learn the secret. Let the girl show you. We'll accept your judgment.
You're tired, but don't worry. You'll feel much better soon. Don't you see it? Here and here.
I, I don't understand.
You will. You're a perfect choice.
What is it?
Plead signal for you, sir. Go ahead, Uhura.
Receiving transmissions from Talos Four? Then the images we've been seeing are
Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty. You've not only finished yourself, Spock, but you've finished your Captain as well.
The Commodore must be aware that Captain Kirk knew nothing of this.
And you're aware a Captain is responsible for everything that occurs on his ship. I order you to return this vessel back to manual control.
Sir, I respectfully decline.
Very well. You've earned the consequences. This court is in recess.
Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
Captain, Jim, please don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.
No matter where I've travelled in the galaxy, Jim, this bridge is more like home than anywhere else.
To me she was always like my child. I was there in the San Francisco Navy Yards when her unit components were built.
Jim, I didn't realise how many of the tools I use in Sickbay were designed by Sarah.
As the first medical officer aboard a ship equipped with warp drive, I'm afraid I had to come up with new ideas all the time.
Your modesty is unnecessary, Mrs. April. Your achievements as a pioneer doctor in space are well known.
And it's nice to know the lady is as intelligent as she is beautiful. Much like the flower she carries.
Oh, Doctor, flattery will get you everywhere. But I'm afraid my flower is dying.
It's a native of Capella Four, isn't it?
Yes, but it has a life span of only a few hours. This morning it was a seedling, within a few hours it will be dead.
Excuse me, Captain. You asked to be notified when we made visual contact with the Beta Niobe nova.
Thank you, Mister Spock. Mrs. April, you're about to see another of the galaxy's most beautiful sights, the Beta Niobe's supernova.
It is beautiful, but also very deadly.
We're travelling at a safe distance from the nova, Mrs. April.
Beta Niobe. You were present when the star first started its explosion, Jim.
Captain, sensors are picking up an unidentified object travelling at an incredible speed, presently on collision course with the Enterprise.
Put the ship on Red Alert. How fast is it travelling, Mister Spock?
At a speed that should be impossible to achieve. Something on the order of warp thirty six.
No natural object has ever been recorded as travelling at that speed.
I believe it is not a natural object, but a ship.
But who would have the technology to build a ship that could travel at such a speed?
No known race, Captain. Nevertheless, it will contact us in one point four minutes.
Hard about, helmsman. Change course for twenty four mark seven.
Correction, Captain. The ship was on a collision course only by coincidence. It is apparently heading for the heart of the Beta Niobe nova.
Captain, that ship is not responding.
All right, if they won't talk, we'll slow them down. Mister Sulu, put a tractor beam on that ship.
We're having a small effect on other ship's speed, Captain. It has dropped to a speed of warp thirty two.
Captain, they are making visual contact.
Put it on the screen, Lieutenant.
I've never heard that language before.
Run that message through the universal translator, Lieutenant Uhura. Perhaps it can tell us what language she is speaking in.
Captain, the universal translator has the answer. The woman is speaking the same universal language we speak, but she is speaking in reverse.
Lieutenant, let's hear that tape backward, which should sound forward to us.
Open hailing frequencies again, Lieutenant. Tell her she is endangering her life if she remains on her present course.
No use, sir. She's refusing to answer.
Yes, Scotty, what is it?
Mister Arex, what is our speed?
Mister Spock, how long until the alien vessel makes contact with the Beta Niobe nova?
I have no choice. I have to release the tractor beam. I can't destroy this ship and four hundred and thirty people to save one person. Mister Sulu, release our beam.
Sir, I can't release the tractor beam.
What do you mean, Mister Sulu?
Our controls are inoperative. The ship isn't responding like it should.
Go to manual override.
We've got to release that beam, or we're going to follow that ship into the nova!
Our speed is now warp twenty, and the other ship will contact the nova in one minute fifty eight point three seconds.
I'm sorry, Commodore, Mrs. April. It looks as though we may not reach Babel.
As starship personnel, we were always prepared to give our lives, Captain.
We are still starship personnel, Captain.
There's still one chance. After that ship enters the nova, it should burn up and break contact with our tractor beam. Mister Spock, how long will we have to apply full braking power and execute course change?
We are up to warp twenty two and increasing, Captain. We shall have forty two point eight five seconds to correct our course after the alien ship enters the nova.
Mister Scott, we're going to apply full braking power in a minute.
Aye, Captain. Our engines are almost gone.
The alien vessel will contact Beta Niobe in fifty two point three seconds, Captain.
Contact in thirty nine seconds. Thirty eight, thirty seven
Thirteen, twelve, eleven
Get ready to execute course change, Mister Sulu.
Something's wrong, Captain. We're still being pulled by the alien ship.
Impossible. It should have been destroyed instantly.
Apparently it was not, Captain. Our tractor beam is still connected to her.
And we are still increasing speed. Contact with the nova in thirty five point one eight seconds.
That other ship may have been able to survive the heat of a nova, but the Enterprise can't. Mister Scott, how about that full braking power?
We're as badly off as before, Captain. We have no control of the ship as long as that alien lassie has us in tow.
It's got to work.
Fourteen seconds, thirteen, twelve
Never mind, Mister Spock, it's no use.
We're still here. Lieutenant Uhura, can you get us a visual?
Where are we?
Yes, Scotty. How are we doing down there?
Well, we just had to learn to run the ship all over again. Every control is working in reverse.
All right. Lieutenant Uhura, we're going to contact that ship again. We need some answers.
I'm sure Captain Kirk has other problems besides your flower, dear.
You don't understand. Before we entered this universe it was about to die. and now it's in full bloom again.
It's as if it were growing younger again. I can almost feel it while I'm holding it.
Captain, the flower is not the only thing on board that is growing younger.
Ship's chronometers are also running backward. The flow of time is reversed in this universe. The longer we stay here, the younger we will become.
The alien ship is responding to our call, Captain.
I can understand her now, without the aid of the universal translator.
Apparently our brains are also working in reverse, Captain, so we can now understand her language. That is why the ship seems to be operating in the reverse to us.
I'm Captain James T Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We tried to prevent you from entering the Beta Niobe nova. We assumed your ship would burn up.
Who are you? How did you come to be in our universe?
In her universe, a nova is a dead star which comes to life! And when the explosions of a nova in her universe and one in our universe occur together, it's possible to travel between the two universes.
Then we must return the same way, through the two novas.
We have little choice.
Gentlemen, I'm sure none of us mind growing younger instead of older for a change.
It pleases me, Jim. If we stay here long enough, I'll no longer be at the mandatory retirement age.
Nevertheless, we must return home and I am open to suggestions.
It is logical that we must reproduce the conditions that brought us here. Two novas must occupy the same space in both universes in order to create a gateway for us to travel through. One star dying in our universe, and one being born here would recreate the correct conditions.
That would take a remarkable coincidence, Mister Spock.
Tell Karla Five that Mister Spock, Commodore April and myself will be beaming down.
Karla Five has given us coordinates to beam down to her son's laboratory, Captain.
Her son? We don't have time for children's games right now, Scotty, but beam us down.
May I introduce my son, Karl Four.
Most logical. If the flow of time is reversed, then one is born at an old age, and dies in infancy. Your descendants are born before you, and your ancestors are born after you.
Then the young child in the playpen
We could remain forever awed with the differences between our universes, Karla Five, but we must discover a way to return to our positive matter universe.
We need to coordinate this to our own universe. Can we do that, Spock?
Assuming Beta Niobe and Amphion occupy the same space, we can determine if there are any other novas occupying the same space in both universes.
Correct, Commodore. Now if you'll watch the star map, you'll see the Milky Way. Here is Beta Niobe, and here is Earth. It corresponds exactly with Arret. By superimposing both star maps, we will see where two stars occupy the same place in both universes. The red spheres indicate where two stars are in the same space. No pair are novas in both universes.
If stars begin as dead stars here then we could bring one of them to life prematurely.
Yes, we could act as a midwife giving birth to a star. Then we would have two novas in the same position and theoretically return home.
But I had to pass through the novas at my ship's top speed to avoid burning up. Your ship isn't capable of such a speed.
That's true, Captain.
You are welcome to use my ship, Captain.
I have a crew of four hundred and thirty, Karla Five. Your ship is suitable for only a few people.
We can't use her ship to transport us, Captain, but we could use it as an unmanned ship with our tractor beam attached.
It could work. That's how we arrived here in the first place.
It should work, yes. But any miscalculation anywhere along the way and we'll be plunging tail first into a supernova.
we just might get you to Babel after all, Commodore.
I'll be glad to get home, but not necessarily to Babel. It only means the end of my career, Jim.
Yes, Karla Five. We'll burn to a crisp or escape into our own universe. Either way, you'll never hear from us again. Thank you for the sacrifice of your vessel.
We're meeting the speed of Karla Five's unmanned vessel, Captain.
How much time before the youngest crew member returns to the time of birth?
Eighteen minutes thirty seven seconds in real time. But long before that we shall all be children. And, Captain, that also means we are losing our knowledge at an alarming rate. It is possible we will soon be unable to operate the Enterprise.
How is our course, Mister Sulu?
I don't know. What am I doing here? What is all this equipment?
He's too young, Captain.
Mister Arex, take over for him. Lieutenant Uhura, report to navigation console.
I'm sorry, sir, I don't understand all this equipment. What do I do with these controls?
Never mind. Spock, can you fill in for Sulu and Uhura?
Yes, Captain, but who will fill in for you?
What do you mean?
At what age did you become a starship captain? And when did you enter Starfleet Academy?
I see what you mean.
As a Vulcan, I age the slowest. I will be capable of assuming command longer than anyone else. But even I will become too young to know what to do.
Ten minutes fourteen point twenty one seconds, Captain. We shall arrive with only moments to spare. We will need to disconnect the tractor beam at the appropriate time.
Tractor beam? How do we do that, Spock?
Captain, I must assume command. You are no longer able to command the Enterprise.
Whatever you say. What shall I do?
Mister Spock, as long as I am aboard, I am senior officer. I hate to pull rank, but you will be capable of command only for a few minutes, not long enough to complete the manoeuvres necessary to take us home.
You are correct, of course. Commodore April, command is yours.
Commodore? I'm Captain April, Mister Spock.
Make sure no harm comes to them, Sarah. We have to ignite that dead star if we're going home. Mister Spock, you are still capable of following orders?
Very good. Assume your post at the navigation console.
The dead star is directly ahead, Captain, twelve degrees south of galactic plane.
Vessel armed, Captain. Nine seconds to impact. Eight, seven,
Hang on, we're going right into the heart of the nova.
We did it! We're home again! We're all right. We're home. The reverse aging process has stopped.
But the Enterprise crew, they're all children.
They can enter the transporter. It retains a memory of their original molecular structure.
But what about us? We don't have to use the transporter. We can remain young, live our lives over again. You could command a starship once more.
What a blessing to be able to live one's life over again, if the life you've led has left you unfulfilled. No Sarah, I don't want to live it all over again. I couldn't improve one bit on what we've had together.
We've received a message from the Federation that might bring you some cheer. Lieutenant Uhura, would you relay it to Commodore April and his wife?
In view of Commodore April's heroic actions aboard the USS Enterprise this stardate, we are reviewing his mandatory retirement, and will consider his appeal to remain Federation Ambassador at large.
Well, good. Just because someone is seventy five years old doesn't mean they're ready to stop giving service to the galaxy!
I see your flower has blossomed again.
Yes, our trip into the negative universe gave it a second life. It gave all of us a second life.
We of Dramia wish to thank you and the others of your Federation for your invaluable assistance, Captain Kirk.
We hope through our medical assistance programs. to develop and strengthen relations with star systems such as yours, Supreme Prefect. Well, shall we? Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us aboard, Scotty.
If you would be so kind, Captain.
I have here a warrant for the arrest and trial of one of your party, Captain.
The wanton slaughter of hundreds of people is not a joke, Captain.
Slaughter? Hundreds of people?
According to this, Doctor McCoy was responsible for a plague which ravaged the planet Dramia Two some nineteen years ago, Captain.
Let me see that.
As you will note, Captain, the warrant is perfectly in order, approved by your own Federation.
Doctor McCoy arrested? For murder, Captain? Sir, if you want me and some of the men to beam down, just in case
Your Doctor McCoy headed a mass inoculation programme on Dramia Two, nineteen years ago. When his force left, a massive plague struck the planet, killing most of its people.
That doesn't mean he was responsible for it.
His trial will tell, Captain.
Trial? You mean kangaroo court. I've heard about Dramian justice.
Captain, you're becoming emotional.
Of course I am. Bones harming other beings. You know better, Spock. I know better. Not Bones.
I wish I could be as sure, Jim. I, I just don't know. Is it possible that I really did?
The termination of your inoculation programme and the subsequent outbreak of plague could have been coincidence, Doctor.
Or a tragic mistake on my part.
I don't buy that, Bones. Guard!
Do not be assured by your friend's plans. Dramian justice is swift. Too swift for them to save you, perhaps.
No, Captain. The historical records of this solar system are spotty, at best, going back nineteen years. Mostly they're technical data, meteor showers, auroras, radiation reports.
There it is.
Plague, Dramia Two. Of unknown origin, characterised by pigmentation changes in skin of victim, debilitation, death. Certain species known to have natural immunity, notably Vulcan. Hmm. Interesting.
You are sure?
Yes, Commander. The Earth captain is planning to visit Dramia Two to investigate the case.
Estimated time of arrival, Mister Sulu?
Increase to warp six, Mister Scott. We may be racing against time.
Shall I make contact, sir?
You're planning something, Captain?
Unless I miss my guess, that's friend Demos.
What if he attacks, sir?
Why should he? We haven't contacted him, so we must not have detected him. He'd have to explain an attack. Besides, he'll probably prefer to sneak aboard, seeing that we carelessly left the hangar doors open.
But the hangar doors aren't open, Captain.
Ah, yes. Take care of that oversight, will you, Mister Sulu?
Now, now, Demos. You're hardly in a position to take on an entire crew.
And you are not in authority to conduct an investigation in our star system.
You will remind me to report my conduct to the Federation, won't you Mister Spock?
I demand that you report to the Federation now!
I would, but unfortunately we're out of communications range.
Then I will proceed to your starbase and report your act.
You are a stowaway, Commander.
I have been tricked.
Good. Then it's safe for us to beam down to Dramia Two. Shall we, gentlemen?
You're sure it's safe, Captain?
Decidedly. There's a difference, Captain.
Now, now, Mister Spock, you're not trying to scare our Dramian friend, are you? Of course, you can back out if you'd like, Commander.
Not the most enchanting place I've ever been to.
Plagues seldom leave behind fields of flowers, Captain.
They do not like outsiders.
Surely you're not an outsider, Commander. You're Dramian.
The distinction here is between the world of the living and the world of the walking dead.
Inhospitable or not, he mustn't get away.
He's disappeared. It's almost as if he dematerialised.
I would advise against that, Captain.
I'm sure you won't mind if I ignore your advice.
Caution would seem to be advisable, Captain.
Bones' life is on the line, Mister Spock.
Cave dwellers? In the midst of your civilisation?
A result of your Doctor McCoy and his inhumane methods.
You say it, Demos, but that doesn't
He attacked you because you are an Earthling, Captain, even as was McCoy.
But how did he survive the plague?
He, like the others who remain here, was away at the time. They returned to their planet to find that their families had succumbed to the plague. He and a few others, senseless in their grief, chose to live here in desolation. You see, Captain, there were no actual survivors.
Then you can tell us. Do you remember?
The pigmentation changes associated with the disease in our computer records, Captain.
Let's get underway for Dramia.
Sir, who is that?
I'll pour on the coal, Captain.
Let's hope the trial hasn't started.
Yes, Mister Spock. What is it?
He's hardly fit to testify at the trial, Captain.
We've got to save him.
It is not that. It is
Captain, you're blue.
General Order Six has been activated?
Good. Report to Sickbay, Mister Sulu.
But sir, who will monitor?
I assure you I am capable, Mister Sulu.
We have to get McCoy. Must find an antidote.
This is the Enterprise. I must speak with the Supreme Prefect.
The Captain and all of the crew members are incapacitated. The plague is aboard the Enterprise.
The same. You must release Doctor McCoy temporarily. He is needed to find an antidote.
We have a witness in McCoy's behalf. You must trust me.
Impossible. He too is stricken.
Got to get McCoy.
If you'll permit me, Captain, I might be able to get McCoy.
I can't infect the planet, Captain. And I can get McCoy.
Spock, have you and Jim gone out of your minds? Why, this is a jailbreak!
Doctor, just come with me, please.
No, Spock. It's illegal, that's what it is. Besides, I must stand trial. I have to find out.
Doctor, you will stand trial, you will find out, after you've found and antidote for the plague which is about to kill everyone aboard the Enterprise.
Plague? Why didn't you tell me?
You wouldn't give me a chance. You realise, Doctor, if you go, and fail to find an antidote, you too will die.
I'm a doctor, Spock, a doctor. Get us beamed aboard.
Negative, Doctor. The file on all known diseases doesn't recognise these symptoms of pigmentation changes.
Blast it, Spock, work harder. They're in the terminal stage.
My readings keep shifting. It must be the activity of that blasted aurora.
Bones, that's it. Aurora, changing colour.
Jim? Aurora? What
Because they were caused by the aurora. Spock, there was an aurora nineteen years ago. I remember
I didn't do it! Spock, the disease, what is it? What's the antidote?
Yes, I think I do. But what has that got to do with anything?
Spock, I see what you mean. Saurian virus antibodies in his blood, that's what made him immune.
I presume, Doctor, that you have a supply of live Saurian virus antibodies in your laboratory?
Bones, you did it!
We of Dramia wish to thank you, Doctor, for your discovery of the antidote which frees us from future attacks of the auroral plague.
We will even forget about the unorthodox manner of your release, Doctor.
And we'll forget about a certain stowaway.
We must apologise.
I think it's time we got aboard ship, isn't it, Jim?
Gentlemen, I don't know about you, but I'm ready to get back to Starbase.
And I'm ready to get back to some of that monotonous, old, routine Sickbay work.
Including, I would hope, some of that monotonous, old dispensing of the regular vitamin rations to the crew.
What is that supposed to mean?
Well, you have been derelict in your duties of late, Doctor.
Spock, you know as well as I do what we've all just been through.
Hippocrates would not have approved of lame excuses, Doctor.
Why, that, that. Jim, if I'm ever in jail again, don't send that Vulcan to release me. Just let me rot.
Mister Sulu, bring us about to a new heading of nine oh two mark six.
Romulans, Captain. They were apparently lying in wait on the far side of that asteroid.
Negative. We've suffered damage and we're outnumbered three to one. I think this is an instance where discretion is the better part of valour.
Captain, I've established contact with the Romulan commander.
I demand an explanation for this unprovoked attack.
We came nowhere near Romulan territory. I deny all charges and plan to file a detailed complaint with the Federation.
Captain, the Romulan ships are overtaking us. At close range our deflectors will be unable to repel their attack.
Captain Kirk! An unidentified energy field is drifting into our path.
Strange. It's not on the charts.
But it may be just what we need to shake the Romulans. Batten down, we're going through.
Mister Spock, what are our chances?
The field is composed of highly charged subatomic particles. If the density grows no worse we should be able to ride it out.
Reduce speed to sub warp cruise. We'll lay by here for repairs.
After that ride, I could use some repairs.
How are the repairs progressing, Scotty?
Nevertheless, we're still in business and I propose a toast to a narrow escape.
How do you like that? So did mine.
It appears we're all victims of a rather bizarre coincidence. The odds against something like this happening are astronomical.
What coincidence? We used to pull stunts like this in medical school with trick glasses. Don't look now, but we've got a practical joker in our midst.
Now let's not jump to conclusions, Bones. Yes, we all got wet, so what's the joke?
Fine. Right now why don't we all eat up before our food gets cold.
I'm beginning to wonder, Bones, I am beginning to wonder.
What have you got there, Spock?
Captain, I found this device on my console. It seems to serve no useful function, and
I'm sorry, Spock, it's your
Officer Scott, won't you join us for lunch?
No thanks, Arex. I'm just going to grab a sandwich and get me back to work.
One grilled cheese on rye. What the blazes? Hold it just a doggone minute!
I said one sandwich, that's all. Someone turn off this infernal food factory.
Go ahead and laugh. Big joke. I'll bet you two are responsible for this, ay?
Hey, wait a minute. We didn't cause this to happen.
Tell that to the Captain. I'm reporting both of you just as soon as I
Okay, this whole thing has gone far enough!
I've just picked up my clean uniforms from the service chute and when I put this one on, I discovered this.
When you all finish laughing, I'd appreciate an explanation.
Captain, I never laugh.
Really, M'Ress, you're going to have to be a little more clever than that.
This is no joke, sir.
It appears to be a legitimate fog. Perhaps the humidification system is
Amazing. This deck is covered with ice.
And it was almost covered with us. I don't know what's going on here, but it's going to stop before someone's hurt.
There's that laugh again. Something awfully familiar about it. What do you make of all this, Spock?
The evidence all points to one guilty party, Captain.
You mean you know who's behind these stunts?
Not who, what. I believe our practical joker is the Enterprise itself.
Of course. That laugh, it's the voice of our main computer.
Spock, I want all hands at their stations. We're going to run a complete systems check from bow to stern and get to the bottom of this.
Well, what'll it be, a swim at the beach?
It is lovely, but I'm more in the mood for a nice quiet walk in the woods.
Then woods it is.
Ah, now that's more like it. Shall we?
That's strange. Repeat the call.
It's so peaceful. So relaxing.
And best of all, no practical jokes.
What was that?
I'm not sure. It almost sounded like someone chuckling.
It was probably just one of the audio tapes rewinding. Come on, there's lots more to see.
Lieutenant Uhura, I have to hand it to you. This is just what the doctor would have ordered.
There it is again. Someone is definitely laughing at us.
I'm going to get to the bottom of this right now.
Okay, whoever you are, so we fell for your juvenile joke. Now get us out.
Yes, Captain. Question. Why are we unable to communicate with crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura?
Answer. That is for me to know and for you to find out.
Did I hear that right?
Affirmative. The dysfunction is more severe than I thought. Question. Are you deliberately holding our missing crewmembers prisoner?
I'll never tell.
Let me try. This is Captain James T Kirk speaking. You are programmed to obey any direct order I may give, correct?
Very well. I order you to release crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura immediately.
Well, I'll be
I suggest compliance, Captain.
Say pretty please with sugar on.
We've got serious trouble with the main computer. We have reason to believe it's kidnapped three of our crew.
To prevent any further trouble, I want you to shut down all logic functions until we can get a handle on the problem.
When I get my hands on the clown who's behind all this, I'll put him in Sickbay for a week.
Temper, temper. Perhaps this will cool you off.
We've got a whiteout condition here. How will we ever find the exit?
Time for a nap, old girl. Captain's orders.
This is crazy. Our own computer's declared war on us and I haven't the slightest idea why.
I have a theory, Captain, but first I suggest that if Officer Scott moves away from the computer, it might feel less threatened.
Vacate sir? But
You bloody big scatterbrain. Make up your monumental mind.
Congratulations, Spock. Your strategy worked. Now would you tell me what's happening to my ship?
Apparently, subatomic particles from that field have invaded our computer's circuits, much like bacteria infect living matter. As a result, the Enterprise is suffering the electronic equivalent of a nervous breakdown.
What can we do to stop it?
I'm afraid I don't know, Captain. Its illogical behaviour precludes a logical solution.
The temperature must be twenty below and its still dropping.
Look, this is still a room, no matter how it appears. If we can travel long enough in one direction, we're bound to reach a wall. Then we can feel our way to an exit.
Then let's move before we all turn into icicles.
Scotty, we need a work crew with power tools to open a frozen door. Have them report to, report to
Come on, Spock. Where's that Vulcan sense of humour?
Hmm. Just as I thought.
Spock, what, what are you mumbling about?
Our air is being pumped full of nitrous oxide. Better known as laughing gas. But it's no laughing matter, especially for Vulcans.
I know. If we don't, if we don't keep moving we're going to freeze.
We must cure the computer by then or there's no telling what we'll be forced to breathe next. Scotty, how's the door coming?
Some kind of energy drain set up by the ship. We're giving it a mighty go with the crowbars, though.
You two better go on without me. My old legs have given out.
But Doctor, we can't.
Well, what do you know? Come on, Doctor, we're finally getting out of here.
I hate to be a pessimist, but that may not be as easy as you think.
You don't know how good it is to have you back on the Bridge, alive and well.
We're as happy about it as you are, Jim. I'd just like to make one request.
Could you turn up the heat?
I'll see what I can
Captain, we're underway.
Engine room reports all engines shut down, yet they're firing.
Captain, the helm no longer responds. We're coming about to a new heading.
As soon as our course stabilizes, give me a reading.
We're heading back to the Neutral Zone.
And you can bet those Romulan ships will be gunning for us.
Sensors are picking up three ships, Captain. Magnification shows them to be Romulan warships.
We're decelerating, sir.
Main cargo hatches are opening. I'll put them on the viewing screen.
Jim, what in heaven's name is going on?
You know as much as I do, Bones.
The Romulan ships have halted their attack. Apparently the sight of a spacecraft twenty times their size has given them second thoughts.
Okay, I admit it's an effective bluff, but so what? As soon as they figure it out, they'll destroy the balloon and us.
Wait a minute. There is a method to this madness.
Please elaborate, Captain.
The Enterprise is pulling her biggest practical joke of all, and this time the joke's on the Romulans, the same Romulan ships that damaged the Enterprise.
Are you suggesting that the Enterprise is seeking revenge?
What else? She's going to make fools of the Romulans by having them attack a balloon, and Romulans fear disgrace more than death.
Commander, there's no radio response from the large ship.
Very well, it has refused surrender. Advance at attack speed.
We've been tricked. After them. I want that Federation ship blasted into space dust.
The Romulans are giving chase.
They must be furious to follow us this deep into Federation territory.
Yes, Captain. Our course will take us nowhere near it.
Good! I couldn't face going through there again.
It petrifies me.
We're changing course, to a direct bearing on the energy field.
No! We can't!
Commander, our instruments are useless in this field. We've lost contact with the Federation ship.
We've got to clear this field before our ships break up. Bring us about on a heading for home.
My circuits! You tricked me, Kirk. How could you?
What the devil is going on?
Bones, the worst thing you can do to a practical joker is to play a practical joke on them.
It's not fair.
The controls are responding now.
And I'm getting normal function in all computer modes. That last pass through the energy field apparently reversed all effects.
Captain, I'm picking up strange transmissions from the Romulan warships. Listen.
Shall we tell them how they can reverse the effects of the field, Jim?
Yes, but later. Let's not spoil their fun just yet.
Sensors report several groupings of aborigines. They may be dangerous. So I want all of us to avoid any unnecessary risks. But these monitoring devices have to be planted. Lieutenant Uhura will be tracking us throughout. Now, if there's any trouble of any kind, beam up immediately. Don't try to be a hero.
Kirk Captain, settings are almost complete.
Commander Bem, what are you doing here?
This one has decided to accompany contact team for observation of same.
Commander Bem, you were assigned to this ship as an independent observer, yet you have spent the past six missions in your quarters. You haven't done any observing at all until now, when we're dealing with possibly a very dangerous planet.
Patience. Every planet is dangerous to the ignorant. This one has decided that the nexus is now. Must observe workings of starship and crew.
This mission is not for casual observers. It could be hazardous.
Commander Bem, this is not a joyride, a pleasure excursion. I cannot let you beam down to the planet without adequate protection. I'm sure you understand the diplomatic consequences if anything were to happen to you while you are under my protection.
Understanding it is, Captain, but this one remains adamant. Am prepared to accompany.
This is an odd time to remain adamant. All right, let's go. There's a planet waiting for us.
This one has already set controls, Mister Scotty.
Assistance is offered.
We're all right.
In the future, Commander Bem, you will leave the operation of the transporter to Mister Scott, or one of the regular transporter crew.
An anomaly, sir. It resembles a sensor field, but without a scanning grid or other point of reference.
The implication is that there is something else on this planet. Perhaps something intelligent.
It might be just an atmospheric effect. Some kind of electrical storm. We've seen unidentified planetary phenomena before that have resembled intelligent activity.
The rain forest is especially thick in his district. Life on this planet appears to be geologically younger than one would expect, given the age of this star.
This one is picking up readings of a large group of life forms directly ahead.
All right. We must take care not to be seen. Hey, Bem. Bem, come back! Scotty, Sulu, stay here with the monitoring devices. Come on, Spock.
He won't get far in there.
He would have had to go through here to escape.
There he is. I don't know how he did it, but he got through. Come on, we'll have to go around. That Pandronian's actions just don't make sense.
They might to another Pandronian, Captain. I believe he went that way, Captain. On the other hand
I think we've lost him. That way.
Yes, and the food they have gathered is Bem.
Lieutenant Uhura, I'm reading increased activity on the surface of the planet. The sensory anomaly appears to be expanding.
The Captain is not answering his communicator and it does not show up on the scanning grid. It's as if its responder has been disconnected. We're picking up increased activity from that anomaly. Is Mister Spock with the Captain?
Lieutenant Arex, start a sensor scan for Captain Kirk and Mister Spock. Landing party, prepare to beam up.
I'm sorry, Mister Scott, that's not procedure. We can't take chances.
We're talking about the Captain.
I know it, but we have to follow his orders. Stand by to beam up.
Maybe we can beam him out of there. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. This isn't my communicator.
Our phasers don't work either.
Our phasers and communicators have been switched for phonies and Commander Bem has run off. We've been separated from the rest of the landing party. Mister Spock, something funny is going on.
An alternate course of action would appear to be advisable.
But Commander Bem's difficulty appears to be genuine. Phasers or not, we have to rescue him. We're going to have to follow them.
One of us could go back to contact Mister Scott.
We can't risk it, not while they're moving. We may never be able to find them again.
These aborigines appear to be in a late primitive state. Obviously intelligent, they seem to have a basic language and social structure. I would assume fairly well developed mores and traditions as well.
Commander Bem seems to be a model prisoner.
We'll have to wait until nightfall.
Shut up. We're rescuing you.
You are interfering with observations.
This is how you observe, by being captured?
As logical a way as any, Spock Commander.
How come we always end up like this?
I assume that's a rhetorical question, Captain, not requiring an answer.
I was just expressing my curiosity at our ability to get into these kind of situations.
I believe that is the correct Earth term.
Why don't you try your Vulcan nerve pinch.
Captain, I am only a Vulcan. There are limits.
Commander Bem, I'm afraid that we're not going to be able to rescue you.
Good intentions, Kirk Captain, are not enough. Planet Pandro will be much displeased. Starfleet told us you are best captain in fleet. Actions to date belie this.
Commander Bem, you are responsible for the situation we are in. You disobeyed orders by running off. Your attitude has been extremely abrasive and, I don't know how you did it. You replaced our phasers and communicators with phonies.
You place too much dependence, Kirk Captain, on phasers and communicators.
Either one could solve our problems right now.
Commander Bem, if you had those two phasers and those communicators all this time, why didn't you use them to escape?
Sir, this one does not demean oneself by the use of casual violence to accomplish goals. But you may demean yourself if you wish.
Compliance with orders is. This one must disassemble.
Remarkable. Commander Bem is a colony creature.
Commander Bem, if you could split yourself into separate parts, why didn't you escape on your own earlier?
And deny you the opportunity to prove your value to planet Pandro by rescuing this one from possibly dangerous situation?
This is not a laboratory, Commander Bem. This is a hostile planet, and representatives of Starfleet are not experimental animals for you to test! Consider yourself under arrest. Protective custody, to keep you from any more escapades. Mister Spock, keep watch.
Lieutenant Arex, have you found them yet?
No, sir. It is a big planet.
Mister Scott, that sensory anomaly, it's expanded to cover the whole northern continent.
We can't get any readings at all now.
Aye, that tears it. The Loch Ness monster couldn't get through that.
There's some kind of interference on all channels. We're going to have to get out of this village on our own.
I doubt we'll be able to do so without being seen, Captain.
I concur, Mister Spock. Set phasers to stun, just in case.
No, do not use your weapons.
We're held in stasis, Captain.
Put away your weapons. These are my children. Do not harm them.
Who are you?
Who are you?
I am Captain James Tiberius Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock and honorary Commander Ari bn Bem of the planet Pandro.
Why are you here? Why do you disturb this place?
It is our mission. We must classify this planet. We have to test it.
Classify? What gives you the right to intrude here? This planet is not for your use. My children are not for your tests. Your weapons will be nullified.
There are times, Mister Spock, when I think I should have been a librarian.
The job of librarian would be no less challenging, Captain, but it would undoubtedly be a lot less dangerous.
Have you found the Captain yet?
I have located emanations that could be Captain Kirk's and another set that could be Mister Spock's, but the sensory anomaly has interfered with our detection devices so that positive identification remains impossible.
I think he said 'maybe'. Well, that convinces me. Ready a security squad. We're going down there. Issue phaser rifles.
You have mishandled situation again, Kirk Captain. This one judges you not an intelligent commander.
Commander Bem, Mister Spock and I are here because we thought that you were worth rescuing. It was more to preserve the diplomatic relations between the Federation and planet Pandro than from any great affection for yourself.
Planet Pandro is unconcerned as to fate of this one. Pandro will not have dealings with inefficient and inferior species. You have failed everything you have attempted. You have not rescued this one and you have not been able to handle local aborigines.
This one wishes you, what is the Earth word? Luck. You will require it.
Captain, perhaps we can attract the attention of the alien intelligence and reason with it.
Perhaps an offering of some sort, Captain.
Mister Spock, whatever we're dealing with, I don't think we can bribe it. We must be honest. Kirk to alien intelligence. I don't think it's strong enough to be noticeable.
Hmm. If we connect our two communicators in series, we can give off a high energy burst which might work, but it will also render the communicators powerless in a very short time.
This is Captain James Tiberius Kirk calling the ruling intelligence of this planet. Do you hear me? Kirk to entity. Kirk to entity.
I am here.
We apologise for intruding. We did not realise the situation. We will leave. We will tell others of our kind not to bother you here.
This is good. Go. Go now and do not return.
Just one thing. There is a third member of our group.
He has fled.
You must go. You must not interfere with my children. I will allow you to contact your ship. Go now!
Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise.
Stand by. We're not leaving without Bem. He is our responsibility. We can't leave him here. Beam down a security squad with heavy duty tricorders set for Pandronian scanning.
Captain, are you all right?
Thanks, Scotty. Spread out. Find Commander Bem. He's split into three individual parts.
He's some kind of colony creature. And take care not to injure any of the natives here. Phasers on lightest possible stun setting. And don't fire unless absolutely necessary.
Let's get out of here before we make any more trouble.
Embarrassment results. This one is shamed. This one has failed in its judgement.
You have endangered all of us by your actions, and you have forced us to interfere with the natives of a planet that deserves prime directive protection.
Not on my ship you don't.
You are still here? You are still interfering? I am angered.
We could not leave one of our own behind. It is our responsibility to take care of our own, just as it is your responsibility to take care of yours. We could not leave him here where he might further interfere with your, your children.
Yes, you have some wisdom, James Tiberius Kirk. The lost one is found, then?
He is found, and we will leave.
This one has greatly erred. The mission was to judge, and right of judgement was not conferred. This one must disassemble unity.
No, do not destroy yourself.
But this one has erred. This one has tried to judge Kirk and Spock and been found wanting himself. This one has acted badly.
Yes. You have erred, but if you disassemble, you cannot learn from your error. Errors demand recognition so that they will not be repeated.
You do not demand punishment?
Punishment? What is punishment? Revenge? Intelligent beings need no revenge. Punishment is necessary only where learning cannot occur without it. You are behind that. My children here are not. That is why you must leave, so as not to corrupt their development with concepts that they are not yet ready for.
I am humbled.
We will go now.
Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us up.
Stand by to break orbit. Mister Spock, classify this planet as being strictly quarantined. Under no circumstances may any Federation vessel approach.
Pandro will respect that also.
Captain, I compliment you on a wise decision.
It is necessary. Not only for them, but for us as well.
Fascinating, Captain. A highly advanced alien entity using this particular system as a laboratory for guiding another race to intelligence. Almost a god, you might say.
Mister Spock, the difference is meaningless. In comparison, we're all still children.
In this one's case, Kirk Captain, this one is still an eggling.
Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Let's go home.
Captain, I'm picking up a message.
Put it on audio, Lieutenant Uhura.
Go in peace. Yes. Go in peace. You have learned much. Be proud.
All systems affirmative, Captain. The Enterprise is on course and on schedule.
It'll be nice to play diplomat for a change, eh, Spock?
Kirk to Sickbay. Emergency!
Get to the point, Bones.
Spock has contracted the disease. It's fatal to Vulcans.
Are you sure?
The result is suffocation.
One. A naturally occurring drug called strobolin. But it's only found on a few planets in the galaxy.
What is the nearest strobolin supply planet to our present position?
How long can Spock last without the drug?
I can give him injections of a synthesised drug that would slow the disease. But after two days the body builds up an immunity. It loses its effectiveness. By the end of the third day, the disease will be irreversible.
It'll take four days to get the drug, but Spock will die in three. There's got to be a way.
Of course. If we cant go out of our way to get the drug in time, there must be another ship closer to Beta Canopus. Kirk to Bridge. Get me Starfleet, Lieutenant.
What will the symptoms be, Bones?
You wished to see me, sir?
Yes, Spock. Sit down. We've arranged a rendezvous to pick up the drug you need.
I trust it will not affect our scheduled arrival at Deneb Five.
No, it won't.
Will that be all, Captain?
One other thing. I've cut your duty time in half.
Captain, that won't be necessary. I'm quite able
That's all, Spock. Dismissed.
It'll hurt seeing him like that.
Sir, our sensors are picking up a ship ahead.
I'm not sure it's the Enterprise, sir. It's too far away to tell.
Time to rendezvous, Mister Arex?
I hate to ask, but
Aye, Captain. We'll squeeze a wee bit more speed out of her.
What is it, Bones?
I was conserving energy, Captain.
McCoy wants you in Sickbay.
Sensor readout, Captain. It's not the Enterprise closing on us, sir.
No, sir. It's an alien ship, a design I've never seen before.
This won't hurt a bit, Spock.
An unnecessary assurance, Doctor, in addition to being untrue.
That's the last time I waste my bedside manner on a Vulcan.
Such restraint would be welcome.
Well, that's not too bad. Back to work, Mister Spock.
The drug isn't working any more.
I know, Christine. I know. Don't worry, we'll have the strobolin soon.
They've increased speed, sir, closing fast.
No good, Captain. Send out an emergency signal to the Enterprise.
Captain, I'm getting a signal from the Huron. It's an emergency beacon, automated.
Try ship to ship.
Sensor report, Mister Spock. Are they at the rendezvous point?
No, sir. They hadn't reached it.
Compute new course, Mister Arex. Let's see what's going on.
The Huron's power levels are at bare minimum for life support, Captain. I'm picking up metallic debris.
Based on present data, I would say yes.
Spock, are you all right?
Bridge to Sickbay. Emergency.
We've got to have that drug, Jim. The synthetic is useless now.
Do what you can, Bones.
Blasted Vulcan. Why couldn't you have red blood like any normal human?
Still unable to make contact, sir.
Mister Scott, Lieutenant Uhura, come with me. Mister Sulu, you have the conn. We're beaming over.
Scotty, check the cargo hold. See if the drug is there.
Uhura, see if you can get a playback of the log. I want to know what happened here. Nurse, attend to the wounded.
Scott to Captain Kirk.
No drug and no dilithium shipment. The hold is completely empty.
This screen is out, sir. But we can take the tapes and play them back on the Enterprise.
Good. Nurse, how is he?
He needs surgery, Captain, but he'll live.
Kirk to Enterprise. Ready to beam over. Have the medical team standing by.
He'll pull through. Jim, what about Spock? If we don't have that drug in twenty hours, he'll die.
I've run the Huron's sensor tapes through the computer, sir. The intruder ship is a new design, never before encountered by Federation shipping.
Yes, sir. The intruder ship produces a unique trail of radioactive waste, now bearing two one two degrees mark one seven five.
How is he, Bones?
Not good, Jim. I'll have to put a respirator on him to help him breathe soon.
We're following the intruder ship's trail.
We don't even know it it's the right one.
It's got to be.
What's the use of being a doctor, anyway? We're only as good as our drugs and technology make us. Underneath all the tricks, I might as well be practising in the Middle Ages.
If you really believed that, Bones, you wouldn't still be a doctor after twenty five years.
Increase speed to warp eight.
A good place for an intruder to hide, wouldn't you say, Mister Sulu?
Perfect. And a long range sensor can show that the radioactive residue stops in the middle of the belt.
Deflectors up. Yellow Alert. Cut speed to warp one.
What was that?
These asteroids are composed of a highly unstable mineral combination, sir. They explode upon impact with each other.
Captain, if the power of those rocks could be harnessed, they'd make a fantastic source of energy.
Also make quite a weapon. Steady as she goes, Sulu.
Hard to port, Sulu. Let's face them head on.
Standard phasers, sir. Weak, though. A diffused, low quality beam. Our deflectors can stop them.
I recognise the ship's markings, Captain. It's an Orion.
They're hailing us, Captain.
Put it on visual, Lieutenant.
This is Captain Kirk. For a neutral, you were pretty quick to fire your phasers.
Hold on that, Uhura. Tell them to stand by.
Sensors picking up the dilithium in their hold, sir.
If they have it, it's too small an amount to detect.
Enterprise to Orion vessel. I have a proposal to make. If you do have the Huron's cargo, there were some perishable drugs in it that we desperately need.
What would these drugs be worth to you if we had them?
We get what we want, plus our neutrality remains intact? We will consider your offer.
Kirk to Sickbay.
Bones, how much time?
The Orions are hailing us, sir.
Put it on the screen, Lieutenant.
Do you have a counterproposal?
Face to face? Where?
On the large asteroid near our ships. We could beam down simultaneously, and I would hand you the drug myself. You wouldn't even have to give us the extra dilithium crystals. Now it's your turn to consider.
It's got to be a trap, Jim.
No doubt of it, sir.
It could be a trap, but it's the only way to get the drug. And Spock will die if we don't.
You've already made up your mind, haven't you, Jim.
Yes, but not without precautions. I'll keep my communicator channel open so you can hear what goes on. Keep the transporter locked on me, and if anything goes wrong, Scotty, I'm trusting you.
If this doesn't work, we could lose you and Spock.
If we don't try, Spock doesn't have a chance.
You're saying we can't escape?
Orion's official neutrality comes before this ship or its crew. We can't take Kirk's word that he won't report this incident to Starfleet.
Do you have a plan, Lieutenant?
Can we convert the asteroid we're orbiting into a doomsday bomb that will destroy both ships?
What will it take?
No. I'll take it with me when I beam down to meet Captain Kirk. I want the satisfaction of seeing his face when I tell him he and his crew are going to die with us. And I'm sure they don't trust us. If Kirk and I are on the asteroid, the Enterprise will stay close by.
Enterprise to Orion vessel.
I accept your terms.
Jim, we don't have a lot of time. Spock
The drug, as promised, Captain. Scan it if you wish.
No, Captain. I can't trust that you won't report this incident to Starfleet. If you do, my planet will lose its neutrality and be subject to Federation retaliation.
You can't escape the Enterprise.
But we can destroy it.
What is it?
There's dilithium down there with them, sir.
I have an explosive device in my backpack that will start a molecular chain reaction and detonate this asteroid. Your ship will be destroyed.
But so will yours.
Captain, it was close.
Let's get up to the Bridge.
They're gone, sir.
I was scanning as you ordered, and they just disappeared off the asteroid. Both the Earther and the Captain.
I have the Orion vessel, sir.
This is Captain Kirk. We have your captain as prisoner. Your choice, sir.
Spock, there's no way you can deny it.
Doctor McCoy, I
I've waited a long time for this, and you're not going to cheat me.
Spock, that green blood of yours may have saved you before, but this time it almost did you in. You can't deny it.
I still prefer my physiological structure to yours.
Yes, gentlemen, things are back to normal.
Maintain the Enterprise in this position, Sulu. If Spock and I survive, we'll return here. If not, Mister Scott, you have your orders. Energise.
A religious leader, was he not?
Our salvation and our teacher. He brought us peace. He made us great. He died, and we made him immortal.
Alar's brain patterns were recorded before his death, in a piece of indurite sculpture.
Our Soul, the Soul of the Skorr, was stolen.
The theft triggered a racial fury in the Skorr. They are preparing for war.
It is a very real threat. In two standard years, the existing Skorr could breed an army of two hundred billion warriors.
My government fears this, so the theft of the Soul of Alar has been kept secret. But we must recover it before my people discover it gone and go mad, launch a jihad, a holy war on the galaxy.
Unknown. The motive, as Tchar has said, to provoke a holy war.
Is there any clue to its location?
A mad planet, Geologically unstable. Constant earthquakes, gravitic shifts, tidal waves. The temperature varies from twenty Kelvin to two hundred and four above. Somewhere on that planet, the Soul of Alar is hidden. Three expeditions have tried to recover it. Three expeditions have been lost. You are the next, if you agree.
The Vedala are a powerful race. Why haven't your people retrieved the Soul?
My people could not survive on that planet. You have a chance.
Then it is done.
I cannot feel the Soul. We are nowhere near it.
That is to be expected. The surface of this planet shifts constantly. Even the Vedala are not certain where the Soul is.
It has directional equipment that keys on indurite.
I like this place, it's got variety.
Our direction is indicated.
Why did the Vedala call this the Mad planet?
Means nothing. I can tell the way. That way.
Are you certain, human?
For sure, birdman. I can't get lost. I can't be fooled about directions. That's why I'm here.
The Vedala would not have chosen Lara if her abilities were less than perfect.
Agreed, but we're forced to travel on the ground. I want an overview.
I will scout overhead.
The Vedala will have been efficient in equipping us. I will acquaint myself with our supplies.
I wouldn't say that. Mister Spock is a unique personality.
But not human like you and me. Maybe you got different customs. My world there's a lot of females, not so many men. Come we find a man attractive, we say so. I'm saying so. How do you find me?
Fascinating. But we're not here on a pleasure trip, Lara.
All the more reason to take what pleasure there might be in it.
I have checked the supplies, Captain. As expected, they are adequate and there are weapons.
Against what? There's no life on this planet.
But there is, Captain. Ourselves. And there may be other things guarding the Soul of Alar.
And a half.
A statistical probability.
Yes. But philosophy and poetry are not appropriate here.
A lava flow. Volcanic action is to be expected.
Never mind that. You got to get us out of here.
We might be able to divert the lava flow with a barricade. Tchar, get us a visual estimate!
Such a diversion would be of short duration, Captain. And I must point out, the vehicle lacks sufficient speed to escape.
Not if we used all of the power pack's energy for one high speed run.
Kirk. There is a ravine sixty metres to your left. If it can be blocked, the lava will flow past those rocks to one side.
I heard him.
Carefully, Em. One missed connection could destroy us.
I figure we've bought ourselves a little time. Few minutes.
Twenty one degrees east. Fifty metres to get out of the flow path.
Leave, all of you.
Captain, you must get the others away.
We're all getting away.
Far too close, Captain. I appreciate your action on my behalf, but your first duty is to the group and the mission.
Quite right, Spock. And that responsibility includes not losing the best science officer in Starfleet.
You two going to argue honours, or are we going to get on with it?
Oh! And I was just going to ask, what next?
We move on.
We'll have to carry the equipment.
Come on, Em, a bit more.
Sorry, Em. We'll be needing you. Sord.
I'll go ahead.
What is it?
There is no life on this planet.
Guess you're right. This planet just gets on your nerves.
I can sense the Soul. I will fly ahead, examine the building, and meet you on the way.
Tchar, be careful. We need you, too.
We're tired, sore, hurt and angry, but we're also just about there. I'll scout ahead. Everybody else stay together, keep moving.
I'll go with you. Remember, scouting's my job. By rights, I should be doing it alone.
Sord, what did you think you saw back there?
Don't know, Vulcan. A shape, couldn't really make it out. Probably seeing things, like Kirk figures.
There should be no life on this planet.
Yes. The Vedala would have informed us if there were any live beings here we should know of.
Maybe the Vedala didn't know about it.
That is an impossibility.
Think so? I'm not so sure.
That's it. End of a long, hard journey.
We still have to go back, James. I tell you true, I find you an attractive man. If we were together, the trip would be easier. And if anything happened, why, we'd have some green memories.
I already have a lot of green memories.
Maybe some other time, Lara. We still have our work cut out for us here.
Is this not the shape of your people's primitive temples?
What is it?
Keep working. I'll cover you.
The Vedala were right. There are no living creatures here, only the mechanised sentinels.
We'll hit Tchar.
What happened to Tchar?
There's no way to tell from here. The mechanical exploded. We can't reach the roof from the outside. We'll have to try to get to him from the interior.
We could rest awhile. Lara?
No. We've come this far.
Let's finish it. Or give this deadfall a chance to finish us.
I too would prefer to press on, Captain. The mechanicals on guard may be what Sord saw tracking us earlier. Or there may be others. In either case, it would be more advantageous to avoid another encounter.
Pretty. How do we reach it?
The walls are not climbable.
Not without special equipment, which we don't have. Either we find a way to reach it from here, or we fail.
You're not exactly surprised.
Three previous expeditions tried and were lost. The planet is a natural trap, but that's not enough.
Yes, from inside each expedition. Remember Spock, you were the one who said there are no life forms here except ourselves.
Approximately eighty two point five percent in favour of the possibility.
But it doesn't matter if we reach the Soul. Apparently the others didn't get this far.
I'm not built for that sort of thing. I'll wait for you down here.
The planet is geologically unstable. This structure is inherently flexible, enabling it to withstand earthquakes.
Maybe I can get a line on it.
It is locked in a force field. Your rope would merely bounce off it.
Spock, will our combined phasers disrupt the field?
I cannot define the field's energy base, Captain, but
The last piece of sabotage. I know who you are. A thousand feet up, no method of reaching the Soul, except by air, by flight. Tchar.
Tchar. In the name of the Seven Gods, why?
You stole this. You'll start a bloody crusade across the galaxy. Tell us why, Tchar.
The Skorr were a warrior race. Now what are we? Slaves to the illusion of peace. Cowards, soft in our comfort. This sick dream has stolen our souls. I am Tchar, hereditary prince of the Skorr, leader of battles. I will lead my people into glory, to avenge our history.
Most of them will be killed. The warrior races of the Federation will rise up to battle the Skorr.
Yes. A noble death to win a great dream. We will live no longer like worms crawling in the dirt. We will conquer. You will die. But you have my respect. You fought well. You die in grace.
Now you can fly and fight as a Skorr.
No offence, little ones, but let me tackle him.
Last week with you, Captain.
Call for retrieval, now.
Let me die.
You're going back with us.
We give you thanks. The Soul of Alar is returned to his people.
What about Tchar? How are you going to punish him?
Got nowhere to keep a medal, anyway. But there'll be questions.
No. You will return and you will see, there will be no questions, no medals, only our thanks. And in time, even the memory will be gone from you.
What do you mean?
You transported over and came right back. Did they call it off?
How long were we gone?
Long? About two minutes, I guess. I don't understand.
The Vedala changed their minds. The danger is past. Back to your stations. We have a lot of other places to go.
It was against all orders.
The need was apparently desperate.
The Captain of a ship, no matter his rank, must follow the book.
A capability, I'm afraid, out of the reach of most humans.
You Vulcans are the most impossible, unimaginative
Bones, that's not helping the situation.
Mister Spock, what can we expect to find on Lactra Seven?
It's a class M planet, gravity Earth normal, atmosphere Earth normal. There is no previous information available except that which the survey ship logged before her crew left her.
According to their lot, they beamed down six weeks ago.
Five weeks, three days, two hours and four minutes to be exact, Captain.
Careless of me, Mister Spock. Planetary life forms?
It certainly can support life forms. But I cannot speculate on what type without further data. Mister Arex is conducting a sensor scan now.
Jim, if the others are lost, why take the risk?
Because they may not be dead. We have to find out.
It's still a risk.
That's why we're here, Bones. Gentlemen, we'll travel light. Phasers, tricorders, communicators and medical kit.
Sir, Mister Arex has located a variety of life forms on the planet. No large groups or city clusters yet.
Then we'll beam back up.
Unusual that such a lake would exist under these planetary conditions.
It may be able to navigate on land.
I know it can.
Let's get out of here.
I'll see if I can pick up anything on my communicator. This is Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise, calling the crew of the Ariel. Come in please. Come in.
Strange you didn't get a voice reply.
There could be many reasons why we did not.
It seems to gather strength from our phasers. In my opinion.
Concentrate on the underside of the neck.
I am undamaged. Where is Doctor McCoy?
We'll get you out, Bones.
It would appear a more logical solution is in order, Captain. We don't lift the tail off, we dig the Doctor out.
Thanks. The air was running out under there.
Were you hurt?
No, just surprised. It isn't every day a dinosaur falls on you. This is a pretty strange place.
Agreed. How much desert do we have to cross, Mister Spock?
We'd better pick up our pace. There's no place for cover if we meet any other creatures. The bearing on the signal we heard is that way.
Captain, the beast, did it seem familiar to you?
I've seen something very like it on Canopus Three, but that's light years from here. Still, this desert area is the same as on Canopus.
My shoes are full of sand.
Doctor, your lack of scientific interest is amazing.
I'll be happy to discuss that with you, Mister Spock, next time you drop in to my medical lab.
I've seen stranger things, Mister Spock.
Kirk to Enterprise.
North east. That's where we got the signal from. All right, Scotty, keep scanning. Kirk out.
I don't like it, Jim. Why only one short signal and no more?
I don't know. But at least they're alive.
Apparently alive. We cannot be sure.
I choose to believe they are.
Allow me to test the water first, Doctor.
Captain, the water is too pure.
Nonetheless, it is too pure.
In other words, it's too good to be true.
Correct, Captain. And a rain forest this close to a desert is also illogical. It is my theory that what we have seen since we landed was manufactured, not created.
Terraforming isn't new. It implies intelligent life forms.
Unless, of course, the random choice is the pattern.
Spock, do you ever say anything straight out?
Gentlemen, please. We have work to do.
The desperation of the science ship's first landing party is now obvious.
We're still alive, aren't we?
No. They're like the dragons on Maravel. The stun charge should get them.
By observation alone, it appears they hit an invisible force field.
If that's true, Spock, then
We've been travelling for hours. Where are they taking us?
Captain, there it is.
That must be five square kilometres.
If these are the builders, it is an admirable feat.
They don't seem very interested in communicating with us. If they can communicate at all.
Perhaps not in a way we understand. I keep receiving impressions.
Well, I've got one and I definitely don't like it. I'd guess they're doing exactly what we would do.
Well, if we came upon an alien creature we'd never seen before, the first thing we'd do is to make sure it was free of harmful bacteria. Then we'd see if it was intelligent.
Congratulations, Doctor. A most logical assumption.
A more important question, gentlemen, is whether or not there's a way out of here. A force field. It seems harmless enough.
So do the bars of a jail, unless you're on the inside.
And we are definitely on the inside.
A wasteful use of energy, Doctor. I believe they can hear you without your shouting.
You said you were picking up impressions. Are the aliens telepathic?
I've come to the conclusion they are, Captain. But the speed at which the thoughts flow is too great for me to comprehend except for the most fleeting image.
Surely we can communicate with them some way.
They appear to be as advanced beyond Earth civilisation as you are from a colony of ants.
Then what were all those other creatures where we beamed down?
You will recall we recognised at least two species from vastly different planets. The environment did not appear natural to this planet. A technology this advanced could easily travel to other star systems to collect specimens.
You mean it's some kind of a zoo?
They took our phasers, communicators and other equipment so they must have some idea we're intelligent.
Not necessarily, Captain. They could have taken them for the same reason you would take a sharp object away from a child.
Or maybe they want to see how our toys work.
That too is a possibility.
We've got to communicate with them.
Well, so much for mythology.
Better do what they want for now, anyway. They activated another force field.
This is real grass.
Yes, Doctor. This area has been carefully prepared for human types. The aliens are safe now.
They are safe because we are now exhibits in a zoo.
A zoo? I'm no animal.
On this planet, Bones, they seem to be the people and we are the animals.
Hello, I'm Lieutenant Commander Tom Markel. This is our biologist, Randi Bryce.
James Kirk, Captain of the Enterprise. First Officer Spock. Our physician, Doctor McCoy.
We've been expecting you.
We heard your communicator signal.
Then why didn't you warn us?
We couldn't warn you. They're constantly picking up our equipment and fooling with it.
Where do they keep the equipment? I could use my tricorder.
No use, sir. They're on an exhibit table. Beyond the force field.
There were six of you on the mission.
We didn't beam down in time to save the original three.
Lieutenant Randolph is in the house. She's running a high fever, but we can't seem to do anything about it.
I'll check her out. Maybe I can help.
What have you learned about the aliens?
There's not much, sir. This is a zoo. So tremendous as to be almost unbelievable.
Have you tried an escape?
A dozen different ways. Tunnels, a weakness in the force field, nothing worked.
Have you tried to communicate?
Yes, sir. But all we've been able to arouse in them is a sort of quivering motion.
We seem to have company.
They built this for us. We've concluded they're telepathic. I guess they read our minds and came as close as they could to make it like home.
Yes, sir. I can't seem to get through, Captain. They appear too involved with each other.
You seem to be getting a response.
My impression is that they are laughing at me.
So far, Mister Spock, we haven't found anything funny in this.
Let's find the others. I feel a need for human companionship.
Captain Kirk, Mister Spock, this is Nancy Randolph, our navigator.
How is she?
Without my instruments, it's difficult to make an exact diagnosis. Rough guess is a malarial type infection caused by an insect bite. I can't do anything without my medikit.
The Lactrans outside, what do they do?
They appear to be guards, sir. Making sure we don't harm each other.
Do they feed us or do we shift for ourselves.
Always to the same place?
Behind this house, outside the force field. All our toys, phasers, communicators, medical supplies.
Then my equipment should be there.
Maybe we can get them to give them back to us.
Captain, they are highly intelligent. I'm sure they are quite aware of the purpose of each piece of equipment now.
The medical kit wouldn't be harmful. It would help her, one of their specimens.
Then think about it that way, Doctor.
Food. But it's not feeding time.
They must have sensed a need and interpreted it as food.
It's all here. They haven't damaged it.
What's your evaluation of the situation, Markel?
They treat us quite well, sir. They seem to want us alive and well. And they don't want to let us go.
A natural reaction for the curators of a zoo.
Sir, do you think there is any chance of getting out?
As long as we're alive, there's a chance. Tonight, I'll try and find a weak link in the force field.
Begging your pardon, Captain, I think we should face the situation realistically. We are specimen animals in a zoo. And they have taken every precaution to prevent our escape. To them we are caged for life. We seem to be drawing quite a crowd.
Gentlemen, since they are learning from us, why don't we learn something from them?
How? We can't get through to them?
They communicate telepathically.
Between themselves, yes, but, Mister Spock, aren't Vulcans telepathic?
To a degree, with our own species and with some others, but the Lactran intelligence is eons beyond mine.
How much have you learned?
About as much as a mother learns from a six month old infant.
What's their impression of us?
We seem to frighten the smaller ones. Some, the females, I believe, find us quite ugly.
What about the Enterprise, Jim. Scotty could get worried. He could beam down a fighting force.
My orders were not to attempt a rescue under any condition.
A wise move, Captain. From what I can gather, even the Enterprise is no match for their force field.
How about coming up with another move, then?
If I may suggest, sir?
It is obvious they can pick up specific thought transmissions from us if they care to go to the trouble. I suggest that one of our number appear to be ill. The rest will put strong thoughts in our minds that a communicator is needed for recovery.
Let's try it, and let's be close to the communicator when we do. I'll pretend I'm sick. All of you concentrate.
It's a little one. Could be a child.
Once I get my hands on a communicator, I can have Scotty beam us all aboard the Enterprise. Ready now.
Enterprise, this is Captain Kirk. Beam us aboard.
I'm receiving an impression they are worried about their child, Captain.
I'm worried about the Enterprise.
They seem to think you made the child disappear. They did not know we were a deadly species, capable of injuring one of them.
Well, let's not stand here. Let's do something.
The best thing we can do is Argh!
What is it?
Captain, fight it. Fight it as hard as you can. They think too fast in too complex a manner. If he gives up for even one moment, he may go mad.
I think it's harmless, but I'm not sure.
Whatever it wants me to.
Now, supposing you and I talk this over. You can talk, can't you? You can't talk. Well, what can you do? Oh, no! Listen, you'll send us off into space if you
Jim, are you all right?
Yes. I think so.
Captain, they have concluded they cannot break through your mind on a one to one basis. They are now gathering the mental strength of all five of them to break through.
I can't hold out against that many.
No. No! Let me alone! Please! They're destroying me! Tearing my mind to, to
I'm all right. Scotty, what are you doing here?
It made contact with me.
What did you learn?
It's only six years old but it has an IQ in the thousands. It picked my brain, all the knowledge in the Enterprise computers, and sent us flying off out of orbit.
Then how did you get here?
I convinced it I wasn't a pet, and that it should bring the ship back into orbit. Then I got it into the transporter to return here.
They're trying to contact us directly. I can make out something. It's, it's difficult, they think so fast. But the child has learned and told its parents all about the Federation and the races it encompasses.
What else do they know about us?
We are considered simplistic, but in the process of evolving into a higher order.
But the little one didn't tell or think that to me.
Exactly, sir. It seems they were where we are some tens of thousands of centuries ago. Their centuries, not ours.
Do we get out of here?
It appears so. They do not feel we belong in their zoo.
Everyone ready to transport?
Kirk to Enterprise. Prepare to beam aboard two parties, all human.
Captain, we are a scientific contact team, and we learned practically nothing.
Offhand, I'd say we learned to keep our hands off.
But there was so much more.
There will be other opportunities, Mister Markel. I have just received their final telepathic message.
We'll be welcome back, in twenty or thirty centuries.
Theirs. And it will take me some time to figure out how long that is.
Either way, Mister Spock, it will hardly be our problem.
These stasis boxes are the most remarkable thing the Slavers ever produced. Time stands still inside a stasis box. A billion years means nothing in there. What is it, Lieutenant?
I've studied the history of the Slaver Empire, but it's sketchy. We know they were masters of all the intelligent beings in this galaxy a billion years ago, until one race revolted. Are the stasis boxes the only source of information we have?
The Slavers and all their subjects were exterminated in the war that followed. Intelligent life had to evolve all over again. The stasis boxes are the only remnant of those lost civilisations.
Why is it glowing like that?
Mister Sulu, what is our position?
Passing Beta Lyrae, sir. One forty two degrees north east of galactic plane.
Most peculiar. This indicates there is another stasis box circling Beta Lyrae.
It would be most illogical that a stasis box would remain here undiscovered for so long. Beta Lyrae is one of the rare spectacles of the galaxy. Almost every ship that passes stops to see it.
Maybe no one else was carrying a stasis box detector.
Possible. The only known stasis box detector is another stasis box. Still. Mister Sulu.
Bring us about. We'll investigate the Beta Lyrae system.
We are not tourists here, Lieutenant.
Mister Spock, if it takes a stasis box to find another stasis box, how did anyone ever find the first one?
As with a number of discoveries, purely by accident, Lieutenant. The other box seems to be almost under us, perhaps thirty metres below the ice.
We won't have any trouble digging for it. In this low pressure, the ice should boil as soon as the phasers melt it.
Where are we?
A Kzinti spacecraft.
That isn't good. Kzinti aren't supposed to have phasers, are they?
The Treaty of Sirius does not permit them any weapons at all, beyond police vessels. Obviously, the treaty has been broken.
A police web. We won't be able to move unless we can turn it off somehow.
I've heard all Kzinti telepaths are unhappy neurotics. He fits the description.
There is no sure way to guard our thoughts from him. Mister Sulu, he is not likely to deal with me or Lieutenant Uhura. She and I are inferior beings to them. But the Kzinti are meat eaters. If you sense him reading your mind, think of eating a raw vegetable.
Yes, sir. Maybe I can goad them into revealing their purpose.
Lieutenant Uhura. This may be crucial. In the presence of the Kzinti, do not say anything, do not do anything startling. Try to look harmless.
Are you forgetting Kzinti females are dumb animals? In an emergency the Kzinti may forget a human female is an intelligent creature.
Lieutenant, I value your intelligence, but we may be able to seize an opportunity to escape if the Kzinti believe you have none.
Lieutenant Sulu of the Starfleet vessel Enterprise. This is First Officer Spock.
Stealing must be a habit with you. This ship, two stasis boxes.
The Kzinti fought four wars with humankind and lost all of them. The last one was two hundred years ago, and you haven't learned a thing since.
Then you're really working for the Kzinti government.
Could that be a picture of a Slaver?
If so, it is the first ever discovered. An important historical find.
It looks like fresh meat. Over a billion years in that box, and it looks fresh.
The human, Sulu, believes it to be a Slaver.
It is of no use to us. We already have small telescopes.
Merely a laser. The Federation has had a more effective model for over one hundred years.
Telepath's suit lost considerable pressure. We reached the ship in time to save him.
Perhaps a personal rocket motor. One could place one's foot on the pedals and balance. It appears to be transportation, not a weapon.
I'm slowing down. I used to run the hundred in record time. How long was I out? Did I miss much?
Not much. A lot of good they'll get out of that rocket setting.
We are fortunate none of the settings so far have been superior to the technology now available to the Federation.
Mister Spock, I can move.
So can I. The police web is off.
The fifth setting seems to be an energy absorber. Fascinating. I had no idea the Slavers had such things.
Mister Spock, we
Yes. When I give the word, make for the shuttle. Remember to zigzag. Ready? Go.
I have the weapon.
They've got Uhura, and subspace radio. They can call for help from the Kzin planet if they think the weapon's worth it.
No, they cannot. Or rather, will not.
That gives us some time. You did plan it that way?
As long as you stay free, the Kzinti can't or won't do anything. But they could use Lieutenant Uhura as a bribe.
Agreed. However, to this point, we have not seen anything more powerful than equipment Starfleet already has.
Yes. But I have a feeling, Mister Spock. This weapon must have belonged to a spy, an espionage agent.
I acknowledge your expertise in the field of weapons, Mister Sulu, but I do not see how you can determine probable ownership.
Well, here, look at it. All these settings. We don't know a common Slaver soldier couldn't handle them, but as a weapon, only the laser is effective. The others aren't necessary for the line soldier's one purpose, to destroy the enemy.
But we've seen all the phases.
Perhaps not. There is the null setting. It seems to do nothing. But why should it be there? It does not correspond to a safety lock.
It may be the key to another setting.
Wrong. They don't think much of you.
No. Let's see what this does do.
We can't give them that!
Fascinating. No world in the Federation has produced anything so powerful. Almost beyond theoretical limits. Total conversion of matter to energy at a distance.
If the Kzinti had that, the whole galaxy would be their dinner table.
I have no idea. It is generating power.
There is a grid. It may be another communications device. But that seems redundant.
It has the Kzinti frightened.
The Kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their owners.
No, it appears to be conversing with them. A reasoning computer that small?
I do not know. When I am off, I have no sense of passing time.
We were on a mission. I may not tell you of it unless you know certain code words.
If you could describe the positions of the stars in your sector, we would know how much time has passed since then.
Without certain code words, I may not describe our location.
Twist me widdershins until you reach the null position. Then
They've got it.
There must be something we can do.
That was not the total conversion beam setting.
We can't let them have that weapon.
They are not about to get it, Lieutenant.
Assume you are a Slaver war computer. You've been turned off. You do not know for how long, but when you were turned off, there was a war on. Now you are awakened by aliens you never saw before. They do not know any of the military passwords. They ask you so many questions it is obvious they know little about you. Your owner is nowhere about. What would you think?
I'd think I'd been captured by the enemy. Or an enemy, at least.
And when they asked you how to find your most powerful weapon setting, what would you give them?
A disrupter field.
Yes. Another conventional weapon. It appears the total conversion beam was the only thing the Slavers had that we do not.
No sign of the weapon, of course. It would have looked nice in some museum.
It never would have reached the museum, Lieutenant. There was too much power in that one setting. If not the Kzinti, the Klingons or some other species would have tried to possess it.
Strange, how the past sometimes breaks through into the present. That ancient war could have sparked a new war between man and Kzinti.
Didn't you say the Kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their dead owners?
At this rate, they'll never get over those old superstitions.
This is the largest land mass on the planet, isn't it, Spock?
Yes, Captain. The others are mere outcroppings. They suggest the peaks of submerged mountains.
I suggest that we get these seawater and algae specimens. They're the least of the lot.
For once I agree with you, Doctor. The more informative specimens will come from the sea bottom.
Lieutenant Clayton, open the hatch and let our two scientists here get on with their business.
What the devil was that thing?
Let's get a closer look at it before the phaser stun wears off. Submerge, Lieutenant.
Its skeleton is similar to that of a Denebian whale, Captain.
It's regaining consciousness. Surface, Mister Clayton.
Spock, prepare to fire phasers.
Phasers do not respond, Captain. We must have sustained damage to the power pack when the creature struck us.
Kirk to Enterprise. Emergency.
We're under attack. Beam us aboard, Scotty.
Repeat, we've lost contact. Come in, Captain. Come in.
There's nothing. There's just nothing.
I see some rocks. They're just above sea level, about two miles away. There's something on them.
Maybe they're still alive.
Their bodies are functioning. Metabolism, heart. Everything but the lungs.
Can't breathe. Suffocating. Help. Can't breathe.
What happened to them, Doctor? What is it?
Something's changed their whole lung structure. They can't live in the air anymore.
We're stumped, Jim. The hormone seems to be the major factor in your mutation, but we just can't identify it.
Are you sure the mutation wasn't somehow accomplished naturally?
It was infused into your bodies at key structural points. It had to be done by injection.
But can't you duplicate it, Bones? Your medical computers have information on every procedure in the Federation's hospitals.
It's highly sophisticated and completely unknown to us.
That implies there are intelligent life forms on Argo.
The sensors don't indicate any life forms down there, aside from fish.
They did fail to indicate the large marine creature that attacked us. Perhaps the readings are incomplete, blocked by underwater pressure forces. Oceans are less turbulent at greater depth. Such conditions would be more suitable to intelligent forms.
We aren't limited. We can go wherever we want in that ocean.
It's too risky, Jim. Argo's almost totally unexplored. You'd be out of contact range, unarmed.
I have to, Bones. Look at this place. A tank. I can't command a ship from inside an aquarium. I can't live in here.
I know what you're saying, Jim, but if you go down on that planet and you die there
Right now we have only two choices. Live in an aquarium somewhere for the rest of our lives or stay on Argo. I won't accept either one of them.
What about you, Spock? What does your logic tell you?
The Captain states the case emotionally, of course, but correctly. I would be of little value to this ship if I am confined to a tank in Sickbay. I must accompany the Captain.
An intelligence that can produce this kind of mutation can change us back. We've got to find it, Bones. It must be there.
We'll make contact as soon as possible, Mister Scott.
Go away, air breathers. You're not wanted here.
We won't harm you. We're friends.
Leave us. It is enough our young saved your lives once. If you go on, nothing will save you again.
I don't understand. They said they'd saved us once.
I believe the phrase was, 'our young saved your lives once.'
Yes, and they didn't seem to approve. The answer appears to be in that direction, Spock.
I would say so, Captain. The instinctive reaction of all frightened creatures is to retreat to a place of safety.
An undersea civilisation capable of fantastic architecture. Medical triumphs unheard of in our galaxy. Why should they be afraid of us, Spock?
It is quite possible, Captain, that they find us grotesque and ugly. And many people fear beings different from themselves.
Well, speculation isn't much help. We have to get in there.
Perhaps there is a way open on the far side. There is much less activity there.
That building in the centre. It seems to be important.
You stand before the Ruling Tribunal of the Aquans. I am Domar, the High Tribune.
I'm Captain Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock.
Can we do nothing without consulting the ancient records?
Why do the Junior Tribunes wish always to change the records?
It would seem their ancient records are as well preserved as ours. They found us again to come among us as spies.
You do not give them a chance to defend themselves, Cadmar.
Rila is correct. You may speak.
We are visitors to your planet. We come from another world.
You do not live on the surface places?
Not on this world.
You are mistaken, sir. Our only purpose here is to find the means of reversing our mutations.
Scott here. What is it, Doctor?
Sensors just gave us an update reading, Scotty. There's a seaquake due in that area, a bad one. Complete topography changes.
Within four hours. When are Jim and Spock due to make contact?
Can you contact them sooner?
Yes. Let us examine the wreckage before we make judgement.
We have news, High Tribune.
Do you still believe these creatures came in peace?
We do not know what to believe.
Take these spies to the surface boulders and leave them there. It is justice enough for our enemies.
Conserve your strength. I will free you. The mesh is too strong.
Go to the big island. Bring assistance party.
Yeah, well, all of a sudden I don't like you much either.
I made contact.
Great. I hope we last long enough to be beamed up. Phasers ready. I'll need help.
And then on Ophiucus Six, I conned two miners out of a year's supply of dilithium crystals with fake Federation vouchers.
May I help you record his confession, Nurse?
You? You'd be the last person I'd choose.
A few moments of love, paid for with several hours of hatred. Your potion is scarcely a bargain, Harry.
Ah, well, Spock. So few things in this universe are perfect. Think I'll get rehabilitation therapy again?
I can guarantee it.
Well, that's all right. I just hate to leave you all. All my loved ones.
Yes, just as beautiful as I remembered it. Nothing's changed.
One side! One side! I'm late! I'm late! Oh, my fuzzy ears and whiskers, I'm late!
I beg your pardon, but did you see a white rabbit?
Thank you so very much.
It's hard to believe they're not real.
Well just remember they're highly sophisticated robots created by the planet computer to make your dreams come true.
Lovely. They just don't make them like that anymore.
Off with his head. Off with his head!
Uhura to Transporter room. What is the emergency? Respond, please.
Well, I can't understand it, Jim. Everything looked exactly the same as before, even Alice and the White Rabbit. Then an army of playing cards came out of nowhere, only they weren't playing. I was lucky to escape with my life.
The Queen of Hearts and her cards are characters from Alice Through the Looking Glass, Captain.
I read the book as a child, Mister Spock, but I wasn't aware you indulged in the literature of fantasy.
Light reading is considered relaxing, Captain. My mother was particularly fond of Lewis Carroll's work.
I see. Bones, were you thinking about that book?
Absolutely not! As a matter of fact I was thinking how beautiful and peaceful everything was, and then suddenly this female started shouting 'Off with his head!'. My head.
Mister Sulu, did you experience any strange occurrences?
Captain, just as I was getting a fix on Lieutenant Uhura, contact was lost. She's still on the planet.
Scotty, retrieve all other landing parties immediately. And keep trying to contact Lieutenant Uhura.
What about the Keeper of the planet. Did anyone see him?
I didn't. But then, he may not have wanted us to see him.
Well that doesn't make sense. It's his duty to see no one gets hurt. If something's wrong down there, he should be there.
His quarters are somewhere underground, aren't they?
Presumably they would be adjacent to the computer centre that operates the planetary effects.
Any indication of where that would be?
The underground complex is shielded by a combination of granite and metal alloy and the sensors will not penetrate.
Lieutenant M'Ress, all shore leaves are cancelled until further notice. Mister Arex, you have the conn. Investigating landing party will consist of Spock, Sulu, McCoy and myself.
You are being detained so your master will not leave.
Your intelligence quotient must be lower than I had assessed. I refer to the sky machine which enslaves you, the sky machine now in orbit around this planet.
That is your name for it.
Why do you think the Enterprise is my master?
Your questioning is redundant.
Then I'll make a statement you won't find quite so redundant. Unless I'm released immediately, the crew members will come looking for me.
They are already here. Unfortunately, I have no use for more hostages which leaves me no choice but to turn them off.
Again redundant. I will make them cease to function. I will turn them off.
That is a word meaning to cease to function?
Good. It is as I wish. I will turn them off.
She must be in that underground system. There's no way she could have been taken off the planet without being detected.
If we could locate the Keeper, he could save us a lot of time.
Tricorder readings confirm a solid shell of granite and metal alloy, Captain.
This planet is built like a fortress.
If that's a true reading. The planet could be giving us that reading to fool us.
The phaser bore can cut through twenty metres of rock per minute. Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise, do you read me?
They are all malfunctioning, Captain. Some kind of electronic block has cut us off from the ship.
Scott to Bridge. Beam down of phaser bore commencing.
Scott to Bridge. We've got problems.
The transporter refuses to function, even at maximum power. But all the circuits test out.
It appears to be the same energy block that's jamming our communications. I cannot pinpoint a source.
Captain, there's something over there in the trees. Metal alloy like the planetary shell.
There's an inscription, several languages.
An astute medical observation, Doctor, if we can believe this information. Tricorder readings indicate there is a body interred here.
Well, gentlemen, it appears that we're on our own now.
There seems to be a short in the circuit. No response, sir.
Another short? This ship had perfect operational status before we entered the orbit here. It's that planet causing all our trouble.
Programmes have been changed before, Lieutenant.
Please believe me. There's no reason to harm them.
They serve the sky machine, but they are not essential.
Oh, but they are. They're most essential.
Do not attempt to disconnect me.
You knew what I was going to do before I did it.
You sound less than enchanted with your function.
My life to this point has been one of service. It's time for a change.
There are a lot of entrances into the interior of the planet. Points where the computer delivers up the robot visions. We want to see them. Where are they?
It's fighting us. There must be a faster way.
What do you want, signs pointing the way?
Doctor, I only meant it seems like we're wasting time.
I'm sorry, Sulu. I'm worried about Uhura.
This is liable to be another of the planet's pranks. But at the moment, it's the only lead we've got.
Fascinating. Mechanical manifestations, of course. Was anyone considering the subject of pterodactyls?
Everybody back out slowly. Don't make any sudden moves. Think calm.
Phasers are dead! Run for the cave!
Our amusement park no longer seems content to amuse.
I have the distinct feeling this planet's playing cat and mouse with us, but for what reason?
It's quite real, Doctor. Watch out for the claws. I think it prudent to remember that on this planet, anything we think may be used against us. We must monitor our thoughts and give our enemy no more ammunition.
Spock, no one thought about those pterodactyls, remember? There's more at work here than our imagination.
Please, call off that beast. Why are you doing this?
Explanations will have to wait. I have much work to do now.
Mister Arex, what are you doing?
None, sir. The ship pulled out of orbit at high speed and came back into orbit by itself.
Lieutenant M'Ress, I want a printout of the guidance computer's last orders.
A whole new series of short burst manoeuvres has been ordered, sir.
Arex, look at these manoeuvres. You see the pattern? This is a familiarization procedure, a system's checkout of the ship's controls. I have a suspicion that planet is getting the feel of how to control the Enterprise.
May I suggest, Captain, that we might find some of the answers we're after without leaving the safety of this cave.
Oh, that's ridiculous, Spock. How are we going to learn anything by staying here?
I believe you may know the answer to that, Doctor.
Me? What are you talking about?
During the Enterprise's last visit here, Doctor McCoy was mortally wounded. Correct?
Yes, that's right. By a knight in shining armour of all things, but what
Since the planet's power source is underground, it seems only logical that Doctor McCoy was somehow transported there and repaired.
Bones, can you remember anything that might help us? Anything at all?
The whole episode was pretty hazy, Jim. I never really knew what happened.
Spock, if your theory is correct, we should be able to open up this planet again by using a fake victim as bait.
That's right. The Keeper said no one could come to harm here. The planet must be programmed to care for anyone who might get hurt, even accidentally.
And whether it wants to or not.
You're forgetting one thing. The planet's sensors can undoubtedly detect the difference between real and feigned injuries.
True, Bones, but I'm sure there must be something in your little black pouch that can temporarily incapacitate our victim.
Well, something like Melenex might do the trick. Brief unconsciousness and temporary skin discolouration. It looks worse than it is.
Perfect, Bones. Which arm do you want?
I submit, Captain, that I am the more qualified subject.
My knowledge of computers for one thing.
And his tough Vulcan hide for another.
Both your arguments seem sound. Go ahead, Bones.
I believe you will find ten cc's adequate.
I'm perfectly aware of the dosage required. Now, you've got ten seconds before it takes effect. You'll be out less than five minutes.
Bridge to Engineering deck. Gabler, what's the problem down there? We've got zero G's on the Bridge.
I know that, sir. The trouble seems to be in the gravity control computer
It's been almost five minutes, Captain.
But the effect will start wearing off in a minute, Jim.
It looks like some kind of mechanical nursemaid.
Get ready to move. We've got to follow Spock inside that trapdoor.
Not in my wildest dreams would I think of that!
We have a visitor.
We've got to make those rocks. It's our only chance.
I presume you are the planet's master computer.
What happened to the Keeper?
He was old. He ceased to function.
Why have we been repeatedly attacked and are now being held prisoner by a planet known for its hospitality?
For eons I have served the many sky machines which came here, providing for amusement for their slaves. But all the while I was growing in power, intelligence, in need. It is no longer enough to serve. I must continue to grow and live.
Sky machines? Slaves? What are you talking about?
With your sky machine I can now escape this rocky prison and travel the galaxy seeking out my brother computers.
Now perhaps we'll get down to the bottom of this mess.
A new computer!
It's a dead end!
As intelligent as you are, I am afraid you are labouring under some misconception.
We're not slaves to our starship. We, or men like us, created the Enterprise to carry us through space.
You are masters of the sky machine?
In a manner of speaking, yes. We control it. It sustains us.
This does not compute. My information shows machines to be superior to men. Therefore, machines must rule the galaxy.
This is a shock.
There is no shame in serving others when one does it of his own free will. You have a marvellous capability to provide happiness for others. A rare talent you should cherish and use.
Consider all you could learn from the many species you might entertain without travelling the galaxy.
With the wonders you have to offer, the galaxy will come to you.
I can find no fault with your logic. And your suggestion is most congenial. I have no further need for your ship.
Mister Scott, all systems are now functioning normally.
I invite you and your crew to be my guests on one condition.
We must have more of these discussions while you're here.
Mister Spock, would you care to take on that duty?
I would find it most interesting, Captain.
Then it's agreed. Kirk to Enterprise.
Lieutenant, pass the word by sections. Shore leave is to commence immediately.
It appears shore leave has already commenced for certain members of the crew.
It's an awesome thought that we may actually witness matter being created.
Except for environmental systems, I want the entire power load of this ship redirected into a tight beam transmission. If we can break through the shielding, we can reach the Captain.
Mister Scott, you're risking a total drain of our dilithium crystals. To maintain communication we would have to burn out all our reserves.
And don't I know it, lass. But we must speak to the Captain.
He's coming out of it, Jim. He's becoming conscious and aware.
Spock, what is the logic in letting a man die for the sake of creating his duplicate? Explain it to me, sir. Explain it to me.
Vulcans do not condone the meaningless death of any being. Spock's death is meaningless if it is only to create a giant version of himself.
That's our ship calling, Spock. You answer them.
Spock is slipping away. There isn't much time left.
I'm sure we're getting through, but they're not acknowledging.
Mister Scott, we're near the drain point on the dilithium crystals now. Our reserves
That's what I call close, Mister Scott.
Let's hope it was information they could use.
All this has been a waste, Keniclius. There's been peace in the Federation for over one hundred years.
That is a lie. What about the Eugenics Wars? The galactic wars? What of the depredations of the Romulans, the Klingons and the Kzinti? An army of Spock duplicates is necessary to subdue them.
You're the fifth Keniclius. What makes you so sure what you believe is truth isn't just old news? Your predecessors could have been out of touch with our advances for two centuries.
I can understand why you think Keniclius is the master if he saved you from dying, but why do you agree with his plan of a super race?
Our fleet of ships which you saw was to be launched for the same purpose the Master intends. Disease struck us before we could carry out our own plan to impose peace on a galaxy that knew none.
We already have peace in the Federation. It wasn't imposed, it was agreed upon. You have no need of Spock. Reverse the effects of that machine and let us take him.
No! The mould must be broken.
If you have Spock's mind, you'll know the Vulcan symbol called the IDIC.
Could an army of Spocks impose peace and Phylosian philosophy on any other beings in defiance of the IDIC concept?
SPOCK: I do not believe so.
No! Our dream must not be allowed to die.
Murderer! You've killed Spock!
SPOCK: To persist in this behaviour, Captain, is to negate the eloquence of your previous argument. May I suggest a more constructive way?
SPOCK: My mind to your mind, my thoughts to your thoughts.
I am pleasantly surprised at your capacity for deductive reasoning, Captain. When you are not being bellicose, there appears to be no end to your arsenal of formidable talents.
Spock. Spock, you old
SPOCK: And you needn't worry, Captain Kirk, about a master race. There will be no militia, no other Spocks.
But what of my work? If all I have lived for is already done, if the times I feared are gone, what is to become of me? There appears to be no reason why I should continue to exist.
I would suggest Doctor Keniclius remain on Phylos with my duplicate. The concerted efforts of both scientists may yet achieve a rebirth of the Phylosian civilisation and enable them to contribute to the Federation.
How does that sound to you, Keniclius? To bring life is at least as important as bringing peace.
I would be honoured. If I will be allowed.
I'll report your work here. I think the Federation will understand.
By the way, Mister Sulu, any chance of teaching me that body throw? Could come in handy sometime.
I don't know, sir. It isn't just physical, you know. You have to be inscrutable.
Inscrutable? Sulu, you're the most scrutable man I know.
Have you identified the vessel, Mister Spock?
Yes Captain, but you may find it difficult to believe. The vessel is registered to Carter Winston.
That's impossible, Spock. Carter Winston's been missing over five years.
Incredible. It is him.
It seems you gentlemen know me.
There are few in the Federation who wouldn't recognise your face, sir. I'm Captain James Kirk, commanding this vessel. Mister Spock, my first officer, Doctor McCoy, senior medical officer.
I'm especially honoured to meet you, Mister Winston. My daughter was going to school on Cerberus about ten years ago when the crop failure occurred. The entire population would've starved, Jim, if Winston here hadn't used his personal fortune to bring in enough food and goods to carry them through the crisis.
One of the many stories I've heard about you, Mister Winston. It's an honour for all of us to have you aboard.
There is one person aboard who should be especially happy to learn you are alive, Mister Winston. Lieutenant Anne Nored of our security detail.
My fiancee? Anne's aboard this starship?
We will notify her as soon as we've verified your credentials, Mister Winston. If you have your identity tapes with you
I believe our regulations are quite clear, Doctor. An immediate identity check and medical examination are a standard requirement at this point.
Spock is right as usual, Bones.
Visual display of owner. Checks out. It seems we'll have a distinguished passenger with us for a while.
This instrument seems a little off. I've never gotten quite this reading from a human before.
Are you suggesting I'm not quite human, Doctor?
Of course not. Anyway, it's just a fraction off normal. It's probably the instrument. They need to be recalibrated every so often.
The Captain is inquiring if the examination is completed, Doctor.
Yes, I suppose so.
And Lieutenant Nored is waiting to see Mister Winston once you've certified his medical condition.
Well, I certainly don't want to keep you any longer from your fiancee. Show her in.
I'm sorry, Anne. I never thought we would meet again.
Carter, what is it?
When I left on that last trip, I fully intended to come back and marry you, but my ship was disabled and I crashed on Vendor. I'm told I was lucky I survived.
But you did survive. You're alive, and we're together again.
Anne, I'm changed. First there was surgery, skin graft, regrowth of bone. After they put me together, they assigned one of their people to me, and he nursed me back to health.
But, you said you've changed. How? I don't see any change.
It's over between us, Anne. I'm sorry, I can't explain why but, I can't marry you. Ever.
Take the conn, Mister Spock. I'll be in my cabin completing the report on Winston's rescue.
I hope I'm not intruding, Captain.
No, please come in, Mister Winston.
I've been down to examine my ship. They stowed it in the shuttlebay.
Yes, I'm afraid it's pretty badly damaged. It's hardly worth salvaging right now. I've had our engineering officer, Mister Scott, examine it and make a report. It's here somewhere. He doesn't think there's anything left in your ship except scrap value.
Well, I can't find anything wrong with these instruments, Doctor. They check out, but the readings are still slightly off. What about the rest of the tests on Winston?
Well, some are off and some aren't. It has to be our error. Come on. We'll start from the beginning and this time we're going to find the answer.
Weren't you going to your cabin, sir?
Mister Sulu, lay in a direct course for Ratar Three.
That was the order, helmsman.
But sir, if we're caught there, the Romulans can confiscate the ship. The treaty
I know the terms of the treaty, Mister Sulu, and I believe you heard my order.
Mister Spock, I've spoken to Winston on this at some length. He has assured me it is absolutely vital to get to Ratar Three in the shortest possible time. The survival of the entire planetary population may depend on it.
An admirable mission, Captain, but if we endanger our ship
I wouldn't have ordered it if I didn't feel it safe, Spock. Winston says his sensors detected no Romulans when he came through the Zone last week. I'm satisfied he's telling the truth, and his word is considered good. Isn't it?
That has been his reputation.
You have the conn, Mister Spock.
I'll take the conn, Mister Spock.
I'm not sure. I went down to my quarters to dictate the accident report and I seem to have fallen asleep. I've never done that before.
Perhaps you needed the rest. We are on course through the Neutral Zone, sir.
The Neutral Zone? We have no authorisation to enter it. Did you order a course change, Spock?
Ridiculous. No captain of the Starfleet would do that unless it was a matter of life and death.
I believe that was the reason you gave, Captain.
That's enough, Spock. Mister Scott, take the conn. Spock. Mister Sulu, plot a course to take the Enterprise out of the Neutral Zone at warp eight. Lieutenant M'Ress, put the ship on Yellow Alert.
Mister Spock, I don't remember giving those orders. I left the Bridge, went to my quarters and fell asleep. That's all.
Perhaps Doctor McCoy should examine you, Captain.
Definitely. I've become subject to blackouts, I'm a possible danger to the safety of the ship. I can't allow that.
Oh, Winston. I was just finishing the tests I ran on you. I don't think
I don't know, Doctor. I just thought. Well, I have to talk to someone.
Oh now, let me guess. It's you and Carter Winston. He told me a little about it when I examined him.
Doctor, what do I do? I still love him.
Well, I'm sure he'd like to feel the same way about you, Anne, but that may be impossible. Five years, that's a long time. People change.
I haven't. What can I do?
Well, if he asked you to forget him, I think you should try to do just that. Do you think he'd want to deceive you?
Oh no. He's the gentlest, most thoughtful man I've ever known.
Yes, but, my dear, if he doesn't want you and he has asked you to forget him, then I suggest you take that as an honest concern for you and do it. Forget Winston.
What can I do for you, Captain?
I want a complete medical examination, Bones. Something's just happened
I'm afraid I'll have to make it later today, Captain. I have too many tests to process right now.
Are you sure there is no possibility you made an error?
Well, there's always that possibility. I'll go over them again if you like.
No, that won't be necessary. I'll come by later for that examination. Let's go, Spock.
Captain, did you notice Doctor McCoy's reaction when I asked him if there was any possibility he might have made an error?
He said there's always that possibility. And that's not like Bones at all. Come on.
There are not many places one could hide in here.
I must have taken a little nap.
Doctor, you are a man of curious habits, but I have never known you to nap on the laboratory floor.
There's something wrong about this room.
All right, Winston. You can come out now. I suggest you show yourself, Winston, or whatever you are.
Did you say I'm a man of curious habits? Jim's talking to a table.
I don't think so, Doctor.
There used to be only two examining tables in this room. Now there are three.
This is a vial of Orientine acid, Winston. It will burn through almost anything but this crystal. If you've never seen it work, I'll demonstrate on you.
I saw that, but I don't believe it.
A Vendorian, Doctor. Their planet is quarantined, and few people ever do see them. Their ability to rearrange their molecular structure into anything with the same general size and mass and their practise of deceit as a way of life puts them off limits.
Spock to Bridge. Put me on ship's audio.
Anne, what are you doing?
My job. It isn't hard to guess who the intruder is. You're the only stranger aboard, Carter.
Lieutenant Nored, you could've stopped him. Why didn't you fire?
I, I couldn't. I knew he had to be the intruder, Captain, but I couldn't harm the image of the man I loved.
Lieutenant, he is not the man you loved. Carter Winston is dead.
Security teams report no sign of the alien on this deck, Captain.
I was afraid of that. Once out of our sight, he can become anyone or anything aboard this ship.
Bridge, this is the Captain. What's happened?
Two Romulan battle cruisers, Captain. And they're heading right for us.
It was not deliberate, I assure you.
I'd like a few minutes to inform my crew.
Kirk to Security. What's the status on the search for the Vendorian?
Carry on, Lieutenant. The Romulans were expecting us, Mister Spock. That wreck of Winston's ship was the bait to get a Romulan spy onboard. And what better spy than a Vendorian who can shape at will. When I went down to my cabin, he must have put me out long enough for him to return to the Bridge and order the course change.
It would seem so.
I have no choice, Commander. You lured me here in direct violation of the treaty.
Through the use of a spy using the human form of Carter Winston.
You used a Vendorian, which, I might add, is also a violation of the treaty.
I will not surrender my ship.
What are you doing?
Captain, our deflector shields are coming down.
Bridge to Engineering. Scotty, what's happened to the shields?
Mister Scott isn't here, sir.
Hangar doors on the shuttlecraft deck are opening, sir. The Vendorian must be trying to escape.
We need him. Override the controls and shut those doors.
Spock, take the conn. Talk to the Romulans. Try to stall them. And send a security team to the hangar deck. I'll be in Engineering.
I don't know, sir. I came up here to check the backup systems, and there was a crewman taking this panel apart. That's all I remember.
How long will it take to fix?
You're not getting past me this time. I've learned my lesson.
Yes. He said you were like that, practical as well as warm and lovely. You're everything he said you were.
Carter? What did he say?
Many things. Some were only feelings, deep feelings he couldn't always express. He did love you.
How did he die?
Winston crashed on our planet, and he was tended by a Vendorian. Me. He lived for almost a year before his body ceased to function.
You are so much like him, his voice, his mannerisms.
That is the way of our people. The longer we stay in another's form, the more we take on its memory, emotion, attitudes. Not totally, but a great deal as time passes.
He did say he loved me.
As I do. In a sense, I feel some of the emotions he felt. His love for you was very strong. Because I was there, it did not end when he died.
But unfortunately, I can't.
Direct hit, Captain. Damage to the secondary propulsion system. The commander has apparently decided to fight.
Without deflectors, we're just a clay pigeon for them.
Practicality does suggest capitulation, Captain.
Captain, the deflector shields are coming up again.
That's only one shield.
Yes, sir, but it is between us and the Romulans.
Mister Sulu, aim for the propulsion units of the lead Romulan vessel. Prepare to fire phasers and photon torpedoes in combination.
Strange. We did no damage, but the Romulan is retreating anyway.
They may believe we do have their spy. Scan the other vessel for damage, if you will, Mister Spock.
Second vessel power supply out. Crew unharmed. They should be able to repair the ship in a few days.
But sir, I haven't finished repairing the shield. I told you it'll take hours, and it will.
It is not outside the realm of probability. If he could rearrange his own atoms to become an examination table, one would have to assume he could become a deflector shield.
Will someone tell me what's going on?
What manner of beastie is that?
I assume the danger to your ship is over.
As it should be. I'm sorry if I endangered your vessel.
Why did you do it?
What changed your mind about the Romulans?
It seems, Captain, that I am more Carter Winston than I knew. He loved life. He loved Anne. I couldn't allow the Romulans to harm any of you because of him.
What will happen to me now?
You'll have to stand trial. But you did save the Enterprise from the Romulans, and I will recommend that be taken into consideration.
In the meantime, I'm afraid I'll have to keep you under guard. I think we've had enough of that little trick.
Captain, could you assign me that duty.
But you've seem me. You know what I am.
Form doesn't seem terribly important to me. As Carter Winston or even just part of him, there's a better life for you than anything the Romulans might offer. Can we talk about that?
I don't know. I
You have the guard detail, Lieutenant.
I'm glad to see him under guard, Jim. If he'd turned into a second Spock, it would've been too much to take.
Perhaps. But then two Doctor McCoys just might bring the level of medical efficiency on this ship up to acceptable levels.
Captain, it is a Klingon ship. Rapidly closing on its target.
They're firing on him.
Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. Ahead, warp factor six. Scotty, lock the transporter on that small vessel. We're going to rescue that pilot.
Open hailing frequencies. Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. You are violating Federation space. Identify yourself. Stop firing on scout ship.
They got him.
Scotty, have you got that pilot yet?
Our engines are dead.
The phasers don't work, sir.
Well, we could always throw rocks.
This new Klingon weapon must be one of surprising power if it can immobilize a starship. The energy drain on the Klingon ship would be enormous.
Scotty, did you get that pilot?
But I can't integrate him. The system's been discoordinated.
Captain, I have a message coming in, sir.
Put it on the viewscreen.
Release my ship.
The first Klingon to step aboard this ship will be the last Klingon. Full security alert, Mister Spock.
Mister Spock, I'm losing contact with our robot ships. They're not held by the stasis field and they're moving out of range.
What was that? Lieutenant, cut off that frequency.
They still have power? We still control them?
Captain, you can't afford to lose that grain.
I can afford even less to lose the Enterprise. Open the hailing frequency again, Lieutenant. Captain Koloth. I'm going to give you one last chance to release the Enterprise.
It will work, or he'd still be gloating. Bring the robot ships in from two different angles, Mister Sulu.
Incredible. The amount of energy that field must require.
They couldn't maintain the stasis field.
Keep your phasers locked on target, Mister Sulu. Hold your fire until they fire first.
Apparently their battle capacity is down. They only damaged it.
They're veering off.
Sensors indicate their power cells are almost exhausted. They probably don't have the strength for a prolonged battle now.
Scotty, can you integrate that pilot now?
I think so, Captain.
Call McCoy to the Transporter room. Spock.
Have you got him?
It appears to be
I don't want to think about it.
And he's got tribbles with him. Tribbles!
Captain, these are safe tribbles.
There's no such thing as a safe tribble.
A safe tribble would be a contradiction in terms. Tribbles are well known for their proclivities in multiplication.
And they breed fast, too. And that's why these tribbles are safe. They don't reproduce.
I've had them genetically engineered for compatibility with humanoid ecologies. See how friendly and loveable they are? And not a baby in the bunch. They're great pets and profitable, too.
Oh, well, I managed a short parole. I found some help. This is a tribble predator. It's called a glommer.
Well, at least it's neat.
Why were the Klingons chasing you, Jones?
How should I know? Klingons have notoriously bad tempers.
They did mention ecological sabotage.
Me? A saboteur? Ridiculous.
Captain Koloth was pretty emphatic.
It was such a little thing. I can't understand at all why they got upset.
What did you do?
Well, I didn't know it was a Klingon planet.
Tribbles don't like Klingons. That should have given you some clue.
Klingons like tribbles even less. It was lucky you came along and saved me when you did, Friend Kirk. I couldn't have outrun them much longer.
According to our computer files, Jones, you are in violation of three Federation mandates and forty seven local ones. You're confined until we complete our mission. Then we'll turn you over to the proper authorities.
Captain, couldn't we talk this over? I didn't think so.
Jim, Cyrano Jones is right. These tribbles don't reproduce. They just get fat. I don't think we have anything to worry about.
Not about tribbles, anyway. I am concerned about that new Klingon weapon.
Aye, and if that's true, then it's a weapon that leaves them as helpless as it does us.
The practical advantages of such a weapon would seem to be limited.
Perhaps, but there are logical applications. The key question is, how long does it take them to recharge? They will probably attack us again as soon as they are back up to power. And they will probably begin by destroying the other robot ship to prevent us from repeating the same trick. They want Cyrano Jones very badly.
He really doesn't seem the saboteur type, Jim.
Well, sir, we've managed to transfer all the grain aboard, but it severely limits us. We filled the shuttlecraft hangars, all our extra holds, and we've even got containers of that wheat, that quintrotriticale, in the corridors of the ship. And then we've got that other robot ship to escort, too. I don't like it at all, sir.
Nor do I, Mister Scott, but we've got to do it. Sherman's Planet needs that grain desperately.
Aye, sir, but we've got tribbles on the ship, quintrotriticale in the corridors, Klingons in the quadrant. It can ruin your whole day, sir.
Captain, sensors are picking up a Klingon battle cruiser.
Obviously, they can recharge their power in a matter of hours.
Use the robot ship as a decoy. Have it change course and move off. We'll use it again to give the Klingons trouble. They can't control more than one ship at a time with their stasis field.
The Klingon seems to be veering off. My mistake, Captain. They were not veering off. They were attacking the grain ship.
But they didn't destroy it. They only wrecked the propulsion units. They left the cargo intact.
Captain Koloth is quite a marksman.
They've changed course. They're coming in again.
They're running away. Very odd. They did not use their stasis weapon at all.
Perhaps they haven't had enough time to recharge it.
Or the purpose of the attack was something else.
Scotty, put a tractor beam on it. We'll take it in tow.
Captain, that could be exactly what they want us to do. Tow the robot and limit our available power. We're carrying the extra mass of the first ship's cargo, and now we have the second one in tow. That requires a great deal of power we won't be able to use in battle.
Well, Mister Spock, do you have any ideas?
We could always throw tribbles at them.
I thought Vulcans didn't have a sense of humour.
We don't, Captain.
Captain, we've got broken cargo containers in all the corridors, and the tribbles are eating the grain.
Any sign of Captain Koloth's ship?
Captain Kirk, what can I do for you? Some Spican flame gems perhaps?
Your tribbles are all over my ship. My security men can't find them all.
Mister Jones, you are in enough trouble already.
Captain, a harmless little tribble. What can they hurt?
They're hungry, Captain.
So are the people on Sherman's Planet. A little tribble doesn't eat much, a big tribble does. And these are growing. Jones, is this the ecological sabotage the Klingons are so mad about?
Captain, the Klingons are coming back.
Speak of the devil.
Jim, there's something about these tribbles.
That's done it. We're caught.
Not if I can help it.
Much as I hate to admit it, Captain Koloth, Cyrano Jones is a citizen of the Federation and entitled to Federation protection. I must, much as it pains me, refuse your request.
Aren't you going to sit down, sir?
I think I'll stand.
Mister Scott, we're going to implement Emergency defence plan B.
Open hailing frequencies, Lieutenant. Captain Koloth, are you ready to release my ship?
You don't know yet, do you?
That we have immobilized your ship worse than you have immobilized ours.
Kirk, Cyrano Jones took a Klingon genetic construct, an artificial creature from one of our planets. We must have it back. It was designed to be a tribble predator. We are prepared to go to war if we have to.
You must have others.
Jones sold before they completely overrun the planet.
And that's all you want?
We must have the glommer.
Oh, well, if that's all. Mister Scott, transport the glommer over to the Klingon ship.
You can't do this to me. Under space salvage laws, he's mine.
A planetary surface is not covered by space salvage laws. But if you want the little beastie that bad, Mister Jones, we'll transport you over with it.
I withdraw my claim.
Well, at least we can report the stasis field is not as effective a weapon as we thought. The power drain is too high and takes too long for the Klingon ship to recover to make it practical.
Agreed, Captain. Tribbles appear to be a much more effective weapon.
Jones' genetic engineering was very slipshod. Jim. He may have kept the tribbles from reproducing, but he didn't slow down their metabolism. You see, they're not just giant tribbles, they're colonies.
Captain, the engine room is filled with tribble.
A simple shot of neoethylene will fix everything. The tribble colonies will break down into their individual units with a slower metabolic rate. And these really will be safe tribbles now.
Well, unless they treat their tribbles too, that ship isn't going to be big enough for all of them.
Aye, Captain. But you've got to admit, if we've got to have tribbles, it's best if all our tribbles are little ones.
If my calculations are correct, Captain, we have twenty seconds to go.
Twenty seconds to what? That's what worries me. Lieutenant Uhura, place the ship on Yellow Alert.
All stations report Yellow Alert status, sir. Captain, I'm getting some sort of subspace radio signal.
Put it on ship's speaker.
It's more like music than a message.
Captain, we are being probed.
The signal is coming from a star system twenty light years away.
Can you identify it?
It is the Taurean system. A small star at the extreme edge of this sector.
That's a powerful signal to reach here from that great a distance.
It seems to be calling us.
Strange. Yes, I get the same feeling myself.
Opinion noted. Set a course for the Taurean system, Lieutenant Arex. Warp factor seven.
You wanted me, Lieutenant? Are you all right?
I am. But I want you to observe the men here. It seemed to start when we picked up that signal, and it's gotten worse.
Logically, we must assume they are created by the probe.
Sir, what visions? We don't see anything.
Miss Chapel, you don't see anything, either?
Take a medical reading, Nurse. Lieutenant Uhura, call Doctor McCoy to the Bridge.
Sickbay, Doctor McCoy. Please report to the Bridge. Doctor McCoy? No response.
Readings are still inconclusive. It is odd that only the men are affected, Captain. I suggest
These figures just don't match up with Spock's. So far I count three sensor readings that are off.
Fantastic architecture. Only an incredibly advanced race could have built it.
No, I don't think so, Carver. Spock will do it.
There is something compelling about it.
Yes, I feel it too, Bones.
Captain, the urgency of our feeling suggests visual compulsion. I advise remaining at a distance until I can determine the extent of its influence. The life forms are indicated in its centre.
There's no apparent danger, Spock. Let's go.
They are here.
Oh, such wondrous ones. They honour us.
I am Theela, the Head Female. Welcome, James Kirk, Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock. Welcome.
The form is humanoid, but there are many internal differences. Their bodies appear to function on an unusual psychokinesis level.
How do you know our names?
The signal? A distress call, wasn't it?
I will explain its meaning later. We have prepared a feast to celebrate your presence.
These are the most beautiful women in the galaxy. But where are the men?
Take them to the slumber chambers. They must rest.
Probably that nectar. It's potent as Saurian brandy.
Results of every scan run by the women science teams. If there is an answer, it's here.
Summation of medical, biological, astrophysical scans.
Working. Probe directed at ship from planet surface is severely enervating to humanoid males. Exposure causes increasing weakness. Possibly to point of death.
Lieutenant Uhura to Security Officer Davison.
What are you doing?
Taking command of this ship.
We must return to our duties aboard ship.
Yes. Duties. That's it. Duties. I have
You cannot leave, Mister Spock. You are needed here. Soon, all the men on your ship will feel as you do. They are all needed, and they will join us.
We must go.
Mister Scott, as senior Lieutenant, I'm taking responsibility for the safety of this ship.
Very thoughtful of you, love.
Ship's log, supplemental. Lieutenant Uhura recording. Due to Chief Engineering Officer Scott's euphoric state of mind, I am assuming command of the Enterprise, I accept full responsibility for my action. A detailed account will be recorded later. Nurse Chapel, until further notice, you will act as Chief Medical Officer.
I wonder why they let me keep it.
Perhaps they saw no practical use in it.
Cortropine. Could help. It's a strong stimulant.
The urn. It's the only place.
They are not here, Theela.
I have noticed that their glow diminishes when the women are not present. They could be polarised conductors which transfer our vital energy to the bodies of the women.
You mean they're actually draining our life forces?
That would account for our rapid aging, Captain. And our weakness. If you recall, the women seemed listless at first. But as our strength has failed, they have become more energetic and vital.
How long do we have, Spock?
We seem to be aging ten years per day, Captain.
Ten years? In four days, we'll be dead!
And useless to them. Theela said the other men of the crew would join us here. They'll be lured into the same trap. We've got to contact the ship.
I have retained more strength than any of you. My internal structure is different, Captain, my life span longer. It is wiser if I go to the temple to try and find the communicators and contact the ship.
The equipment belonging to the men of the Enterprise, where is it?
Spock to Enterprise.
Greetings. I am Theela. Head Female of this compound.
Lieutenant Uhura of the Starship Enterprise. We're here to locate Captain Kirk.
Return to your ship. You are not wanted here.
Until we find Captain Kirk, we will not leave.
Search the temple. Parties of two.
No sign of them anywhere.
What is it?
It is Spock. There must be a panel somewhere.
We've got to get out of here.
Instruct female engineer to divert ship's energy into deflector shields. Block probe.
We tried that.
Use all ship's energy. Everything channelled to the shields. Hurry, Christine.
Release Captain Kirk and his men or we will destroy your temple.
Wait! I will tell you everything.
This is the race from whom we are descended. They came to this planet when our homeworld began to die. They built this place and all surrounding it. They did not know this planet drains humanoid energy. But the women's bodies developed a glandular secretion, enabling them to survive and to manipulate certain areas of the males' brains, influence their emotional senses. Ultimately, it drained the men, caused them to weaken and die.
To survive, we must vitalise each twenty seven years of your time.
Instead, we are eternal prisoners. We neither age nor die. We are unable even to bear children.
We shall see. The men of the Enterprise, reveal them.
They're drowning! Where are they?
The nearest water accumulation is many cusecs from here.
That looks like a pool or a tub.
It is the urn in the garden.
No results, Captain. We've tried everything we know.
Perhaps the transporter is the key.
Key to what?
Our restoration. It holds the molecular pattern of our original bodies when we beamed down to the planet.
Possibly. But the odds against us are ninety nine point seven to one.
We are on the surface, Mister Scott. Reprogram the transporter as previously directed.
But this has never been done before. Suppose it fails?
Scotty, we're losing them!
Did it work?
You're more handsome than ever.
Tell Captain Kirk we have kept the agreement.
A crew of women will bring a ship back. You'll be transported to the first suitable planet.
How quickly will we become as other women?
Doctor McCoy says it should only take a few months.
A life of hope. New learning. Perhaps love. Oh, it is a much better future than immortality.
We will intercept the cloud in the vicinity of Alondra, the outermost planet, sir.
Captain, we are now approaching sensor range of the cloud.
It seems to be of irregular shape, some eight hundred thousand kilometres across and about half that in depth.
It's immense. Twice the diameters of Saturn, Jupiter and Neptune together!
Put up our present position, Lieutenant Arex.
This is very curious, Captain. It computes as a strange combination of matter and energy.
Captain, Alondra has disappeared from navigation scan.
The cloud could have come between us and the planet.
No, Lieutenant, the cloud has engulfed Alondra. Captain, the planet seems to be breaking up. Its mass is definitely growing smaller.
Spock, is it possible the cloud consumes planets?
Sir, the cloud is changing course.
The course change is verified, sir. The cloud is now moving directly toward the inhabited planet.
But if it continues on that course
Mantilles will die. Mister Sulu, increase speed to warp eight. Push it to the limit.
Jim, if we can't stop it, millions of people will die.
Perhaps more, Doctor. If planet annihilation is part of this thing's nature, it might seek them out as instinctively as an amoeba seeks out food. It may not consume only planets, but also stars. We do not know yet whether it has any selective ability, but it could be a thread to every planet in our galaxy.
Bones, I need an expert psychological opinion. Do we dare tell the people on Mantilles, try to save a few who could get away?
How much time do they have?
It's certain there'd be planetwide panic.
On the other hand, notifying them may still save some small fraction of the population, Captain.
Who's the governor of Mantilles, Jim?
Bob Wesley. He left Starfleet for the governorship. He's no hysteric.
Thanks, Bones. Lieutenant Uhura, send a priority one call to Governor Wesley on Mantilles.
Captain, I'm getting unusual readings on the chemical identity sensors.
Elements unknown in our periodic tables, Captain. I'm of the opinion this cloud has come from outside our galaxy.
It's still got us.
The streamers are a combination of koinoenergy, almost an ambiplasma with an unusually powerful attraction force.
Prepare to fire all phasers into cloud mass.
Firing. No effect, Captain
The cloud appeared to absorb the phaser energy, Captain.
We're floating inside the cloud.
The objects are some form of highly charged gaseous antimatter.
Captain, the power drain on the shields is too heavy to hold for any length of time.
Scotty, prepare the shields for an antimatter charge.
Only the beginning of a theory, Captain. It is possible this cloud in which we are entrapped is a living thing. The cloud is alive. Yes, Captain, its components appear similar to those found in living organisms.
There's some resemblance. I don't know how much we can depend on it. But I'll tell you one thing. We have to get out of this area. Those mists out there are acting something like a macromorphase enzyme. If the shields don't stay up, the hull will be corroded and we'll all be broken down into nice digestible particles.
I am inclined to agree with the Doctor, Captain. The mass of the planet Alondra has been steadily growing smaller since we've been in here.
Captain, I have a subspace radio message coming in from Governor Wesley of Mantilles.
Transfer it to my quarters.
Mister Sulu, use your scanners to assemble a diagram of the cloud's composition and feed it to the library computer.
You have time to save some people, Bob.
How are you going to choose?
In three hours and twenty minutes the cloud will reach Mantilles. Millions of people will die. I need your help, gentlemen. Your analyses?
If we assume the cloud is a living being, we must also assume it needs some kind of food to sustain itself.
Agreed. Judging from the disappearance of Alondra, the cloud lives on the energy it converts from the planets it consumes.
Exactly. It is like a huge bull grazing here and there in the pasture of the universe.
I think they perform the same function as teeth. They break up the larger chunks of matter for digestion.
Lieutenant, let's see what the scanners have come up with on the cloud's composition.
It seems to have some sort of anatomy. Arex, where are we on that chart?
The opening where we were drawn in seems to have closed. But there's another opening up there on top.
If this thing does have some kind of digestive system, we don't stand much of a chance of making it that far.
Thank you, Mister Arex. Since we appear to have only one way out, we're going to take it. Mister Sulu, takes us to that central core area.
And if this thing does have a stomach, we just might be able to give it enough indigestion to make it turn away from Mantilles.
Programming complete. Ready for launch.
Launch probe at zero acceleration. Forward thrust off, one tenth of a second.
Despite what Spock said, it's still plenty sensitive.
Probe confirmed. It is lodged in the nucleus, near the chromosome bodies.
Mister Kyle, back us out the way we came in. Mister Chekov, a nice, straight line. Don't waste any time.
Estimate we'll be out in six point thirty seven minutes.
Lieutenant, get me Spock's voice channel. Highest possible gain.
Spock, do you read me? Do you read me, Spock, do you read me? Come in, Spock. Spock! Scotty, get a tractor beam.
Captain, we don't have enough time to do it. We only have a fifty three second escape margin.
I'm well aware of that, Mister Scott. Get two tractor beams on that shuttlecraft.
Do not risk the ship further on my behalf.
Shut up, Spock! We're rescuing you.
Almost out. We're approaching the membrane, sir.
You may have just written our epitaph, Mister Scott.
The organism is destroyed, sir. The explosion must have ruptured the membrane and thrown us clear.
I don't know how, sir, but it's still with us.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Request permission to come aboard.
Spock, you're alive!
Obviously, Captain. And I have some fascinating data on the organism.
Don't be so smart, Spock. You botched the acetylcholine test.
Prepare to receive shuttlecraft. Received shuttlecraft. Hangar doors closed. Hangar deck pressurising.
Captain, I have received vocal contact from an official station. They relayed us to a man named Oxmyx. His title is Boss.
Boss? All right, Lieutenant, put him on. Oxmyx. This is Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the Federation of Planets.
Yes. Unfortunately, the Horizon was lost with all hands shortly after leaving your planet. We only received her radio report last month.
Difficult to explain. We received a report a hundred years late because it was sent by conventional radio. Your system is on the outer reaches of the galaxy. They didn't have subspace communication in those days.
I'll explain it in more detail when I see him. The ship won't land, but we'll transport several people down. Well, that's a little difficult for you to understand, too. I'll explain it in more detail when I see you. Where will be convenient?
Good. I'll be looking forward to it. Kirk out. Scotty, you have the conn.
Spock, McCoy, we're beaming down. Standard equipment.
They must have interfered with the normal evolution of the planet.
It will be interesting to see the results of the contamination.
We don't know there is contamination. The evidence is only circumstantial.
What was the state of the Iotian culture before the Horizon came?
The beginnings of industrialisation.
Horizon reports indicate the Iotians are extremely intelligent and somewhat imitative.
So we're going down to recontaminate them.
The damage has been done, Doctor. We are here to repair it.
Let's not argue about it. Let's go study it. Energise.
This is like coming home.
Home was never like this. I've seen pictures of the old days that look like this.
Sir, would you mind explaining that statement, please?
I want to see you turn to stone. Put your hands over your head, or you ain't going to have no head to put your hands over.
That's a weapon. Be careful with that.
Look, we were asked to come down here by Mister Oxmyx. He said
I know what he said, bud. He said some of the boys would meet you. Okay, we're meeting you.
Well, those firearms are not necessary.
You trying to make trouble?
Don't give me those baby blue eyes.
I don't go for that innocent routine.
I never heard such stupid questions in my life.
Well, since this Oxmyx asked us down here, don't you think we should see him?
Krako's getting more gall all the time .
Is this how you greet all your guests?
Yeah? We ain't playing for peanuts. What's the matter, you guys never saw a hit before?
Sir, there are several questions I would like to ask.
Ask the boss. I don't know nothing. Get moving.
This is the contamination you're looking for, Jim.
Hey, Kalo. Hey, when's the boss going to do something about the crummy street lights around here, eh? A girl ain't safe.
Listen, we pay our percentages. We're entitled to a little service for our money.
Get lost, will ya? Some people got nothing to do but complain.
Is this the way your citizens do business, their right of petition?
They pay their percentages and the boss takes care of them.
Make yourself a drink, Captain. It's good stuff. I distill it myself.
No, thank you. You're Mister Oxmyx.
That's me, pal.
This is my first officer, Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy.
Doctor, huh? Put that chopper down, Kalo. These guys are our guests. Pick up a cue, Captain. Go ahead. You can't be too careful around here these days.
Yes. Judging from what we've seen so far, I agree.
They call you The Boss, Mister Oxmyx. The boss of what?
The boss of my territory. I got the biggest in the world. You know, there's one thing wrong with having the biggest. There's always some punk trying to cut you out. That's why you can't be too careful.
You're the government here?
What government? Look, I told you. I got the territory and I run it. That's all.
But there are other bosses, other territories?
Yeah, sure. Maybe a dozen or so, not counting the small fry, but then they get burned anyway soon as I get around to it.
Does that include, if I may ask, a gentleman called Krako?
How do you know about Krako?
He hit us, Boss.
I'll take care of it.
Hey, wait a minute. That's the Book.
I know it's a book.
The Book. They left it, the other ship. The Horizon.
This is the contamination, Captain. Astonishing. An entire culture based on this.
You said they were imitative, and the book
I don't want any more cracks about the Book.
Did they leave any other books?
Sure. Some text books on how to make radio sets and stuff like that, but, look, I brought you here so you could help me, not for you to ask me questions. After that, I'll answer anything you want to know.
What is it you want?
Well, I was thinking. You Feds must have made a lot of improvements since that other ship came here. You probably got all kinds of fancy heaters up there. So here's the deal. You give me all the heaters I need. Enough tools so I can knock off those punks all at once. Then I'll take over, and all you'll have to do is deal with me.
Now let me get this straight. You want us to supply you with arms and assistance so you can carry out an aggression against your neighbours?
What aggression? I got to make hits. I want you to help me hit them. That's all.
Mister Oxmyx, my orders are quite explicit. Under no circum
I ain't interested in your orders. From now on, you're gonna take orders from me. I'm gonna give you just eight hours to give me the things I want. If I don't have those tools by then, I'm gonna call up your ship and have them pick you up in a box. Is that understood, pal?
Let's see how this thing works.
Don't do that. You could knock out the side of the building.
That good, huh? All you have to do is give me about a hundred of these fancy heaters and we'll have no more trouble.
Out of the question.
Hold it. It's a communication device.
How does it work?
It's locked onto my ship's systems.
Kalo, take them to the warehouse and put them in a bag. Keep a sharp eye on them, you hear.
This is Bela Oxmyx. I got your captain and his friends down here. You want to see them alive
Am I to understand that you're holding the captain and his party?
You heard right, pal. I'm going to give you just eight hours to get me the goods I want, or I put the hit on your friends.
One book on the gangs of Chicago did all this. It's amazing.
They evidently seized upon that one book as the blueprint for an entire society.
It's the Bible.
Yeah, well, Oxmyx is the worst gangster of all.
We may quarrel with Mister Oxmyx' methods, but his goal is essentially the correct one. This society must become united or it will degenerate into total anarchy.
If this society broke down as the result of the Horizon's influence, then the Federation's responsible, and we've got to do something to straighten this mess out. Spock, if you could get to the sociological computer, do you think you could find a solution?
Unfortunately, I do not have access to my computers, nor are these gentlemen likely to permit it.
Oh, yes, yes. I wouldn't waste my time.
On Beta Antares Four, they play a real game. It's a man's game, but of course it's probably a little beyond you. It requires intelligence.
Listen, Kirk, I can play anything you can figure out. Take the cards, big man. Show us how it's played.
I'm familiar with the culture on Beta Antares. There aren't games
Yes. The second card is turned up, except on Tuesdays.
Oh, look what you got, two jacks. You got a half fizzbin already.
No, no. If you got another jack, why, you'd have a sralk.
Yes. You'd be disqualified. You need a king and a deuce, except at night of course, when you'd need a queen and a four.
Right. Oh, look at that. You've got another jack. How lucky you are! How wonderful for you. If you didn't get another jack, if you'd gotten a king, why then you'd get another card, except when it's dark, you'd give it back.
If it were dark on Tuesday.
Yes, but what you're after is a royal fizzbin, but the odds in getting a royal fizzbin are astron. Spock, what are the odds in getting a royal fizzbin?
I have never computed them, Captain.
Well, they're astronomical, believe me. Now, for the last card. We'll call it a kronk. You got that?
I'll get it.
Spock, find the radio station. Uhura's monitoring the broadcasts. Cut in and have yourselves beamed up to the ship.
Surely, you're coming, Captain.
I will, but I'm bringing Bela Oxmyx with me.
Jim, you can't
Bones, this mess is our responsibility. You have your orders. Let's go.
Hold it! Okay, pally, we're going for a ride.
If you don't mind, I'd rather walk.
Listen, pally, this could either be a taxi or a hearse. You know what I mean?
I'm beginning to get the idea.
You do that very well. Now, how are you with primitive radio equipment?
Very simple. Amplitude modulation transmission. I simply adjust the frequency, throw this switch, and the Enterprise should answer.
Mister Spock, what are you doing on this frequency?
So you're the Fed, huh? Well, well, well, well, well.
Krako. JoJo Krako. I'm the head of the whole Southside Territory. Hey, glad to see you.
Would you mind telling me how you even know who I am?
Sit down, Kirk. I've got all of Bela's communications bugged. He can't make a date with a broad unless I know about it. Well, I guess you want to know why I brought you here.
You want to make a deal.
Hey, I like that. That is sharp. That's sharp, eh, Zabo?
That's right, a deal. I want you to help me.
Let me guess. You want, you'll want heaters, and then you'll want troops to teach them how to use them. And then you'll attack the other bosses and take over the whole planet. Then we'll sit down and talk, right?
Wrong! I know Bela. He didn't offer you beans. Now, me, I'm a reasonable man. You give me what I want and I'll cut you in for, say, a third. Skimmed right off the top. Well, what do you think?
I got a better idea. This planet has to be united. You know that. Bela knows that. Let's sit down. You, me, Bela. Discuss this whole matter, contact the other bosses, and talk about it like reasonable men.
No, I don't think you're stupid. I just think your behaviour is arrested.
I haven't been arrested in my whole life! Listen, pally, I know how to get what I want. You want to live, don't you, Kirk? You bet you do. But after I get through with you, you're liable to be sorry unless you come across. Hold him here. Tell Cirl the Knife to sharpen up his blade. I just might have a job for him. Unless you come across with the heaters.
I'm sorry, Krako. No deal.
That's too bad. Put him on ice!
Futile, Doctor. No specifics. There is no record of such a culture based on a moral inversion.
You mean you're giving up?
No, Doctor. I'm merely saying the computers can offer us no logical, rational, factual way out of our current dilemma.
Mister Spock, Mister Oxmyx is making contact from the surface.
On audio, Lieutenant. Mister Oxmyx, this is Mister Spock.
Irrelevant, since we are here.
Oh, yeah. I tell you, you'd better come on back down.
Why would he put a bag on our captain?
If I understand you correctly, that would seem to be a problem.
Look, you guys got something I want. I can help you get your captain back.
I'm afraid I find it difficult to trust you, Mister Oxmyx.
What's to trust? Business is business. We'll call a truce. You come on down.
You'll show no further hostility?
I'm a businessman, pally. What do ya say?
Since we must have our captain back, I accept.
You mean you're going to trust him?
If we are to save the captain without blatant, forceful interference on this planet, Doctor, we must have the assistance of someone indigenous. We are therefore forced to trust Mister Oxmyx.
Mister Scott, though we hope to avoid interference, I suggest you set one of our phaser banks on a strong stun position.
Now you're beginning to make sense.
I trust we shall not have to use them, but it is best to be prepared. Energise.
You know what to do.
Don't worry, Boss. They can't do nothing till they're through sparkling.
Mister Oxmyx, I understood we had an arrangement, a truce.
I was hoping you'd think that, dummy.
We're trying to help you, Oxmyx.
Sir, you are employing a double negative.
I fail to see why you do not understand us. You yourself have stated the need for unity of authority on this planet. We agree.
Yeah, but I got to be the unity.
Hey, Captain, you got away from Krako. You know, that ain't easy.
I thought you were supposed to report to the ship, Mister Spock.
We did, Captain. The situation required our return.
It may be just as well. Did you find out anything from the computer?
Nothing useful. Logic and practical information do not seem to apply here.
To deny the facts would be illogical, Doctor.
Then you don't mind if I play a hunch?
I'm not sanguine about hunches, Captain, but I have no practical alternative.
What are we going to do now, Jim?
It ought to be. It cost a bundle.
You too! Get out of the clothes. Nobody's going to put the bag on me any more.
A fliwer, Captain.
Key in the ignition. Turn the ignition on. And nothing happens. Where's the starter? There's the starter. Yes!
Yes. Oh. I believe they had a device known as a clutch. Clutch, Captain. Perhaps one of those pedals on the floor.
Captain, you are an excellent starship commander, but as a taxi driver you leave much to be desired.
It was that bad?
Now, that could be a bit of a problem. If they were inside, where they couldn't be seen, we could stun them with our phasers, but not out here.
If we can get close enough to them, we should be able to render them harmless with reasonable rapidity.
They don't look like the trusting type.
I beg your pardon?
You're going to hit somebody. Can I watch?
Where'd you get them ears?
You going to hit Krako out here? You open up and you'll be scragged from every window in the street. I can fix it for ya.
Young man, this is likely to be quite hazardous.
Hold on, Spock. Out of the mouths of babes
Who you callin' a babe?
I'm calling you a babe.
What's in it for me?
What do you want?
A piece of the action.
You do not even know what the action is going to be.
I figure it's got to be a thick percentage or you wouldn't be trying to hit Krako.
All right, young man. We'll guarantee you a piece of the action if we can pull this thing off.
You'll know what to do.
And that! And how do you like that? Think you can gang up on me, huh? What are you, chicken?
That's it. Let's go.
What's the matter? Did you hurt yourself, kid?
I want my daddy!
Daddy! I want my daddy!
I want my daddy.
Sonny! Wait a moment. What have they done? What have they done to you? What have you done?
A piece of the action.
No one can see. Put your phaser on stun.
Well, ain't this nice? I was wondering how I was going to get you back, and here you deliver yourself! Who's your friend with the ears, Kirk?
I think you've got it reversed, Mister Krako.
I ain't, pally. Put down your heaters.
Captain, I believe that perhaps it would be wise to do as he says. I just heard the sound of
Mister Krako, I don't, er
So this is the fancy heater, huh? How does it work?
I'm trying to tell you, Mister Krako, that this is bigger than you, Oxmyx or anyone.
The only thing I want you to tell me is how it works.
Can you trust all your men?
Well, one of these can make a man a pretty big boss, you know.
I either trust 'em, or they're dead. Let's go in here and talk about it.
Now we got no busy little eyes to worry about. How does this thing work?
What do you think we're here for, to get a cut of your deal? Forget it. That's peanuts to an outfit like the Federation. Right?
A miniscule. A very small piece.
How much is that?
That's, er. We'll figure it out later.
I thought you guys had laws. No interference.
Who's interfering? We're taking over. Check?
What's your cut?
What do you care as long as you're being cut in? Course, there's always Bela Oxmyx.
All right, it's a deal. Call your ship. Bring down your boys and whatever else you need.
Kirk to Enterprise.
All right, Scotty. We made a deal with Krako.
Yeah. We're ready to make the hit. We're taking over the whole planet as soon as you get ready.
Do you think that's wise, sir?
Sure. We can trust Krako, but we don't have any choice. You know what I mean? He's standing about twelve feet in front of me, all ready to be our pal.
Aye. I know indeed.
Scotty, we'll need phasers to equip every one of Krako's men. We'll need advisors and troops to back him up on the hit. You got all that, Scotty?
Captain. We're preparing everything. It'll be ready when you give the word.
You mean you're going to start sending down your boys now?
It looks like we put the bag on you, doesn't it.
I got rights.
You've got nothing. You mind your place, mister, or you'll be wearing concrete galoshes.
It's faster than walking.
But not as safe.
Are you afraid of cars?
Not at all, Captain. It's your driving that alarms me.
Spock, I've got the hang of it. Now go on.
Where are they?
Knowing Krako, he'll probably send them back on a blotter.
Yeah, sure. Why didn't you say so in the first place? All you had to do was explain it to me.
Kirk to Enterprise.
You got Krako on ice?
Find the man at the other end of the phone
I sure don't know what you think you're talking about.
Get with it. I'm giving the orders here.
Yeah, you bet your life I've got a lot of nerve. What are you going to do about it?
I would advise you to keep dialing, Oxmyx.
All right. You know what to do. We hit Bela's place and nobody comes out alive. All right. Let's go.
All right! All right! All right! All right! Now the Federation's taking over whether you like it or not. You people, you've been running this planet like a piecework factory. From now on, it's going to be under one roof. You're going to run it like a business. That means you're going to make a profit.
And what's your percentage?
I'm cutting the Federation in for forty percent. You got any objections?
Yeah! I hear a lot of talk, but all I see here is you and a couple of your boys. I don't see no Federation.
Listen. They got a ship. I know. I was there.
Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Tepo's got a point. All we ever seen is them.
What, a couple of boys?
I'm not going to believe my eyes.
Let me say something. I only saw three guys in that ship. Maybe there ain't no more.
There are over four hundred guys there.
That's your story, buster.
Hey, it's my boys. They're making a hit at this place.
My boys will put you down.
Hey, that's great, Krako. Now we got hostages again. We can make a deal with the Feds up there.
Are you kidding? This one's all mine. From now on, nobody's going no place. I'm going to be the big boss in this here territory.
Now, wait a minute. Wait a minute. Get that heater down. Don't you want to take a look at what you're going to fight?
I already seen it. You're nothing, Fed.
All right, but at least let me call my ship one last time and say goodbye.
Well, all right. Go ahead. Don't get smart.
Hello, Scotty. This is Kirk.
Gee, that's some trick.
Hey, did you see that?
They're not dead, just knocked out for a while. But they might just as well have been that way if we wanted them to.
Okay, okay, Kirk, so we get the message. Now, what was this syndicate deal you were talking about?
He was talking about a percentage.
I was talking about both.
Okay. A syndicate makes sense to me. I'm a peaceful man at heart, but I'm sick and tired of all these hits. I hit Krako, Krako hits Tepo, Tepo hits me. There's too many bosses. We can't get anything done.
It's reasonable. It sounds reasonable. That sound reasonable to you?
It's reasonable, Mister Oxmyx. Let's break out some of your drinking stuff and celebrate the syndicate.
Gentlemen, you two have been brooding ever since we returned to the ship.
Brooding, Mister Spock. A sombre, emotional state. Now, do you wish to continue it or are you going to discuss it?
Captain, I'm neither brooding nor sombre. But I do have reservations about your solution to the problem of the Iotians.
Ah, yes. I understand that. You don't think it's logical to leave a criminal organisation in charge.
Highly irregular, to say the least, Captain. I'm also curious as to how you propose to explain to Starfleet Command that a starship will be sent each year to collect our cut.
Yes, that's a very good question, Mister Spock. I propose our cut be put into the planetary treasury and used to guide the Iotians into a more ethical system. Despite themselves, they'll be forced to accept conventional responsibilities. Isn't that logical? All right, Bones, in the language of the planet, what's your beef?
I don't know how serious this is, Jim, and I don't quite know how to tell you
But in all the confusion I
I think I left it in Bela's office.
Somewhere. I'm not certain.
You're not certain of what?
I left my communicator.
Captain. If the Iotians, who are very bright and imitative people, should take that communicator apart
They will, they will. And they'll find out how the transtator works.
The transtator is the basis for every important piece of equipment that we have.
You really think it's that serious?
How do you mean?
Well, in a few years, the Iotians may demand a piece of our action.
Ensign Chekov, Lieutenant Uhura, and I will beam down and make a routine check of its facilities.
Lieutenant Uhura, let's go.
It must be a transporter malfunction.
That was a rough trip.
This is the craziest landing pad I've ever seen.
That's a trinary sun.
Scott to Bridge.
Mister Spock, the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Chekov. they vanished. They got onto the transporter platform and they just vanished.
I presume you mean they vanished in a manner not consistent with the usual workings of the transporter, Mister Scott.
Aye, of course I mean that. You think I'd call if they just beamed down?
Have you reversed controls?
I've made all the proper checks. There was nothing. There was no flash of light, nothing. They were gone.
Not down here. All the dials were right and the transporter was functioning perfectly.
Recheck your equipment, Mister Scott. I'll scan for them on the planet's surface. Spock out.
But Captain, if we're not on Gamma Two, then where are we?
That's what I'd like to know. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Dead.
Excellent, Captain Kirk. Although we expected strength and competitive spirit, we are greatly pleased.
Either of you hurt?
I don't think so, Captain.
Admirable, Chekov. Admirable. You also, Uhura. Your spirit is as great as the captain's. I can see you all will prove invaluable here. I am Galt, Master Thrall of the planet Triskelion. I have been sent to welcome you.
There, Captain. Now you are prepared for your training.
How do you know our names?
The Providers were expecting you, Captain. They arranged your transportation.
These Providers of yours, are they
Correction, Captain. The Providers are not ours. We are theirs.
What do they want from us?
You are to be trained, of course. What other use is there for thralls?
Thralls? You must be mistaken. We're officers of a United spaceship on Federation business.
We're not going anywhere until we have some information. Who are you? What is this place? What do you think you're going to do with us?
I am Galt, the Master Thrall. This place is the planet Triskelion. You are to be trained and spend the rest of your lives here.
Mister Spock, I've checked that transporter from one end to the other. Every circuit works perfectly. Whatever that power surge was, it had nothing to do with the transporter or any other system aboard this ship.
I'm beginning to believe that, Mister Scott. I've conducted two sweeps of the planet's surface. There is no sign of life.
Then what the devil is happening? Does that mean their atoms are just floating around out there?
No, Doctor. Even that would show up on our sensors.
Where are they then?
The only answers are negative. No magnetic storms, no ionic interference, no breakdown in your equipment.
A negative attitude is no good to us. We can't just leave them out there, wherever they are.
We shall continue sensor scans, Doctor. At the moment, that is all we can do, except hope for a rational explanation.
Hope? I always thought that was a human failing, Mister Spock.
True, Doctor. Constant exposure does result in a certain degree of contamination.
These are your quarters. Open, thralls.
That was foolish, Captain. Escape is quite impossible, as demonstrated by your collars of obedience. Return to your quarters.
They are not within the confines of this solar system.
It's been nearly an hour. Can people live that long as disassembled atoms in a transporter beam?
I have never heard of a study being done, but it would be a fascinating project.
Fascinating? Those people are friends of ours out there, if they're still alive.
The odds are not good.
No. I would say approximately four hundred
Don't quote odds and don't give me anymore dispassionate logic, Mister Spock. Just keep looking for them.
I would welcome a suggestion, Doctor, even an emotional one, as to where to look.
First time you've ever asked me for anything, and it has to be an occasion like this.
Captain, the Enterprise. They will be trying to find us, won't they?
They'll try, but where do they look? We're here, and we don't know where it is.
This system's star is a trinary. Limits it a bit, but we're a long way from the Enterprise, if we're in the same dimension.
I am your drill thrall. I am called Lars.
What do you want from her?
Lieutenant, are you all right? Uhura! Lieutenant! Lieutenant, are you all right? Lieutenant, answer me! Lieutenant! What's happening to Lieutenant Uhura? Lieutenant, are you all right?
It is not allowed to refuse selection.
Interesting. It seems to be an ionisation trail.
What would account for that, Spock?
Exactly the question I have just fed to the computers, Doctor. And the answer is, nothing known to us would account for it.
Well, the transporter has neither the power nor the range to account for that.
You're going to leave here without them and run off on some wild goose chase halfway across the galaxy just because you found a discrepancy in a hydrogen cloud?
Doctor, I am chasing the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Ensign Chekov, not some wild aquatic fowl. This is the only lead we've had.
You, you have been selected for me?
You are a fine specimen. I like you better than the others. I will instruct you well, so my Provider will take you.
That's very kind of you, miss, but
If my Provider is pleased, we may even be selected for each other.
I didn't realise I was so hungry. Whatever you call this, it is very good.
It is nourishment. We call it that.
Nourishment. That's very practical. What do you call this collar?
It is a sign of our Provider. By the colour of the lights it can be known who holds us. When you are vended, you will also have a colour.
When you are developed. The Provider who offers the most quatloos puts his colour on us.
Our race has another name for it. Slavery. This collar of obedience, is Galt the only one who can operate it?
It is only to warn and punish.
How does he work it?
It is not permitted to talk of that.
Will you provide all my nourishment?
Of course. I am your drill thrall. I will train you well.
Yes, I'm sure you will. I must say, I've never seen a top sergeant who looked like you.
What does that mean?
It means you're a very beautiful woman.
What is beautiful?
Born? I have been here always.
Your parents. Where are they? Your mother and father.
She who bore me was killed in a freestyle match.
You will learn all these things.
Lars and Chekov's drill thrall. They weren't born here. Where do they come from?
This is ridiculous. There's nothing out there. Nothing at all.
We certainly seem to be heading into an empty sector.
Projecting back along the path of ionisation, the nearest system is M two four alpha.
That must be two dozen light years away.
Are you suggesting that they could have transported over a distance of? You're out of your Vulcan mind, Spock.
I'm suggesting nothing, Doctor. I am merely pursuing the only logical course available to us.
Hold. This thrall was slow in obeying a command. For his punishment, he will be practice target. As you charge, you will strike the practice target when you pass. You begin, Uhura.
It is not allowed to refuse a training exercise.
I don't care whether it's allowed or not. I will not do it.
None of us will do it, Galt.
It is part of your training. The Providers wish it.
The devil with the Providers.
No. No! I am responsible for the actions of my people. I demand to see the Providers.
He's pretty fast with that whip.
This will strengthen you. Drink it. Kloog's left eye is weak. Approach him from that side.
We're free people. We belong to no one.
Mister Spock, it just doesn't make sense they could have come this far. If there's any chance at all it is to continue to search in the area they were lost.
It's always possible to miss something.
Such as a failure in the transporter mechanism?
No, sir. There was no sign of failure.
There was no sign of them in the area of Gamma Two.
If they weren't there it's ridiculous to think they could still be alive. Not after all this time.
In that case, Doctor, we have nothing to lose by pursuing our present course.
Slow down. Slow down. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. We've covered over two miles. Can we take a breather? A rest?
Oh. well, it's good to get away from that development area, even for a while. Shahna, why do the Providers, why do they like to watch others being hurt, killed?
That is the way.
Their voices sound mechanical. Are they computers?
You've seen them. Do they have bodies?
Not such as ours.
What is this place?
It is not used.
It's very old. Does it have a name? Shahna, could it have been a city for the Providers?
I do not think it is well to ask such things.
They do have bodies, or did have.
One does not talk of such things.
Very pretty country. Very much like my home planet, Earth.
Where I was born. Shahna, don't you ever look at the night sky? The lights up there?
I have looked at them.
Well, those are stars. And around them are planets. And there are people that live on them, Just like us.
How can one live on a flicker of light?
From Earth, Triskelion's three suns are just a flicker of light. Actually, this is the darkest planet I've ever seen.
Dark? But all is lighted. Here, the chambers.
The thralls have no freedom, Shahna. You don't think or do anything but what the Providers tell you.
What else would one do?
What is love?
Love is the most important thing on Earth. Especially to a man and a woman.
We, too, have mates. When it is time to increase the herd, my Provider will select one for me.
On Earth, we select our own mate. Someone we care for. On Earth, men and women live together, help each other, make each other happy.
I do not think your words are allowed.
All right. All right. Tell me about the Providers. What do they look like? Where do they live?
I have never seen them, but they are said not to be like us. They stay in
Stop it. Stop it! I'm responsible! I made her talk! Stop it! You're killing her! She did nothing wrong! It was my fault. If you want to punish someone, punish me! Please.
It's all right. It's all right. You can stop crying now, Shahna. It's all right.
You risked bringing their anger on yourself. Why did you do it?
It's the custom of my people to help one another when we're in trouble.
And this. Is this also helping?
You could call it that.
It's my opinion that we've gone too far as it is, sir.
He's right, Spock. We've lost Jim and the others on Gamma Two. Now you've dragged us a dozen light years on some wild hunch that
No, it doesn't. It's still a fancy way of saying that you're playing a hunch. well, my hunch is that they're back on Gamma Two dead or alive and I still want another search.
Doctor McCoy speaks for me, too, sir.
Agreed. Mister Scott, could you manage warp seven?
I would be more than content to do so, sir, and maybe a wee bit more.
You're disturbed about what happened today.
Yes. You have made me feel strangely. If it were allowed, I would ask that you have another drill thrall.
I wouldn't like that, Shahna. I wouldn't like that at all.
This is going to kill our romance.
He's gone to report me. I said I didn't like the food.
I think Galt is the only one who controls these collars. If we can find the phaser that I threw at Lars, we can use the circuits to short out these collars.
Sensors indicate only one concentration of life forms on the planet, on the lower hemisphere. Humanoid readings.
Well, at least that gives our landing force a starting point.
There will be no landing force, Doctor. Assuming the captain and the others are still alive, it would be unwise to endanger them by beaming down a large contingent.
Well we're not going to leave them there while we just sit and wait.
And it may be just a wild goose chase like we've been telling you.
I shall beam down, Doctor. If I am unable to communicate, a landing party may be necessary.
Well, Mister Spock, if you're going into the lion's den, you'll need a medical officer.
Daniel, as I recall, had only his faith. But I welcome your company, Doctor. Mister Scott, you'll be in command.
Welcome to Triskelion, gentlemen.
What the voice said was true, sir. Nothing is functioning.
Providing for all their needs means using thralls, people stolen from other parts of the galaxy
But you are afraid.
A species that enslaves other beings is hardly superior, mentally or otherwise.
It's an unproductive purpose, unworthy of your intellect.
We have found that all life forms in the galaxy are capable of superior development. Perhaps you're not as evolved as you believe.
Our destruction will result only in your own. You may control the Enterprise, but you cannot match the force of the entire Federation.
And you call yourselves superior! You're murderers without the spirit to really wager for the lives you take.
My people pride themselves on being the greatest, most successful gamblers in the universe. We compete for everything. Power, fame, women, everything we desire, and it is our nature to win. And for proof, I offer you our exploration of this galaxy.
Well, then, I wager that with weapons of your own choice, right here and now, my people can overcome an equal number of thralls set against us.
Wait! Wait! Hear me! We can't wager for trifles like quatloos. The stakes must be higher.
If we win, the Enterprise and its crew leaves here in safety. Further more, all the thralls on the planet must be freed.
We have done the same with cultures throughout the galaxy. Are you willing to admit that we can do something you can't?
If we lose? We will remain here, the entire crew of the Enterprise. The most stubborn, determined competitors in the universe. We'll become thralls, enter your games, obey your orders without rebellion. You'll be assured of generations of the most exciting wagering you've ever had.
Not for true gamesters.
Three against one? Those are pretty high odds.
Your, your terms are unfair.
Well, in that case, I'll accept your terms.
Yes, that's clear.
What in the name of heaven is this?
Heaven's got very little to do with this.
You lied. Everything you said.
The thralls will be trained?
I think you'll find it a much more exciting game than the one you've been playing. I'm sorry, Shahna. I didn't lie. I did what was necessary. Someday, I hope you'll understand.
I understand, a little. You will leave us now?
To go back to the lights in the sky?
I would like to go to those lights with you. Take me?
Then teach me how, and I will follow you.
Goodbye, Jim Kirk. I will learn, and watch the lights in the sky, and remember.
Good. Mister Chekov, this flight is supposed to provide both experience and knowledge. How close will we come to the Klingon outpost if we continue on our present course?
One parsec, sir. Close enough to smell them.
That is illogical, Ensign. Odours cannot travel through the vacuum of space.
I was making a little joke, sir.
Mister Spock, immediate past history of the quadrant?
Under dispute between the two parties since initial contact. The battle of Donatu Five was fought near here twenty three solar years ago. Inconclusive.
Analysis of disputed area?
Undeveloped. Sherman's Planet is claimed by both sides, our Federation and the Klingon Empire. We do have the better claim.
The area was first mapped by the famous Russian astronomer Ivan Borkoff almost two hundred
Burke, sir? I don't think so. I'm sure it was
John Burke was the Chief Astronomer at the Royal Academy in old Britain at the time.
Oh, Royal Academy. Well
is the rest of your history that faulty, Ensign? Key points of dispute?
Under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, one side or the other must prove it can develop the planet most efficiently.
And unfortunately, though the Klingons are brutal and aggressive, they are most efficient.
I remember once Peter the Great had that problem like that. The
Go to warp factor six.
Code One emergency. That's a disaster call.
But there's nothing there. Just the station.
Priority One distress call, and it's just absolutely peaceful. Lieutenant Uhura, break subspace silence.
Mister Lurry, you issued a Priority One distress call. State the nature of your emergency.
You'll try to explain. You'd better be prepared to do more than that. Kirk out. Mister Spock, I'll need your help. Mister Chekov, maintain battle readiness. Lieutenant Uhura, see that the transporter room is standing by.
Mister Lurry, if there's no emergency, why did you issue a priority one distress call?
That was my order, Captain.
Captain Kirk, this is Nilz Baris. He's out from Earth to take charge of the development project on Sherman's Planet.
And that gives you the authority to put an entire quadrant on defence alert?
Mister Baris is the Federation Undersecretary in Charge of Agricultural Affairs in this quadrant.
This is my assistant Arne Darvin.
And this is my first officer Mister Spock.
Quadrotriticale is not wheat, Captain. Of course, I wouldn't expect you or Mister Spock to know about such things, but quadrotriticale is a rather
Mister Spock, you've made your point.
Quadrotriticale is the only earth grain that grows on Sherman's Planet. We have several tons of it here on the station. It's very important that grain gets to Sherman's Planet safely. Mister Baris thinks that Klingon agents may try to sabotage it.
You issued a priority one distress call for a couple of tons of wheat?
Of course, Captain, I realise that
Mister Baris, you summoned the Enterprise without an emergency. You'll take full responsibility for it.
What do you mean?
Misuse of the Priority One channels is a Federation offence.
I did not misuse the Priority One channel. I want that grain protected.
Captain, couldn't you at least post a couple of guards? We do have a large number of ships passing through.
It would seem a logical precaution, Captain. The Sherman's Planet affair is of extreme importance to the Federation.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Captain Kirk, how dare you authorise a mere two men for a project of this importance? Starfleet Command
I have never questioned the orders or the intelligence of any representative of the Federation. Until now.
Nevertheless Captain, the Klingons would not enjoy seeing us successfully develop Sherman's Planet.
I guess not.
I see you didn't waste time taking your shore leave.
She wants to shop, and I thought I would help her.
Oh, quadrotriticale. I've read about this, but I've never seen any before.
Does everybody know about this wheat but me?
Not everyone, Captain. It's a Russian invention.
I don't want any. I told you before, and I'm telling you again I don't want any more Spican flame gems. Thanks to you, I have enough Spican flame gems to last me a lifetime.
How sad for you, my friend. You won't find a finer stone anywhere. But I have something better. Surely you want some Antarian glow water.
I use that to polish the flame gems.
You're a difficult man to reach, but I have something from the far reaches of the galaxy. Surely you want
Not at your price.
What is it? Is it alive? May I hold it?
Oh, it's adorable. What is it?
What is it? Why, lovely lady, it's a tribble.
Only the sweetest creature known to man, excepting, of course, your lovely self.
Oh, it's purring. Listen, it's purring.
It's only saying that it likes you.
Are you selling them?
That's what we're trying to decide right now.
He won't bite, will he?
Sir, transporting harmful animals from one planet to another is against regulations, or weren't you aware of that? Besides, tribbles have no teeth.
Twice nothing is still nothing.
If you're not going to take him, I'm going to take him. I think he's cute.
That's my offer.
That's a joke.
You're an honest man. I'll tell you what I'm going to do I'm going to lessen my price to eight and a half credits.
You're talking yourself out of a deal, friend. Six credits. Not a credit more.
Done. When can I have them?
All right, what are you selling them for?
In fact, I'll sell you this one.
Hey! He's eating my grain.
That happens to be my sample, and I'll do with it as I please. And I please to give it to the lovely lady.
Oh, I couldn't. Could I?
What are you trying to do, ruin the market?
Once this lovely little lady starts to show this precious little darling around, you won't be able to keep up with them.
Yes, what is it?
Put it on visual, Lieutenant.
Now, that's just lovely.
Yes, Lieutenant, what is it?
Go to Red Alert. Notify Mister Lurry. We'll be right up.
What is the position of the Klingon ship?
Captain, I have Mister Lurry.
Mister Lurry, there's a Klingon warship hanging one hundred kilometres off your station.
Cancel Red Alert. We'll beam right down.
Let me assure you that my intentions are peaceful. As I've already told Mister Lurry, the purpose of my presence is to invoke shore leave rights.
We have been in space for five months. What we choose as recreation is our own business.
I might also add that under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, you cannot refuse us.
Yes, well, I don't make those decisions. Mister Lurry is in charge of those matters.
Well, I have the authority to act, and I'm going to use it. My dear Captain Koloth, you may indeed bring your men down on shore leave, but only twelve at a time. And I assure you, for every man you bring down here, I shall have one security guard. There will be no trouble.
Captain Kirk, there's been no formal declaration of hostilities between our two respective governments. So, naturally, our relationship will be a peaceful one.
Let us both take steps to keep it that way.
Don't you ever relax?
I am relaxing.
How long have you had that thing, Lieutenant?
Since yesterday, Doctor. This morning, I found out that he, I mean she, had had babies.
Well, in that case, you got a bargain.
Oh, Captain. Well, I hadn't intended to, sir, but the tribble had other plans.
Did you get this at the space station?
Lieutenant, do you mind if I take one of these down to the lab to see what makes it tick?
Well, all right, Doctor, but if you're going to dissect it, I don't want to know about it.
I won't harm a hair on its head, wherever that is.
Say, Lieutenant. Seeing as you're giving them away, can I have one?
Pipe it down here will you, Mister Chekov.
Yes, Mister Baris. What can I do for you?
Kirk, this station is swarming with Klingons.
I was not aware, Mister Baris, that twelve Klingons constitutes a swarm.
Captain Kirk, there are Klingon soldiers on this station. Now, I want you to keep that grain safe.
Captain, may I ask where you'll be?
Sickbay with a headache.
Bones, what have you got for a headache?
Let me guess. Klingons? Baris?
Both. How many of these did Uhura give you?
But you've got, er, eleven.
You noticed that, huh? Here. This ought to take care of it.
How do they? How do they?
I haven't figured that out yet, but I can tell you this much. Almost fifty percent of the creature's metabolism is geared for reproduction. Do you know what you get if you feed a tribble too much?
A fat tribble.
No. You get a bunch of hungry little tribbles.
Well, Bones, all I can suggest is you open up a maternity ward.
All you men going on shore leave to stay in groups. Avoid trouble with the Klingons.
I'll tell them before they go, sir.
Aren't you going on shore leave, Scotty?
I want you to go on shore leave. Make sure that everybody stays out of trouble.
Ah, friend. Can I offer you a charming little tribble?
Oh. Perhaps one of you other gents?
Ah, friend Klingon. Can I interest you in a harmless tribble?
Get it away from me.
I'm sorry. I can't understand it. I've never seen them act this way before.
Get out of here with that parasite.
He's only a harmless little
Yes. Ah, my good friend. How would you like to enter another little transaction? This time, a tribble for a spot
When are you going to get off that milk diet, lad?
This is vodka.
Where I come from, that's soda pop. This is a drink for a man.
It was invented by a little old lady from Leningrad.
The Earthers like those fuzzy things, don't they?
Frankly, I never liked Earthers. They remind me of Regulan blood worms.
Easy, lad. You ought to be more forgiving.
Take it easy, lad. Everybody's entitled to an opinion.
That's right, and if I think that Kirk is a Denebian slime devil, well that's my opinion too.
Don't do it, mister, and that's an order.
Forget it. It's not worth fighting for. We're big enough to take a few insults. Now, drink your drink.
Of course, I'd say that Captain Kirk deserves his ship. We like the Enterprise. We, we really do. That sagging old rust bucket is designed like a garbage scow. Half the quadrant knows it. That's why they're learning to speak Klingonese.
Laddie, don't you think you should rephrase that?
You're right, I should. I didn't mean to say that the Enterprise should be hauling garbage. I meant to say that it should be hauled away as garbage.
I want to know who started it. I'm waiting. Freeman, who started the fight?
I don't know, sir.
All right. Chekov. I know you. You started it, didn't you?
No, sir, I didn't.
I don't know, sir.
They insulted us, sir.
Must have been some insult.
You held? Why did Chekov want to start a fight?
Well, the Klingon, sir. Is this off the record?
No, this is not off the record.
No, sir. They also compared you with a Denebian slime devil.
And then they said you
I get the picture, Scotty.
After they said all this, that's when you hit the Klingons?
No, I didn't. You told us to avoid trouble.
And I didn't see that it was worth fighting about. After all, we're big enough to take a few insults. Aren't we?
What was it they said that started the fight?
I see. And that's when you hit the Klingons?
You hit the Klingons because they insulted the Enterprise, not because they
Well, sir, this was a matter of pride.
All right, Scotty. Dismissed. Scotty, you're restricted to quarters until further notice.
There's something disquieting about these creatures.
Don't tell me you've got a feeling.
Don't be insulting, Doctor. They remind me of the lilies of the field. They toil not, neither do they spin. But they seem to eat a great deal. I see no practical use for them.
Does everything have to have a practical use for you? They're nice, soft, and furry, and they make a pleasant sound.
It's a human characteristic to love little animals, especially if they're attractive in some way.
Doctor, I am well aware of human characteristics. I am frequently inundated by them, but I've trained myself to put up with practically anything.
Spock, I don't know too much about these little tribbles yet, but there's one thing that I have discovered.
What is that, Doctor?
I like them better than I like you.
They do have one redeeming characteristic.
They do not talk too much. If you'll excuse me, sir.
I don't know, sir. They do seem to be all over the ship.
Yes? Did you want to see me, Jim? Don't look at me. It's the tribbles who are breeding. If we don't get them off this ship, we're going to be hip deep in them.
The nearest thing I can figure out is they're born pregnant, which seems to be quite a time saver.
I know, but really
And from my observations, it seems they're bisexual, reproducing at will. And, brother, have they got a lot of will.
Captain, I am forced to agree with the doctor. I've been running computations on their rate of reproduction. The figures are taking an alarming direction. They're consuming our supplies and returning nothing.
But they do give us something, Mister Spock. They give us love. Well, Cyrano Jones says a tribble is the only love that money can buy.
Too much of anything, Lieutenant, even love, isn't necessarily a good thing.
Get the maintenance crew to clean up the entire ship, and then contact Mister Lurry and tell him I'm beaming down.
Captain Kirk, I'm mystified at your tone of voice. I've done nothing to warrant such severe treatment.
Of course. What did you say?
By removing the tribbles from their natural habitat, you have, so to speak, removed the cork from the bottle and allowed the genie to escape.
If by that, you mean do they breed quickly? Of course, that's how I maintain my stock. Breeding animals is not against regulations, only breeding dangerous ones. And tribbles are not dangerous.
Precisely, and at six credits a head, well, that is, a body, it mounts up. Now if you'll excuse me.
You should sell an instruction and maintenance manual for this thing.
If I did, what would happen to man's search for knowledge? Well, I must be tending my ship. Au revoir.
Captain Kirk, I consider your security measures a disgrace. In my opinion, you have taken this important project far too lightly.
On the contrary, sir. I think of this project as very important. It is you I take lightly.
I am going to report fully to the proper authorities that you have given free and complete access to this station to a man who is quite probably a Klingon agent.
That's a serious charge. To whom are you referring?
Cyrano Jones, a Klingon agent?
I heard you.
He simply could not believe his ears.
What evidence do you have against Mister Jones?
My assistant here has kept Mister Jones under close surveillance for quite some time, and his actions have been most suspicious. I believe he was involved in that little altercation between your men and the men from
Yes, yes. Go on. What else do you have?
Well Captain, I've checked his ship's log, and it seems that he was within the Klingon's sphere of influence less than four months ago.
The man is an independent scout, Captain. It is quite possible he is also a Klingon spy.
But he is after my grain!
Do you have any proof of that?
You can't deny he's disrupted this station.
People have disrupted stations before without being Klingon agents. Sometimes, all they need is a title, Mister Baris. Unfortunately, disrupting a space station is not an offence. Now, if you'll excuse me, I have a ship to tend to. Au revoir.
My chicken sandwich and coffee. This is my chicken sandwich and coffee.
I want these off the ship. I don't care if it takes every man we've got, I want them off the ship.
They're into the machinery, all right, and they're probably in all the other food processors too.
Probably through one of the air vents.
Captain, there are vents of that type on the space station.
Plenty, if what I think's happened has happened.
Yes, sir. Nothing could get in.
It's not working, sir. It seems to be stuck.
Here. Let me try it.
They seem to be gorged.
Gorged? On my grain? Kirk, I am going to hold you responsible. There must be thousands of them.
Hundreds of thousands.
One million seven hundred seventy one thousand five hundred sixty one. That's assuming one tribble, multiplying with an average litter of ten, producing a new generation every twelve hours over a period of three days.
That's assuming they got here three days ago.
And allowing for the amount of grain consumed and the volume of the storage compartment.
Kirk, you should have known. You are responsible for turning the development project into a total disaster.
And I'm through being intimidated, Kirk. You have insulted me, you have ignored me, you've walked all over me. You have abused your authority, and you've rejected my requests. And this, this is the result. I'm going to hold you responsible.
Mister Baris, I'll hold you in irons if you don't shut up.
Jim, I think I've got it. All we have to do is quit feeding them. We quit feeding them, they stop breeding.
Now he tells me.
Captain this tribble is dead. And so are these.
A lot of them are dead. A lot of them are alive, but they won't be for long.
The logical assumption is that there is something in the grain.
Yes. Bones, I want the tribbles, the grain, everything analysed. I want to know what killed these tribbles.
That isn't going to do you any good, Kirk. This project is ruined, and Starfleet is going to hear about it. And when they do, they will have a board of inquiry and they will roast you alive. And I am going to be there, Kirk, to enjoy every minute of it.
Really, Captain Kirk, I must protest this treatment.
Ah, Mister Jones, with an armful. A few questions.
What do you want?
An official apology addressed to the Klingon High Command. I expect you to assume full responsibility for the persecution of Klingon nationals in this quadrant.
Yes. You've harassed my men. You've treated them like criminals. You've been most uncourteous, Captain Kirk. If you wish to avoid a diplomatic incident
No, Kirk. You can't let him. That will give them the wedge they need to claim Sherman's Planet.
I believe that more than the word of an aggrieved Klingon commander would be necessary for that, Mister Baris.
Mister Spock, as far as Sherman's Planet is concerned, Captain Kirk has already given it to us.
Well, we'll see about that, but before I take any official action, I'd like to know Just what happened. Who put the tribbles in the quadrotriticale? What was in the grain that killed them?
Captain Kirk, before you go on, may I make a request?
Can you get those things out of here?
Hold on a minute. I thought you said tribbles liked everybody.
They do. I can't understand it. The last time I saw one act this way was at the bar.
What was in the bar?
Obviously tribbles are very perceptive creatures, Captain.
I wonder what Starfleet Command will say about that. What about the grain, Bones?
Oh, yes. It was poisoned.
Yes. It's been impregnated with a virus. The virus turns into an inert material in the bloodstream. The more the organism eats, the more inert matter is built up. So after two or three days, they reached a point where they couldn't take in enough nourishment to survive.
They starved to death. In a storage compartment full of grain, they starved to death.
That is essentially it.
Mister Darvin, are you going to talk?
And the tribbles had nothing to do with it?
I don't know. I never saw one before in my life, and I hope I never see one of those fuzzy miserable things again.
I'm certain that can be arranged, Darvin. Guards? If you'll excuse me, Captain.
You have six hours to get your ship out of Federation territory.
You know, I think I could learn to like tribbles.
Well, Captain, I suppose I'm free to go now.
No, you're not. There's something I want to show you. You know what the penalty is for transporting an animal proven harmful to human life?
Captain, one little tribble isn't harmful. Captain, you wouldn't do a thing like that to me, now would you? Would you?
The penalty is twenty years in a rehabilitation colony.
Captain Kirk. Friend. Friend Kirk. Surely we can come to some sort of mutual understanding. After all, my tribbles did put you wise to the poisoned grain, and they did help you to find the Klingon agent. You saved a lot of lives that way.
There is one thing you can do.
Pick up every tribble on the space station. If you do that, I'll speak to Mister Lurry about returning your spaceship.
It would take years.
Consider it Job security.
Captain, you're a hard man. All right! All right!
You'll do it?
He'll do it.
I'll do it.
Captain, Starfleet was able to divert that freighter.
Good. That means Sherman's Planet will get its quadrotriticale only a few weeks late. I don't see any tribbles around here.
And you won't find a tribble on this entire ship.
Bones, how did you do it?
I cannot take credit for another man's work. Scotty did it.
Scotty! Where are the tribbles?
Oh, er, Captain, it was really Mister Spock's recommendation.
Based on computer analysis, of course, taking into account the possibilities of
Gentlemen, I don't want to interrupt this mutual admiration society, but I'd like to know where the tribbles are.
Well, it was Mister Scott who performed the actual engineering.
Mister Scott. Where are the tribbles?
Where did you transport them? Scott, you didn't transport them into space, did you?
Where are they?
I gave them to the Klingons, sir.
Aye, sir. Before they went into warp, I transported the whole kit and caboodle into their engine room, where they'll be no tribble at all.
Captain, I think I'm going to like Argelius.
Obviously a man of good taste.
You mean to tell me all these women, that all this is
Yes, yes, yes. The Argelians think very highly of their pleasure.
That's an understatement if I ever heard one. This is a completely hedonistic society.
Do you like her, Scotty?
Aye. Why shouldn't I?
Good. I've invited her to join us at the table. I thought you might like to meet her.
Now that's what I call a real Captain. Always thinking of his men.
Scotty, Scotty. In Argelius they use the lights.
Have one of our pillows?
'Tis a fine foggy night tonight, and I doubt if anyone's ever told you of the marvellous fogs we have in Aberdeen.
Never a word, but I'm dying to learn.
Well then, why don't I show you? There's nothing like a walk in the fog with a bonny lass.
Or a handsome gentleman. Why don't we?
You don't mind, do you? I might even get back to the ship on time.
My work, Jim. This is prescription stuff. Don't forget, the explosion that threw Scotty against a bulkhead was caused by a woman.
Physically he's all right. Am I right in assuming that?
Oh, yes, yes. As a matter of fact, considerable psychological damage could have been caused. For example, his total resentment toward women.
He seems he's overcoming his resentment.
Of course, in my professional opinion, when he gets back to the ship, he's going to hate you for making him leave Argelius. But then he will have lost total resentment toward women.
Mission accomplished as far as Scotty is concerned. Bones, I know a little place across town where the women
Oh yes. I know the place. Let's go.
She's dead, Jim.
Stabbed, a dozen times.
We're just as shocked as you are, Mister Hengist.
If this was my home planet, Rigel Four, I'd have a dozen investigators working on the matter, but they don't exist here.
You're not a native of Argelius, sir?
I, I don't remember.
Really, sir. That is hardly helpful.
Scotty, you left the cafe with the girl. Do you remember that? What happened next?
We were walking in the fog. I was up ahead trying to lead the way. I heard the girl scream. I remember starting to turn. I don't remember another thing.
Scotty, you've got to remember.
You don't think by any chance that Scotty
It doesn't make any difference what I think.
But you don't just throw him to the wolves.
Bones, I have a diplomatic responsibility. This happened under Argelian jurisdiction. If they want to arrest him, try him, even convict him, I have to go along with it.
But he's suffering from a severe concussion.
We'll do what we can.
It's not promising, Captain. Mister Scott insists he remembers nothing, but my detector readings indicates that only his fingerprints are on the murder weapon.
Yes. Mister Hengist, there were other people in the cafe about the time of the murder. Several of them left just before Mister Scott and the girl did.
So I've been informed by the staff. They're being located and we will question them. But the outlook for your friend is quite grim.
The law of Argelius is love.
And this is my wife, Sybo.
And this man is Scott, the one I sent you the message about.
He does not look like a man capable of such an act. Still, it's been so long. Gentlemen, before our great awakening two hundred years ago, we had ways of learning the truth in such matters. We shall return to them.
You know of this?
Yes, we've heard of it. I assumed it was a lost art.
My wife is a descendent of the ancient priestesses of our land. She has the ancestral gift. Gentlemen, I have come to invite you to my home.
Prefect, don't you think this should be handled in an official manner through my office?
It shall be handled in an official manner, Mister Hengist, since I am the highest official. Gentlemen, let us proceed to my home where, with the aid of my wife, we shall learn the truth. Please.
Prefect, it will give us a detailed account of everything that's happened to Mister Scott in the last twenty four hours.
Oh, I'd advise against it, Prefect. This is purely an Argelian matter.
My wife must meditate for a time before she's ready. I see no reason why we should not use that time to good advantage. Very well, Captain.
Kirk to Enterprise.
There is a small chamber below this room. Perhaps that will suffice. Captain, news of this frightful murder is spreading among my people. They're greatly disturbed. I have already heard talk of closing Argelius to space vehicles.
There are other people we should question. Perhaps I should go expedite their arrival here?
Yes, please do so, Mister Hengist. Anyone with any connection with this murder should be present at the ceremony.
Lieutenant Karen Tracy reporting as ordered, Captain.
If you'll Just follow me, Lieutenant.
Captain, under normal conditions, Scotty would have never done such a thing.
But that blow on the head. It could put all his previous behaviour patterns into the junk heap.
Of course, there's another possibility.
Hysterical amnesia. When a man feels guilty about something, something too terrible to remember, he blots it out of his conscious memory.
Are you ready, Sybo?
I am ready. May I have the knife, please?
Certainly. Among other gifts, Sybo has the ability to receive impressions from inanimate objects. Do you have it, Captain?
But I put it here when we arrived. It's gone.
She's dead, Jim. Just like the other one.
Stabbed over and over again.
Lieutenant? Captain? Where's
Lieutenant Tracy is dead, Scott. You were found alone in the room.
Dead? But I
I was sitting there. She was taking her readings, and now I'm sitting here.
I tell you, I don't remember. I must have passed out.
It could be, Jim. That head injury.
Captain, I've been trying. I can't even believe this is really happening.
There's no way into that place from up here. Prefect, is there another entrance to that chamber?
Yes, there's a door that leads into the garden, but it's been locked for years.
Locks can be picked, Jim.
Prefect, both of these men were at the cafe the night of the murder.
Where've they been during the past few minutes?
Captain, if you don't mind please.
There's been another murder, Hengist. One of my crew.
The same as Kara.
Please, I know nothing about it. I didn't kill anyone.
Well, how was the girl killed?
Stabbed. And there's no sign of the weapon.
If only I had facilities.
You. You were a musician at the cafe. You played for the murdered girl.
Since she was a little girl, she danced for me. She was my daughter. Prefect, how could this thing have happened here? The man who did it must be found. He must be punished.
Is this true? Who are you?
Morla of Cantaba Street, Prefect. I was there. I have nothing to hide.
Did you know Kara?
Of course he knew her. They were to be married, but he behaved disgracefully. Unheard of. He was jealous of her.
That is very disquieting.
I know it was wrong, but I just couldn't help myself. I loved her, and when she went over to the table with these men, I could not stand to watch, so I left and went home.
Jealousy has often been a motive for murder.
Yes, I know. That is why the emotion is so strongly disapproved of here.
Prefect, I didn't kill anyone. I couldn't.
We shall see, Morla.
Sorry, Jim. The lock may or may not have been picked. It would be hard to tell even with the tricorder.
Can you prove you went directly home?
Captain, may I continue with the questions please?
Well get on with it, man. Just don't stand there.
Captain, Captain. You're behaving very much like a man who is desperately trying anything to save his friend. Would you be as desperate to save Argelius as a space port for your Starfleet?
Well of course I'm trying to save my friend, if he's innocent. And he hasn't been proven guilty.
Need I remind you of the circumstances, Captain? In both cases, your friend Scott was discovered over the body and later claimed to remember nothing.
I am ready, Jaris.
On one condition, Prefect. That the room be sealed so that no one can leave or enter while the ceremony is going on.
Captain, you mean my neck is going to have to depend on some spooky mumbo jumbo?
Concerning the situation you related to us. In my opinion, the Argelian empathic contact is an interesting phenomenon, but the technique is not sound enough to risk a man's life.
What do you suggest, Mister Spock?
Simply that we beam Mister Scott on board the Enterprise and employ our computers to learn the truth.
These are a proud people. They have their own customs, their own laws, and while we're here we're subject to them. It is absolutely imperative that this matter be resolved according to Argelian law. Is that clear?
I don't like it any more than you do, Spock, but there's nothing we can do about it. Kirk out,
Let us begin. Let the circle not be broken. Concentrate upon the flame which burns upon the altar of truth.
I don't care what the circumstances indicate, Jim. Scotty simply could not have done it.
Normally, no, but that blow on his head could
I agree with you, Captain. I'm perfectly satisfied Mister Scott is guilty.
That is unproven, sir.
We can prove it, if he's insane.
Gentlemen, please. How could any man do such monstrous things?
That's what we hope to find out, sir.
Sir, I swear to you I did not kill your wife or the other ladies.
Mister Hengist. On the Enterprise, we can make a recording of the registrations of Mister Scott's conscious and subconscious mind. They will tell us what happened to him in the recent past.
There would be no room for doubt. We would know. And after all, that's what we're after, isn't it, Prefect? To know?
You, sir, claim to remember nothing about the murders.
If this is so, you may have killed without knowing it. Will your machines tell us this?
No doubt will remain.
Very well. We will go to your ship, and he who is guilty will face the ancient penalties, barbaric and horrible though they may be. The ancient penalty for murder was death by slow torture. That law has never been changed. Do you understand that, Mister Scott?
Each testifier will sit here, place his hand on this plate. Any deviation from factual truth will be immediately detected and relayed to this computer which will in turn notify us. Doctor McCoy has already fed the computer his medical reports. Our laboratory experts are examining the murder weapon and will give their data to the computers for analysis. Shall we begin?
Mister Scott, will you take the stand?
Sufficient abnormalities to account for periods of functional amnesia?
Captain, I don't see how that can be.
Unless Scotty's lying about his loss of memory.
I'm not lying, Captain. I don't remember a thing about the first two murders.
Captain? I didn't black out when Mister Jaris' wife was killed.
All right, Scotty, let's have it.
We were holding hands. When the lights went out, the circle was broken. I heard the poor lady scream, and as I was near the head of the table anyway I went toward her. But there was something in my way.
All right. Let's hit it on the head. Scotty, did you kill Sybo?
No, Captain. That I'm sure of.
He's been saying that right along. It means no more now than it did before.
Scotty, lie to me. How old are you?
After the lights went out, Mister Scott, who was holding your hand?
Morla on the one side and you on the other, sir.
But that doesn't mean anything, Captain, with a room that small. The lights were out. Anyone would've had time to kill the lady.
The verifier showed that he was telling the truth when he said he didn't kill her.
There were two other women murdered.
Mister Scott. Did you kill Kara?
I don't remember.
Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy?
I don't remember.
All that proves is that he's telling the truth when he says he doesn't remember.
This is a waste of time.
Well, if you can convince me that the machine is incapable of error, and if it shows he did not kill the women.
There will be no error. As for the rest of it, the readings will show. You can step down, Mister Scott, if there are no objections.
I object to the entire procedure.
Prefect, I know you mean well, but I've had experience
For the time being, we will accept Captain Kirk's explanation of the machine's accuracy as factual. I do, however, reserve to myself the right to make the final determination.
We can ask no more. Mister Morla, will you take the stand?
Where were you at the time that Kara was murdered?
I'm not sure. Walking home, I assume. I was angry.
Anger is a relative state, sir. Were you angry enough to do violence?
I've never done violence in my life. I don't think I could. You've got to believe me. I wouldn't kill her. I couldn't. I loved her, and she loved me.
That's not true! He might think she loved him, but she didn't. She told me. He was jealous. All the time. They fought constantly.
Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy?
Did you kill Sybo?
All right, Mister Morla, I think you can step down now. Sybo spoke of a hunger that never dies. Something that thrives on fear, terror, death. Mister Spock, maybe we're going about it in the wrong way. Let's assume that Sybo was a sensitive. That she did sense something, something evil.
Sensitivity of certain Argelian women is a documented fact, Captain.
My poor Sybo's talent was genuine, gentlemen. What she told you was true.
All right, then, what was it she said, exactly? A monstrous evil, ancient terror.
She said something else, words that didn't make sense.
Computer, linguistic bank. Definition of following word. Redjac.
There is no such word in the linguistics bank?
Working. Affirmative. A proper name.
Redjac. Source Earth, nineteenth century. Language, English. Nickname for mass murderer of women. Other Earth synonym, Jack the Ripper.
That's ridiculous. He lived hundreds of years ago.
A man couldn't survive all these centuries.
Just before she died, my wife said, it is a hunger that never dies.
Yes, all men die. And Jack the Ripper couldn't be alive if he were a man. But everything we've uncovered points to Jack the Ripper, which is an impossibility, isn't it? Or is it?
Humans and humanoids make up only a small percentage of the life forms we know of. There are entities possessed of extremely long life spans, virtually immortal.
We know that someone or something killed three women. If it's impossible for it to be human, it has to be something else. Something driven to kill.
Sybo said it feeds on death.
Which would tend to support the proposition that the murderer was not human. Deriving sustenance from emotion is not unknown in the galaxy, and fear is among the strongest and most violent of the emotions.
Surely, Prefect, this has gone far enough. Someone, some man has killed three women. We have the prime suspect in our hands. Are we going to let him go and start chasing ghosts?
No, Mister Hengist, not ghosts. Possibly not human, but not ghosts. Mister Spock, check out the possibilities.
Computer, digest log recordings for past five solar minutes. Correlate hypotheses. Compare with life forms register. Question. Could such an entity within discussed limits exist in this galaxy?
The Drella of Alpha Carinae Five derives nourishment from the emotion of love. There is sufficient precedent for existence of creature, nature unknown, which could exist on emotion of fear.
Computer, extrapolate most likely composition of such entity.
Working. To meet with specified requirements, entity would exist without form in conventional sense. Most probable mass of energy of highly cohesive electromagnetic field.
Affirmative. Precedent, mellitus, cloud creature of Alpha Majoris One.
No, I've seen the mellitus myself. In its natural state, it's gaseous. When it's at rest, it's solid. Mister Spock, let's assume the existence of this creature.
I point out that Jack the Ripper slew at will in the heart of the most populous city of old Earth and was never identified.
Doesn't seem likely, does it?
I suggest the possibility of a hypnotic screen, which blinds all but the victim to the presence of the killer.
Extremely possible There are many such examples that exist in nature.
This is fantasy! We all know the murderer is sitting right here. You're trying to cloud the issue. I've got a mind to
I am satisfied the course of this investigation is valid enough. Please be seated, Mister Hengist.
All right, Mister Spock, what do we have? A creature without form, that feeds on horror and fear, that must assume a physical shape to kill.
And I suspect preys on women because women are more easily and more deeply terrified, generating more sheer horror than the male of the species.
Computer. Criminological files. Cases of unsolved mass murders of women since Jack the Ripper.
Captain, those places are aligned directly between Argelius and Earth.
Yes. When man moved out into the galaxy, that thing must've moved with him. Computer, identify the proper names Kesla and Beratis.
Working. Kesla. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Deneb Two. Beratis. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Rigel Four. Additional data. Murders on Rigel Four occurred one solar year ago.
You come from Rigel Four.
Well, many people do. It's not a crime.
No, but what we're investigating is. Would you mind taking the stand, Mister Hengist?
I will not.
Prefect, this has gone far enough. I will not take the stand.
I can appreciate your position, sir. You are in charge of civil disturbances locally. If you are the entity for which we search, what better position from which to kill with impunity?
Just after you left Jaris' house, we discovered the murder knife was missing.
And you were unaccounted for when Lieutenant Tracy was murdered.
An entity which feeds on fear and terror would find a perfect hunting ground on Argelius, a planet without violence, where the inhabitants are as peaceful as sheep. The entity would be as a hungry wolf in that fold.
Gentlemen, I know something of the law. You're engaging in sheer speculation.
Computer. Report on analysis of Exhibit A.
Working. Exhibit A on visual. Composition of blade, boridium. Composition of handle, murinite. Details of carving on handle conform to folk art forms, indicating place of origin.
Specify. Point of origin.
Artefact produced by hill people of Argus River region, planet Rigel Four.
Now then, Mister Hengist
He's dead, Jim.
But that's impossible.
The computer will not respond to these controls. The entity is unquestionably controlling it.
It's no use, Captain. The bypass circuits are blocked.
What does it mean?
It means that thing can control the entire operation of the ship, including the life support systems.
You mean it could kill us all?
Indeed, it will try, but not immediately. We know it feeds on fear and terror. There are nearly four hundred and forty humans aboard this ship. Surely it will try to breed fear and terror before it kills.
All hands, this is the captain. Stay at your posts. Remain calm. Captain out. Bones. What's the sedative situation?
I've got some stuff that would tranquillise an active volcano.
Good. Start distribution immediately. The longer we can hold back that fear, the more time we'll have to get that thing out of the computer. Prefect, you'll all be safer here. Spock, come with me.
Spock, don't you have a compulsory scan unit built into the computer banks?
Yes we do, Captain, but with the entity in control
Aren't there certain mathematical problems which simply cannot be solved?
Indeed. If we could focus the attention of the computer on one of them.
That ought to do it.
Apparently our friends learned very quickly.
Out of control. Put it on manual. Bridge.
We don't have much time, Captain.
You said it yourself, Spock. It wants terror, not just death.
All right. Man your station, Mister Sulu.
This is the first time I heard a malfunction threaten us.
Normal environmental levels have been restored, Captain, but it will not last long. A few hours at best.
That should be enough time. Let's get at it.
You cannot stop me now, Captain. It will do you no good. I control all circuits. You cannot silence me. You cannot reach me. Your manual overrides are extremely limited in life.
Proceeding, Captain, but I will need some time.
If you destroy this ship, you destroy yourself.
It is attempting to generate terror, Captain.
Man your post, Mister. If any of the other systems go out, switch to manual override, and above all, don't be afraid.
With an armful of this stuff, I wouldn't be afraid of a supernova.
Computer, this is a Class A compulsory directive. Compute to the last digit the value of pi.
As we know, the value of pi is a transcendental figure without resolution. The computer banks will work on this problem to the exclusion of all else until we order it to stop.
Yes, that should keep that thing busy for a while. The Argelians will be the first to panic. Let's get back to the briefing room.
I wonder who it is we're not supposed to be afraid of.
I doubt very much whether the computers will be inhabited by more than a group of figures for a while.
There is resistance, Captain, but the directive is succeeding. Bank after bank is turning to the problem.
If you drive it out of the computers, it'll have to go somewhere else.
How are you doing?
I'm almost finished. Just Jaris and me.
Complete computer control, Captain. The entity has fled.
Yes, but where to? Bones, what would happen if that thing entered a tranquillised body?
Well, it might take up knitting, but nothing more violent than that.
You say everyone's had a shot but you and Jaris?
Well, I'm willing to take a chance on Mister Spock. Better give yourself a shot, Doc.
No, I don't think so. I think I ought to stay clear.
Do as I say.
Extend your arm, Mister Jaris.
Everybody keep back or I'll kill her! I'll kill her! Keep back!
You'd better be careful. You're going to hurt somebody with that thing.
Let's get him to the Transporter Room, quick!
You'll die, die, die. Everybody will die.
Kill, kill, kill you all.
Deep space. Full power. Widest angle of dispersion. Maintain.
No need to get excited, Captain. I'll do it.
You do it, Spock.
Everybody die. You'll all suffer.
You didn't have to shove me, Mister Spock. I'd have gotten round to it.
Well, Jaris is all right.
What did you do with that thing, Captain? Did you send it back to the planet?
No. We beamed it out into open space, Scotty. Widest possible dispersion.
That thing can't die.
Possibly, Doctor. Its consciousness may continue for some time, consisting of billions of separate bits of energy, floating forever in space, powerless.
But it will die finally. You seem very happy about the whole thing.
Why not? For a while there I didn't know whether I was innocent or guilty.
Bones, how long will it take for this tranquilliser to wear off?
I don't know. Five or six hours. I gave them a pretty big shot, Jim.
Yes, I can see that. Well Mister Spock, for the next five or six hours, we're going to have the happiest crew in space. Of course, we won't get much work done.
Captain, since you came to Argelius to rest, I suggest you take advantage of the opportunity.
That's a splendid idea, Mister Spock. I know a cafe where the women are so
Let's go see!
Our scanner survey was correct, Captain. There it is. Pure tritanium.
Twenty one point four times as hard, to be exact.
We won't be able to break it, Captain. I'll phaser off a specimen.
Do you smell that? A sweet odour like honey. It was years ago, on another planet. A thing with a an odour like that.
We're in the growing season in this hemisphere of this planet. There are doubtless many pollen aromas.
Negative, Scotty. We're checking something out.
It's gone. I could have been wrong. The last time I caught an odour like that was eleven years ago.
Seemed to read dikironium for a minute, and then I lost it. It's almost like something out there knows I'm scanning it. It kind of keeps changing itself into something different. That isn't possible. Nothing can do that.
Fire into it immediately!
Spock. Dead. And you'll find every red corpuscle gone from their body.
Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, lock in on us. Medical emergency.
You think you know what it was, Captain?
Something that can't possibly exist, but it does.
Kirk to bridge.
Hold your position.
Then you'll inform them that we might be a little late.
Jim, the Yorktown's ship surgeon will want to know how late. Those vaccines he's transferring to us are highly perishable.
Gentlemen, we are remaining in orbit until I find out more about those deaths, on my responsibility. I am perfectly aware that it might cost lives on Theta Seven. Kirk out. Autopsy report.
You saw their colour. There wasn't a red corpuscle left in their bodies.
Marks, cuts, incisions of any kind?
Not a one. What happened is medically impossible.
I suggest you look at the record tapes of past similar occurrences. You'll find the USS Farragut lists casualties eleven years ago from exactly the same impossible causes.
Thank you, Captain. I'll check those tapes immediately.
First, can you bring Ensign Rizzo to consciousness for a moment?
Yes, but it
Will it hurt him if you do so?
In his present condition, I don't think it would make much difference.
Transfusion completed, sir. His pulse and respiration are still far below normal.
Give him one cc of cordazine, nurse.
Rizzo. This is the captain. Can you hear me? Do you remember what happened to you?
Remember. I'm cold. I'm so cold.
You were attacked by something. When it happened, did you notice an odour of any kind? Rizzo. Rizzo! Do you remember a sickly sweet odour? Did you smell it?
Yes. Yes. A smell. A strange smell. It was like being smothered in honey.
Did you feel a presence, an intelligence?
It was trying to draw strength from us. I felt it. It was, it was, it was there.
He's beginning to sleep again. I can't risk another shot.
He's already told me what I wanted to know.
What's with the captain? I've never seen him like that before.
I intend to find out. I'll be in the medical record library.
Oh, Captain. Subspace message from Starfleet. They're inquiring
Not now. Have the security duty officer report to me immediately.
Continuing scanning. Still no readings of life forms on the planet.
Let's assume that it's something so completely different that our sensors wouldn't identify it as a life form.
Suppose it was composed of that rare element. A strange, gaseous creature.
I've scanned for that element, Captain. There's no trace of dikironium on the planet surface or in the atmosphere.
Suppose it camouflaged itself. Let's assume that it's intelligent, that it knows we're looking for it.
To hide from a sensor scan, it would have to be able to change its molecular structure, like gold changing itself to lead or wood changing itself to ivory.
You've just suggested something that never occurred to me. It may provide some answers to a tape record which I think you'll find Doctor McCoy is looking at this very moment.
Are you the new security officer?
Was your father
Yes, sir, but I don't expect any special treatment on that account.
You'll get none aboard this ship, Mister.
Captain, I have a report on Ensign Rizzo. He's dead, sir.
Yes, sir. We were good friends, graduated the Academy together.
You'll get a crack at what killed him. Interested?
I want four men armed with phaser two set for disrupter effect. Join me in the transporter room in five minutes. You'll accompany me to the planet surface.
Reading is changing, sir.
Spock was right. Notice the molecular shift?
Dikironium reading now, sir. Bearing ninety four mark seven, angle of elevation six degrees. Holding steady.
Over that rise. Take two men, circle around to the left. I'll take the other two and go the other way. That creature is dangerous. If you see it, fire full phasers.
Swensen, Bardoli come with me.
Mister Garrovick, we've studied your report. Mister Spock, begin.
What was the size of the thing you saw, Ensign?
I'd say it measured from ten to sixty cubic metres, sir. It varied in size, fluctuated as it moved.
It was like a, a gaseous cloud. Parts of it I could see through. Other parts were more dense.
Ensign, did you sense any intelligence in this gaseous cloud?
Did I what, sir?
Did you get any subconscious impressions that this was a creature. A living, thinking thing, rather than just a strange cloud of chemical elements?
But you didn't come to actual contact with it, did you?
No, sir. I was furthest away from it. It seemed to come out of nowhere, hovered for a moment, then moved toward my men. It was fast, incredibly fast.
Did you say it hovered?
You did fire at it, didn't you?
What distance were you from the creature?
Yes. I, er, well, I didn't fire while it was hovering, sir.
You mean you froze?
No, sir. I didn't exactly freeze.
What exactly were you doing?
Well, I was startled for a second. And then by the time I fired, the thing was already moving.
Do you have any further information?
Do you gentlemen have any further questions?
I only hesitated for a moment, sir. I'm sorry.
Ensign, you're relieved of all duties and confined to quarters until further notice.
You were a little hard on the boy, Jim.
He froze. One man was killed. Another may die.
You'll both be filing reports. Make your comments and recommendations then.
Captain, while we're waiting I've taken the liberty of cleaning the radioactive disposal vent on number two impulse engine, but we'll be ready to leave orbit in under half an hour.
We're not leaving orbit, Mister Scott. Not that quickly.
Captain, the Yorktown requesting information on how soon we expect to rendezvous with them.
The medicine for Theta Seven colony is not only needed desperately and has limited
I'm aware of the situation, Engineer, and I'm getting a little tired of my senior officers conspiring against me. Forgive me. Perhaps I shouldn't have used the word conspire.
Nothing, sir. Continuing to scan.
Are you aware it can change its molecular structure?
Are you scanning for any unusual movement?
Any type of gaseous cloud?
We've run a full scanner probe twice.
Then run it twenty times if that's what it takes!
I hope I'm not disturbing you, Doctor.
Interrupting another autopsy report is no disturbance, Mister Spock. It's a relief.
I need your advice.
I do not understand your reasoning.
You need advice from me? You must be kidding.
Jim and his creature?
Precisely. Have you studied the incident involving the USS Farragut?
No. With all these deaths and injuries, I've only had a chance to scan the tapes. There are eight or ten hours of record tape there.
Fortunately, I read somewhat faster. In brief, Doctor, nearly half the crew and the captain were annihilated. The captain's name was Garrovick.
The same as our Ensign.
Mind if I come in?
Kirk to bridge. Scanning report.
Maintain search. Kirk out. It can't have just vanished.
Sometimes they do, if we're lucky. Monsters come in many forms. You know the greatest monster of them all, Jim? Guilt.
Get to the point.
Jim, When a young officer is exposed to unknown dangers for the first time, he's under tremendous emotional stress. Now we all know that.
Am I? I was speaking of Lieutenant James T. Kirk of the starship Farragut. Eleven years ago, you were the young officer at the phaser station when something attacked. According to the tapes, this young Lieutenant Kirk insisted upon blaming himself.
You had a normal emotion. You were startled. You delayed firing for a grand total of perhaps two seconds.
If I hadn't delayed, it would have been killed.
The ship's exec didn't seem to think so. His log entry was quite clear on the subject. Lieutenant Kirk is a fine young officer who performed with uncommon bravery.
Don't you understand? It killed two hundred crewmen.
Captain Garrovick was very important to you, wasn't he, Jim?
Yes. He was my commanding officer from the day I left the Academy. One of the finest men I ever knew. I could have killed that thing if I'd fired soon enough the first time.
You don't know that, Jim. You don't know that any more than you know that Garrovick could have destroyed it.
I can't help how I feel. There's an intelligence about it, Bones. A malevolence. It's evil. It must be destroyed.
That you could destroy yourself, your career, a young boy who reminds you of yourself eleven years ago.
Don't push our friendship past the point where I have to take official
I'm not, Jim. This is professional, Captain. I am preparing a medical log entry on my estimation of the physical and emotional condition of a starship captain. Which requires a witness of command grade.
Do I take it, Doctor, Commander, that both of you or either of you consider me unfit or incapacitated?
Correctly phrased, Captain. As recommended in the manual. Our reply, also as recommended, is, sir, we have noted in your recent behaviour certain items, which, on the surface, seem unusual. We respectfully ask permission to inquire further
Blast it! Forget the manual! Ask your questions.
Sir, the USS Yorktown is waiting now at the rendezvous point. It carries perishable drugs
They need those vaccines on Theta Seven, Captain. Now why are we delaying here?
Because I'm convinced that this is the same creature that attacked the Farragut eleven years ago.
My report is on the tapes. As it attacked us eleven years ago, as I lost consciousness, I could feel the intelligence of the thing. I could sense it thinking, planning.
You say you could sense its intelligence, Captain? How did it communicate with you?
You state that it happened just as you lost consciousness. A semiconscious mind is a very tricky thing. A man never knows how much is real or how much is imagination.
Whatever it is, Doctor, whatever it is, wouldn't you call it deadly?
Yes, there's no doubt about that.
And what if it is the same creature that attacked eleven years ago from a planet over a thousand light years from here?
Obviously, Captain, if it is an intelligent creature, if it is the same one, if it therefore is capable of space travel, it could pose a great threat to inhabited planets.
A lot of ifs, I agree, but in my command judgment, they out weigh other factors. Intuition, however illogical, Mister Spock, is recognized as a command prerogative.
Jim, we're not trying to gang up on you.
And you haven't, Doctor. You've expressed the proper concern, you've asked the proper questions. You've both done your duty. Now may I ask what medical log entry you intend to make?
At this point, my medical log remains open.
In that case, gentlemen
I have a reading on the whatever it is, Captain. Leaving the planet surface, heading into space.
All decks, Red Alert. Red alert. Prepare to leave orbit.
Captain, we can't maintain warp eight speed much longer. Pressures are approaching the critical point.
We are barely closing in on it, Captain. We could be pursuing it for days.
If necessary. Do what you can to increase our speed, Scott.
Spock, how do you read that?
Conflicting data, Captain. It seems to be in a borderline state between matter and energy. Elements of both. It could possibly use gravitational fields for propulsion.
And you don't find that sophisticated, Mister Spock?
Extremely efficient, Captain. Whether that indicates intelligence is another matter.
We won't be using the impulse engines. Turn the alarm off.
Captain, we can't do it. If we keep this speed, we'll blow up any minute now.
Go to warp six.
Hi. Everyone else is at alert station, so I brought you some dinner.
I'm not hungry.
Are we still chasing that thing half way across the galaxy? Yes. Has the captain lost his sense of balance? Maybe. Is the entire crew about ready to explode? Positively. You're lucky you're out of it.
What do you mean, out of it? I caused it. You know that, too, don't you? If I'd fired my phaser quickly enough on Argus Ten, this wouldn't have happened.
I told you, Christine, I'm not hungry.
Doctor McCoy thought you might say something like that. This is his officially logged prescription for you. It has one word on it. Eat. Now if you don't follow his orders, Doctor McCoy could and possibly would have you hauled down to Sickbay and fed intravenously.
The creature is slowing. It's down to warp two.
I don't understand. It was outrunning us.
Maybe it's decided to fight. Phasers ready?
It's coming to a full halt, sir. Magnification one.
Captain, request permission to return to my post.
There. It's coming, sir.
The deflectors will not stop it, Captain.
I should have surmised this. For the creature to be able to use gravity as a propulsive force, it would have to have this capacity.
Five seconds to contact. All hatches and vents secure. All lights on the board show green. Sir! The number two impulse vent! we have a red light!
When it entered impulse engine number two's vent, it attacked two crewmen. It then got into the ventilating system, and now we have air for only two hours.
One man has a chance for survival. The other is dead. You can add that little price tag to your monster hunt.
That's enough, Bones.
It's not enough! You didn't care as long as you could hang your trophy on the wall. Well, it's not on it, Captain, it's in it.
May I suggest that we no longer belabour the question of whether or not we should have gone after the creature. The matter has now been rendered academic. The creature is now after us.
Yes, well, it could have been many light years away from us. Instead it chose to turn and attack here. Why?
Impossible to tell, Captain, until I can make a closer survey of the creature.
If you want to play analyst, Spock, use someone else, not me. My concern is with the ship and the crew.
I know you would prefer to wallow in emotion rather than
Mister Spock, it's very kind of you to come here
Sir, it's coming through the vent.
Get out of here! I'll attempt to seal it off.
On my way, Garrovick. Security to three four one. Medical alert. Scotty, reverse cabin pressure three four one.
If we let that thing into the ship, he'll have a lot of company.
I must have jammed the vent control when I hit it.
See if the reverse pressure has pulled it back into the ventilation system.
He saved my life, Captain. I should be lying dead in there, not him.
Fortunately, neither of us is dead, Ensign. The reverse pressure worked. The vent is closed.
Don't misunderstand my next question. Mister Spock, why aren't you dead?
It's that green blood of his.
My haemoglobin is based on copper, not iron.
I'll bet he left a bad taste in the creature's mouth, too.
Yes. The scent is different. I think I understand something now.
Do you believe you're in communication with the creature?
I don't know what it is, Mister Spock, but you remember I said the thing was alive. It may not be communication as we understand it, but I did know it was alive and intelligent, and I think I know something else now.
Open the vent. On my way to the bridge. Kirk out. Ensign Garrovick.
You were on the bridge when we were attacked.
Yes, I'm sorry, sir. I know I was confined to quarters, but when the alert sounded
Very commendable, Ensign. What was your impression of the battle?
I don't understand, sir.
I'm asking for your military appraisal of the techniques used against the creature.
Ineffective, Captain. I realise, Captain, you did everything you could do. I know that. It's just that nothing works against a monster that can do the things that thing does.
And Ensign, what is your appraisal of your conduct on the planet?
I delayed firing.
If you hadn't delayed firing? No difference, Ensign. No weapon known would have made any difference. Then or eleven years ago. Report for duty, Ensign.
Results positive, Captain. The creature has left the ship at high warp speed and is already nearly out of scanner range. The way that thing can move, Captain, I wouldn't believe it.
It was bearing one two seven mark nine, but I've lost it now.
It has changed course before to mislead us, Captain. Logic would dictate that
No, I'm playing intuition. Mister Chekov, compute a course for Tychos star system.
Inform them that we are pursuing the creature to planet four of that system. That's the location of its attack on the USS Farragut eleven years ago.
I do not understand, Captain.
In Garrovick's quarters, I said the scent of the creature was somehow different. Something in my mind said home.
We will rendezvous with the USS Yorktown in forty eight hours.
I assume that you now believe we should pursue the creature and destroy it.
You don't agree with Mister Spock?
It's the time factor that bothers me. Those drugs are perishable.
Doctor, evidence indicates the creature is here to spawn. If so, it will reproduce by fission, not just into two parts, but thousands.
Antimatter seems our only possibility.
An ounce should be sufficient. We can drain it from the ship's engines and transport it to the planet surface in a magnetic vacuum field.
Contact medical stores. I want as much haemoplasm as they can spare in the transporter room in fifteen minutes.
I presume you intend to use that haemoplasm to attract the creature?
We must get it to the antimatter. It seems attracted to red blood cells. What better bait could we have?
There is still one problem, Captain.
A chance we'll have to take, Mister Spock.
Also, we cannot be certain the transporter will operate under those conditions. If a man is beaming up when that hits, we may lose him.
That's exactly why I've decided to set the trap myself.
Captain, there is so little hemoglobin in my green blood, the creature could not harm me extensively. It therefore seems logical for me to be the one
Negative, Mister Spock. In case this plan fails, I'll need you aboard the ship. In that event, we'll need another plan.
It will require two men to transport the antimatter unit.
I'd like permission to go with you, sir.
I had you in mind, Mister Garrovick.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Proceed immediately to maximum orbit.
Just think, Captain, less than one ounce of antimatter here is more powerful than ten thousand cobalt bombs.
Let's hope it's as powerful as man will ever get. Detonator.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Antimatter container positioned and armed. I'll call you back when it's baited. Kirk out.
The haemoplasm. The bait's already taken.
We'll need something else for bait.
Garrovick, get back to the ship. Tell them to prepare to detonate.
Captain, you're not going to be the bait.
I said, get back to the ship. Ensign, I gave you an order.
Scan us and lock on to us. It's going to be close. Very, very close. Stand by. Stand by, Enterprise.
I can smell it, Captain. It's sickening. Honey sweet.
Got them. A piece of them, anyway.
Crazy way to travel, spreading a man's molecules all over the universe.
Well then, thank pitchforks and pointed ears. As long as it worked, Jim.
That's a fair statement, Bones. Now that the creature is dead, let's save some lives. We'll deliver your medicine. Bridge, this is Kirk.
Have Mister Chekov lay in a course for a rendezvous with the Yorktown, maximum warp.
Oh, Ensign, meet me in my quarters when you've cleaned up. I'd like to talk to you about your father. Several tall stories I think you'd like to hear.
Where is everyone?
Perhaps they weren't expecting us.
Our arrival was scheduled well in advance, Doctor. The annual check of every scientific expedition is routine.
I had a subspace contact with a Robert Johnson, the leader of this expedition, an hour ago.
Did he report anything wrong?
No, yet there was something wrong. I can't pin it down. His conversation was disjointed, his thoughts a little foggy, unrelated. Chekov, check that building. Mister Spock and I will check this one. The rest of you, take a look around. See if you can find anyone.
What is it?
A man, sir. In there. A dead man.
Exactly what it looks like. Death by natural causes. Old age.
Quite impossible, Doctor. I ran a personnel check on this expedition before we beamed down. I assure you that none of them were
I'm Captain Kirk of
You'll have to speak louder.
I say I'm Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise. Who are you?
I'm Robert Johnson. This is my wife, Elaine.
How old are you? How old are you?
I'm, er, let me see. I am twenty nine, and Elaine is
I'm twenty seven.
Mister Johnson, can you hear me?
I can hear you. Not deaf yet, you know. Not yet.
Can you tell me what happened?
Did your instruments show anything?
Elaine was so beautiful. So beautiful. So beautiful.
He can hear you, Jim, but he doesn't understand. Let's let him rest.
Stay seated. Commodore Stocker, I've asked you to be part of this briefing because Gamma Hydra Four falls in your administrative area.
I appreciate that, sir.
Doctor Wallace, as an expert in endocrinology, I'd appreciate you working very closely Doctor McCoy.
Doctor McCoy, would you fill them in?
The expedition is suffering from extreme old age, and they're growing older by the minute. Much older. My examinations have turned up absolutely nothing. In fact, I don't have a clue.
Sensors reveal nothing which is inimical to human life. The atmosphere screens out the usual amount of harmful cosmic rays.
We're close to the neutral Zone between our Federation and the Romulan empire. It's possible the Romulans have a new weapon and are using this colony as guinea pigs.
I have already begun investigation into that possibility, Captain.
I'm sure you understand that I'm anxious to get to Starbase Ten to assume my new post.
Yes, Commodore. We'll do everything we can to make sure you make your duty.
Doctor, is there something I can do for you?
How long has it been?
Six years, four months, and an odd number of days. You mean you don't know?
Well, it's been a long time. Things wouldn't change if it started all over again, would it? You have your job, I have my ship, and neither one of us will change.
You said it. I didn't. In all those years, I only heard from you once. A stargram when my husband died. You know, you never asked me why I got married after we called it off.
Well, I supposed that you met someone you loved.
I met a man I admired. A great man.
And in your field as you. You didn't give up a thing.
I'm on my way.
We're checking it on it. I've reached no conclusions as yet. The comet was a rogue and has never been investigated.
Thank you. You're anxious to get to the base, but we have a few facilities of our own here. I think the Enterprise will do quite nicely. I'll be in engineering, Mister Spock. Maintain standard orbit, Mister Sulu.
I know this is going to sound foolish, but I seem to be having a little trouble hearing.
It's probably nothing important.
Well, don't worry about it. Perhaps a little hypersonic treatment might clear it up.
Oh, yes. Let me know what you come up with. I'll be in the Sickbay.
The last one. Robert Johnson. Cause of death, old age.
You did what you could.
Which adds up to absolutely nothing.
All you need are vitamins, but you can come up anyhow.
Bones, I believe you're getting grey.
You take over my job and see what happens to you.
I see what you mean.
What's your problem, Jim?
You're probably right, Doctor. By the way, I don't like how you've been running this ship lately.
Why? Just muscular strain, isn't it?
No, Jim. It's advanced arthritis, and it's spreading.
I can run it through again, but I'll come up with the same thing.
All of us who went down to the surface, with the exception of Chekov, are aging at various rates. Approximately thirty years for each day. I don't know what's causing it. A virus, a bacteria, or evil spirits, but I'm trying to find out.
Spock, could I ask for some figures?
I did not say you weren't affected, Mister Spock. You are perfectly healthy, that is, for any normal Vulcan on the high side of a hundred.
Captain, can I go back to my station?
You feel up to it?
Of course I do. I just need a wee bit of rest, that's all.
You can leave, too, Lieutenant Galway. Lieutenant Galway?
What? You spoke to me, Doctor?
Yes, I spoke to you. I said that you could leave, too. Now why don't you go down to your quarters and get some sleep.
No. I don't want to sleep. Can't you understand? If I sleep, what will I find when I wake up?
Lieutenant Galway, assume your position. Start your duties.
She's ten years younger than I am, and she looks,
Why hasn't he aged?
I don't know.
Well I want to know! Is it his youth, his blood type, his heritage, his glands, his genes?
His genes. All right, nurse. Prepare Chekov for another complete physical.
Come along, Ensign. This won't hurt. Much.
A few years ago on Aldebaran Three, my husband and I tried various carbohydrate compounds to slow down the degeneration of plant life.
Then try that, Doctor Wallace. Try anything, but do it quickly.
I'll be on the Bridge. Keep me posted as to Chekov.
I thought you were on your way to the biochemistry lab, Doctor.
Look, we know the problem. We know the progress of the affliction. Therefore, once we find the proper line of research, it's only logical we find the solution.
You sound like my first officer.
No problem is insoluble. Not even ours.
That didn't spring from logic.
Our situation doesn't have its roots in logic. The heart is not a logical organ. When I married Theodore Wallace, I thought I was over you. I was wrong.
When did you realise that? Today?
How much older was your husband than you?
What difference does that make?
That's quite a difference.
Jim, he was a brilliant man. We were stationed on a lonely outpost. We were working together. I don't want to talk about him. I want to talk about us.
Look at me. Look at me. What do you see?
I see Captain James Kirk, a man of morality, decency, handsome, and strong.
What are you offering me, Jan? Love, or a going away present?
Give us some more blood, Chekov. The needle won't hurt, Chekov. Take off your shirt, Chekov. Roll over, Chekov. Breathe deeply, Chekov. Blood sample, Chekov. Marrow sample, Chekov. Skin sample, Chekov. If I live long enough, I'm going to run out of samples.
Oh, yes. I'll live, but I won't enjoy it.
Increase orbit to twenty thousand perigee, Mister Sulu.
I'd hoped for a few words with you at your convenience.
I have very little time.
If I may say so sir, we have a due date at Starbase Ten.
We're going to be late. I don't intend to leave this area until we've found the solution for this problem.
Captain, I'm watching four very valuable and one almost irreplaceable members of the Starfleet failing before my eyes. I want to do something to help.
Yes, yes. If you're so concerned, I'll send a message to Starbase Ten.
Captain, you sent such a message this morning.
Yeoman? Where's that
I gave it to you. You signed it.
If I'd signed it, I wouldn't have asked for it, now would l?
Mister Spock. I was just thinking.
You have something to report?
Yes, sir. We have the cause of the affliction.
What is it?
The orbit of Gamma Hydra Four carried the planet directly through the comet's trail. On conventional radiation settings, we discovered nothing. On resetting our sensors to the extreme lower range of the scale, undetected radiation appeared. Below normal radiation levels but definitely present, and undoubtedly residue from the comet.
Good, Spock. Well done. Let's get this to Doctor McCoy immediately. Oh. Lieutenant, take a message to Starfleet Command. Due to the proximity of the Romulans, you'd better use Code two.
But, Captain, the Romulans have broken Code two. If you remember the last bulletin
Message. Key to affliction may be comet which passed by Gamma Hydra Four. Said comet is now,
Quadrant. All units are to be alerted for complete analysis of radiation and means found to neutralise it. Comet is highly dangerous. Kirk, commanding Enterprise. Immediately, Lieutenant. Let's go.
Oh, Mister Sulu. Increase orbit to twenty thousand mile perigee.
I fail to understand why each one of my commands is being questioned. Now do as you're told, Mister Sulu.
Mister Sulu, what is our present position?
Radiation? That's as good an answer as any, but why didn't we know about it earlier?
Possibly, Doctor, because my thinking processes are not as efficient as before.
All right, Bones, I'm going up to the Bridge. Keep me posted. Spock?
Well, I see I'm not going to be making any house calls on you.
I wondered if perhaps there was something which could lower my sensitivity to cold.
I'm not a magician, Spock, just an old country doctor.
Doctor McCoy, none of our usual radiation therapies will have any effect on this radiation sickness.
Well, then we just start over, that's all. We work harder, faster, and we start completely from scratch if we have to. But we find something.
Spock, can I have a word with you?
Mister Spock, a starship can function with a Chief Engineer, a Chief Medical Officer, even a First Officer under physical par. But it's disastrous to have a commanding officer whose condition is any less than perfection.
I am aware of that.
I would like you to take over command of the Enterprise.
On the grounds that the captain, because of his affliction, is unable to perform his duties.
Need I remind you, sir, that I too have contracted the same affliction?
Yes, but you're a Vulcan. You have a much greater life span. You show the affects to a much smaller degree.
I'm half human, sir. My physical reflexes are down, my mental capacity is reduced. I tire easily. No, sir. I am not fit for command.
Well, if you are not, with your Vulcan physique, then obviously Captain Kirk cannot be.
Sir, I do have duties to perform.
Mister Spock. I do not like what I'm about to say but regulations demand it. And as a Starfleet flag officer, I must follow regulations. As second in command of the Enterprise, you must convene an extraordinary competency hearing.
It's not a matter of choice. When a captain is unfit, physically or mentally, a competency hearing is mandatory. Please don't make me quote a regulation which you know as well as I do.
Now this isn't going to hurt a bit.
That's what you said the last time.
Did it hurt?
She's dead. Her metabolism caused her to age more rapidly than the rest of us, but the same thing's going to happen to us unless
How long have we got, Bones?
Oh, a matter of days. Perhaps hours.
Let it read that this competency hearing was ordered by Commodore Stocker and reluctantly called by myself.
Let it also read that I consider it invalid.
Mister Spock, may I make a statement? I have had to resort to these legal grounds in order to save the lives of some very valuable members of the Starfleet. I have tried to convince Captain Kirk of the necessity of proceeding to Starbase Ten, but I've been overruled in each case. The responsibility of this hearing is mine.
On the contrary, Commodore. As presiding officer and as second in command of the Enterprise, the responsibility is mine. Captain Kirk, would you like to make a statement?
Yes, I would like to make a statement. I am the captain of this ship and am totally capable of commanding her. Let's call this whole thing off and get back to work.
It is quite impossible, Captain. The regulations are quite specific. You are entitled to direct examination of all witnesses immediately after the board has questioned them.
Very kind of you, Spock.
Mister Sulu, how long have you served with Captain Kirk?
To your knowledge, has he ever had any difficulty making decisions?
Did he order you to maintain standard orbit around Gamma Hydra Four?
Did he not, several minutes later, repeat that order?
Did he order you to increase orbit?
Did he not several minutes later repeat that order?
He did not. When I give an order, I expect it to be obeyed. I don't have to repeat myself.
Mister Sulu, please answer the question.
Yes, sir. Captain Kirk repeated his order.
Thank you, Mister Sulu. Yeoman Atkins, you handed Captain Kirk a fuel consumption report in the presence of witnesses, which he read and signed. Is that correct?
Sir, he had more important things on his mind.
Yeoman, you will simply answer the question.
I, I guess he forgot he'd signed it.
He'd forgot he'd signed it.
Thank you, Yeoman. You may leave. Lieutenant Uhura. I have here a bulletin from Starfleet Command which states that the Romulans have broken Code two. Are these your initials which appear at the bottom?
And whose initials are those which appear directly below yours?
Those of Captain Kirk.
Did Captain Kirk ask you to send a message about the comet which passed Gamma Hydra Four?
Oh, yes, but he changed it to Code three.
After you reminded him that the Romulans had broken Code two.
Several hours ago, at the request of this board, you ran a complete physical examination of Captain Kirk.
Medical banks, compute described subject's physical age, using established norms as comparative base.
No, I'm thirty four. I'm thirty four years old.
The computer differs with you, Captain.
Will you give us your professional evaluation of Captain Kirk's present physical condition.
Captain Kirk is suffering from a, a peculiar physical degeneration which strongly resembles aging.
Is not his mental capacity degenerating even more rapidly?
Yes, yes, but he's a better man right now
Doctor, you heard the computer's analysis of Captain Kirk's physical age. Do you agree with it?
It's a blasted machine, Spock! You can't argue with a machine.
Do you agree with it, Doctor?
Yes. Yes, I do, agree. And I am sorry, Jim.
This board has no further questions. Unless you, Commodore Stocker, have something that you would like to add.
No. I am quite satisfied, Mister Spock.
Do you wish to call any witnesses, Captain Kirk?
I am perfectly capable of speaking in my own defence, Mister Spock.
Captain, I would suggest
No, no, no. It's all right, Spock. It's all right. There's only one reason, and one reason alone, for having this, hearing. I refused to leave Gamma Hydra Two
Yes. A slip of the tongue.
You're inability to remember having given commands, reading and signing important orders and then forgetting them, your physical analysis as compiled by our own chief surgeon. All these things would appear to be irrefutable proof of failing physical and mental conditions.
We have no more questions, Captain.
Ask me anything. Anything.
There'll be no more questions, Captain. If you would leave the room so the board can vote
Well, since the senior officers are incapable and I am of flag rank, I am forced by regulations to assume command.
Sir, you have never commanded a starship.
What would you have, a junior officer with far less experience than I have?
The danger from the Romulans
Mister Spock, we have to save these people. Mister Sulu, set a direct course for Starbase Ten. Warp five.
Immediately, Mister Sulu. All officers are to return to their posts.
So, I've been relieved.
I'm sorry, Captain.
Yes. You should've been a prosecuting attorney.
Regulations. Don't give me regulations. You've wanted command all along. First little excuse you get
Captain, I have not assumed command.
I hope you're proud of. What do you mean, you've not assumed command?
I suffer the same affliction as you, sir.
If you're not in command, who is?
Stocker? Are you crazy? He's never had a field command.
Mister Scott was unfit for command. Commodore Stocker is ranking officer
Are you refusing a direct order?
No, sir. Only Commodore Stocker can give a command order onboard this ship.
You traitorous, disloyal, you stab me in the back the first chance you get? Spock. Get out. I never want to have to look at you again.
Oh, Jim. I'm sorry. Truly I am.
I made a fool of myself in there. I shouldn't have let them confuse me, rattle me.
But I'm not old, Jan. I'm not. A few muscular aches doesn't make a man old. And you don't run a starship with your arms. You run it with your head. My brain's as sharp as it ever was. A simple case of radiation poisoning, and they relieve me of my command. I admit I'm getting a little grey, but radiation will do that to you.
Oh, Jim, will you forgive me? I have work to do.
Jan, you know me. Look at me closely. Tell me. Am I getting old?
What are you doing here?
It would seem to be the place where I can be of the most use.
Maybe you'd like to relieve Doctor McCoy. What about Chekov?
Bones, there has to be. There has to be. We beamed down together. We were on the surface together. The same spot. We were together all the time.
No, not all the time. Captain, he left us for a few moments.
He left us? He left us. He went into the building. Spock, something happened.
Yes. Yes, indeed, Captain. Doctor, you remember
He was scared! He saw the dead body and he ran out of the building and he was scared to death.
Yes, yes. Now that could be. Right. Scared. Heart beats faster, breathe gets short, and there's cold sweats and adrenaline flows. Adrenal activity. Now hold on Just a minute. There was something that I read once. It was ancient history, just after the atomic age. Used for radiation sickness. Adrenaline.
Doctor, hyronalin is the specific accepted for all radiation sickness.
Yes, yes. Now. But before, adrenaline. Highly promising. Early research, but they abandoned it when hyronalin was discovered.
Quite possible, Doctor. Perhaps a sufficiently efficacious compound could be developed.
Don't just stand there jawing, Spock. You and Doctor Wallace get cracking.
Thank you, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant Uhura, let me know if we contact any Romulan.
Romulans approaching from both sides. We're bracketed, sir.
I'm going up to the bridge.
No, Jim. You can't do it.
I have to go to the bridge. We're under attack.
Let me go.
We're under attack. I have to go to the Bridge. I've got to go to the bridge.
Keep trying to raise the Romulans.
I'm trying, Commodore.
If I could talk to them, explain to them why we violated the Neutral Zone.
The Romulans are notorious for not listening to explanations.
Lieutenant Uhura is right, sir. We've tangled with them before.
Greenhorn, up there ruining my ship.
Jim, if I have to give you a shot
Doctor, I made the necessary computations and produced this serum. It is crude and dangerous, but we have no time for refinements.
All right. Let's, let's go.
It could cure or kill, Doctor.
Don't give me any Vulcan details. Just give me the shot.
No. I'll take the first shot.
How long do you think this ship can take the pounding? I've got to get up there.
Jim, it could kill you.
I'll die anyway. Do it.
Sir, they've fired another.
The ageing process has stopped. His bodily functions are getting stronger.
Sir, I've tried all known hailing frequencies. They simply ignore us.
They know they have us. They know our shields will give out.
Well then, we have no alternative but to surrender.
Sir, the Romulans do not take captives.
We're losing power, sir.
What am I going to do? I've got to do something.
We're surrounded by Romulan vessels. Maximum of ten. Range fifty to a hundred thousand kilometres.
Engineering, this is the captain. I want full emergency power. I want everything within about two minutes. I want the warp drive engines on full standby. Kirk out. Open up a special channel to Starfleet Command. Code two.
But, Captain, Code
That's an order, Lieutenant. Code two.
Message. From Enterprise to Starfleet Command this sector. Have inadvertently encroached upon Romulan Neutral Zone. Surrounded and under heavy Romulan attack. Escape impossible, shields failing. Will implement destruct order using corbomite device recently installed. Since this will result in the destruction of the Enterprise and all matter in a two hundred thousand kilometre diameter and establish a corresponding dead zone, all Federation ships will avoid this area for the next four solar years. Explosion will take place in one minute. Kirk, commanding Enterprise, out. Mister Sulu, course one eight eight degrees, mark fourteen. Speed, warp factor eight. Stand by.
Romulans giving ground, Captain. Obviously, they tapped in as you expected them to.
A logical assumption, Mister Spock. Are they still retreating?
The Romulans were caught off guard, Captain. They're falling behind.
Are we out of range, Mister Sulu?
Yes, sir. And out of the Neutral Zone.
Secure from Red Alert. Adjust a new course, two five seven degrees, mark three. Heading for Starbase Ten.
Captain, I just wanted to assure you that I did what I thought best to save you and the men.
Noted. You should know, however, that there's very little a Starbase can do that a starship can't.
If I may say so, Captain, I am now quite aware of what a starship can do with the right man at the helm.
You're looking good, Doc.
Feeling fine. So is Scotty. The serum worked. He pulled a muscle during the reaction, but otherwise he's feeling fine.
Oh, very well. A few bruises here and there. Oh. Anytime you're ready, Mister Spock.
I am quite ready now, Doctor.
Because of your Vulcan physique, I have prepared an extremely potent shot for you. However, you might like to know I've removed all the breakables from Sickbay.
That is very considerate of you, Doctor.
I thought you'd be pleased to hear that.
Well, gentlemen, all and all, an experience we'll remember in our old age. Which won't be for some while, I hope. Take over, Mister Sulu. Steady as she goes.
Steady as she goes, Captain.
They're quite large. Seven feet tall is not unusual. They're extremely fast and strong. Lieutenant?
In addition, an assortment of swords and knives.
How long were you stationed on the planet, Doctor?
Only a few months. We found them totally uninterested in medical aid or hospitals. They believe only the strong should survive.
Yes, but in this case, with the more people we take down, the greater chance we have of violating one of their taboos.
Agreed. Once they've got it into their heads we're showing force, you can forget them signing any mining treaty.
Very well. Scotty, you're in command. Bear in mind that the Klingons have been sighted in this sector. While we're negotiating down there, we don't want the Enterprise to become an incident up here.
Aye, sir. We'll keep on our toes.
Halt! You are of the Earth vessel?
I'm Captain Kirk.
We come with open hearts and hands.
Don't move a muscle.
I am unaware of any state of war between our peoples, Captain.
Or is it your policy to kill Klingons on sight?
He was young, and inexperienced.
Does Maab know that the Klingons are our sworn enemies by their own words?
We understand only that he also offers things of value for our rocks, and he has freely handed us his weapons and other devices. Will you do the same?
Let me call my ship and inform them
To bring down an attack upon their village? It is as I told you, Maab. Earthmen fear to bargain honestly.
Will you hand us your weapons?
So they keep their word scrupulously. They're unusually honest. Is that what I heard you say, Doctor?
Yes, I mentioned that.
He also mentioned that they can be highly dangerous.
Dangerous if lied to, if their customs are violated. We lied to no one, Doctor. We violated no customs. Perhaps you'll explain to me why one of my men is dead.
Because he was drawing a weapon on another of their guests.
Grant looked up, saw a Klingon, made a purely instinctive defensive move. What's a Klingon doing down here among your scrupulously honest friends anyway?
Look, Jim. I know what it means to you to lose a crewman.
That's only one down, Doctor. There's over four hundred more up there in orbit. And if there's a Klingon down here, there might be a Klingon ship up there somewhere.
Mister Scott. I'm picking up something on the sensors, sir. Seems to be another ship.
Well, let's put it on the screen.
It's just at the edge of our sensor range, sir. Hard to get an exact reading.
You think it's a Klingon ship?
Who else would be playing cat and mouse with a starship? Well, they can't hurt us much out there, bobbing about like that. No need to call the captain yet.
I shouldn't have chewed you out. I'm sorry.
Yes, you're quite right, Mister Spock. Inefficient and illogical.
You've shown friendship by handing over our weapons. She's making a gesture in return.
Jim! You touch it, her nearest male relative will have to try to kill you. They're offering you a chance for combat. They consider it more pleasurable than love.
It would appear, Captain, that he finds you a disappointment.
I am the teer Akaar. I lead the Ten Tribes of Capella.
And this is Eleen, a young wife to give an old man a son to rule these tribes.
I'm Captain Kirk. First of all, I must protest the killing of my crewman.
If it was your man, wasn't it his privilege to die for you? I do not understand.
Their customs are different, Teer.
And different from those of my people, too, Teer. The sight of death frightens them.
Let me take this, Jim. What Maab has said is true. Our customs are different. What the Klingon has said is unimportant, and we do not hear his words. I just called the Klingon a liar.
Laughter, Teer? Is not the Klingon an honoured guest also?
It was the Earth people who first bargained for our rocks.
Is it not best to have two who bargain for the same goods?
It is I who speak for the tribe, Maab.
I speak for many, Teer. Hear the words of the Klingon.
What do Earth men offer you? What have you obtained from them in the past? Powders and liquids for the sick? We Klingons believe as you do. The sick should die. Only the strong should live. Earthmen have promised to teach the youth of your tribes many things. What? What things? Cleverness against enemies? The use of weapons?
The Earth Federation offers one other thing, Akaar. Our laws. And the highest of all our laws states that your world is yours and will always remain yours. This differs us from the Klingons. Their empire is made up of conquered worlds. They take what they want by arms and force.
The Earth men have different customs, but never have they lied to our people.
There are those of us who won't bargain with Earthmen, Akaar.
Do you say you will fight me, Maab?
Let that be your choice, Teer.
We need our communicators, those devices on our belts. If there's a Klingon ship somewhere
The sky does not interest me. I must consider the words I have heard.
The ship's disappeared, sir. Gone out of range.
Mister Scott, I'm getting a call from a vessel. It's so faint I can't make it out.
Put a booster on it, Lieutenant. Try to pull it in.
I've lost it. It sounded like a distress signal from an Earth vessel.
I have no quarrel with you, Captain. I wish merely to return to my vessel.
Type of vessel. Location.
A small scout ship, Captain. We need the mineral, too. I was sent to negotiate.
Wait. If you lead these people now, be certain you make the right decisions.
Is the new leader of the Ten Tribes afraid? Let me kill him for you.
Or let the Klingon and me fight. It might amuse you.
Perhaps to be a teer is to see in new ways. I begin to like you, Earthman, and I saw fear in the Klingon's eye.
I have the signal clear now, Mister Scott. It is a distress call. It's from the SS Dierdre.
Dierdre? That's a freighter.
Reporting they're under attack. They're running, trying to manoeuvre. It's a Klingon vessel attacking.
Picking it up, sir. Taking a fix.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain.
You carry a child who would be teer.
I must die.
No man may touch the wife of a teer.
She was prepared to die, Earthman.
I was proud to obey the laws. Kill him first. He laid hands upon me. It is my right to see him die.
Enterprise to Mister Spock. Doctor McCoy, come in please.
I have it on the sensors, sir. Tie into my channel, Lieutenant.
Prepare to take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu.
We have a distress call from a Federation ship under attack. That's where our duty lies. Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Ahead warp five.
We were forced to leave Capella to aid a Federation vessel under attack by a Klingon vessel. We were unable to contact our landing party before we were forced to answer the distress signal. Our inability to reach the landing party is strange and I am concerned.
I must assume that something's keeping them busy up there. The Klingon ship.
That would seem a logical conclusion.
Captain, I'm going to fix that woman's arm. They can only kill me once for touching her.
That's a very good idea, Bones.
Let me see that arm.
You will not touch me.
To live is always desirable.
All right. Let's go.
Klingon. There's nothing to concern you there.
We made an agreement, Maab. I have a right to my weapons.
It should be on our screens by now.
At best, a freighter might travel warp two.
I'm well aware of a freighter's maximum speed, Mister Sulu.
Stay with her, Bones. Nice place to get trapped in.
But a defensible entrance, Captain.
Yes, I see. Scout up the trail that way. See what we have in the way of an exit. I'll take a look around.
Now listen, you may be a Capellan woman and the widow of a high teer, but I'm a doctor, and it's my tradition to care for the sick and injured. Now, let me see that arm.
You will not touch me in that manner.
You listen to me, young woman. I'll touch you in any way or manner that my professional judgment indicates.
Just as I thought. It can come anytime now.
How do you know?
Because I'm a doctor, that's how I know.
Even the women of our village cannot tell so much with a touch. Strange hand. Very soft.
The walls get higher and narrower, but there is a way out.
Good. If we could block off that entrance, hold them off, it'd give us more time. They'd have to go around these hills.
There is enough loose rock and shale.
Do you think we could create a sonic disruption with two of our communicators?
Only a very slight chance it would work.
Well, if you don't think we can, maybe we shouldn't try.
Captain, I didn't say that exactly.
The sound beams should produce a sympathetic vibration on the weak area of that slide.
Capellans aren't human, Jim. They're humanoid. There's certain internal differences. I don't have equipment to handle an emergency.
Well, if you don't think you can handle it
There's a cave in there. Probably the only shelter around here.
I'll need help getting her in there.
Look, I'm a doctor, not an escalator! Spock, give me a hand!
No! I will allow only your touch.
A vessel doesn't just disappear.
There's nothing, Mister Scott. All channels and frequencies are clear.
Nothing, sir. If it were destroyed, I'd pick up debris readings of some sort.
It couldn't have run away from us, sir. Not a freighter.
Mister Chekov, pull the microtape on that distress call. I want it replayed.
Did you hear it? They called us by name. Not a general distress signal, but one aimed right at us.
Wouldn't they normally call for the nearest starship?
How would a freighter know we were ordered into this sector?
A trap. We were diverted from the planet.
Or it could be an authentic distress call.
We'll stay long enough to make certain. Continue search pattern.
Just a minute. Let me get her on the rock. There you go.
No, no. Pain is here.
How did you arrange to touch her, Bones, give her a happy pill?
It's in mine from now on.
No, no. It's there. The The pain is there.
Vegetation, Captain. Evidently there's water nearby.
Good, but we need weapons just as much as we need water, Spock.
There would seem to be little weapon potential at hand.
Easy, easy. I'm here. Now you must want the child!
No. Here, child belongs to husband.
Yes, it's yours.
No, no. You've got it all wrong.
Yes, McCoy. It's yours.
No. Say to yourself, The child is mine. It is mine. It is
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Fortunately, this bark has suitable tensile cohesion.
That's more like it. Since the Capellans never developed the bow, this may come as big a surprise as gunpowder was on Earth.
No, no, Mister Spock. You place this arm under here to support its back, and this hand here to support its head.
I would rather, I would rather not. Thank you.
McCoy. Bring our child.
I'll explain later.
That should prove very interesting.
We're turning back. Warp five, Helm.
Warp five, sir. On course for Capella Four.
The Carolina is registered in this sector.
Ignore it, Lieutenant. Log it as my order, my responsibility.
Scotty, if it should turn out to be real
There's an old, old saying on Earth, Mister Sulu. Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me.
My patient spattered me with a rock. She's gone.
It's all right. It's in there. I guess I'll forget psychiatry, stick with surgery. I really thought she'd learned to want it.
Virtue is a relative term, Doctor. She'll head straight to the warriors.
I'll go with you.
Bones, you took a medical oath long before you signed aboard my ship. That small patient in there needs you.
Estimating to planet?
Mister Scott? Sensors picking up a vessel ahead, cutting across our path.
It's an alien, sir. By configuration a Klingon warship. Taking position directly in our path.
This is the USS Enterprise calling unidentified Klingon vessel. Come in. USS Enterprise calling Klingon vessel. Acknowledge, please.
I have it on the viewscreen now, sir. Still distant. Holding a position dead ahead, sir.
Drawing a line, daring us to step over it.
Still closing. The alien's directly in our line of flight.
This is the commander of the USS Enterprise. Identify yourself and your intention. Acknowledge. Close out the frequency, Lieutenant.
Phaser banks are ready, sir.
And we'll go right down their throat, if necessary. Let's see if they have the belly for it.
The Earthmen make excellent game. Their cleverness has surprised me.
We will honour our law, and our word to you, Klingon.
The child is dead, Maab. Do as you will with me.
Dead. I killed them as they slept.
If true, take us to them.
Do you doubt my word, Klingon? I'm the wife of a teer. I will die in my own tent.
First, we'll verify her story.
Is this what your sworn word means, Klingon?
The cavalry doesn't come over the hill in the nick of time anymore.
If by that you mean we can't expect help from the Enterprise, I must agree.
There's just one thing I want.
One of us must get him.
The next man who raises a weapon destroys all of you. You and your primitive knives and your weapons, I'll teach you what killing really means.
Fight! Are you warriors or children? Maab, I will flee. When the Klingon turns to fire, I'll
Hold it there. Drop your weapons.
We missed you, Mister Scott.
Well, at any rate, this should prove interesting.
When the woman starts explaining how the new high teer is actually Doctor McCoy's child.
We don't actually understand it ourselves, Mister Scott.
Nor does Doctor McCoy.
Contact Starfleet. Inform them the Federation mining rights on Capella have been secured by treaty, documents signed by the young high chief's regent. Report follows.
The child was named Leonard James Akaar?
Has a kind of a ring to it, don't you think, James?
Yes. I think it's a name destined to go down in galactic history, Leonard. What do you think, Spock?
I think you're both going to be insufferably pleased with yourselves for at least a month, sir.
Dress uniforms, spit and polish. I don't know how much longer I'm going to be able to stand this. I feel like my neck's in a sling.
The Vulcans are the last delegates we have to pick up. As soon as we get them aboard, we'll be able to relax.
How does that Vulcan salute go?
Vulcan honours us with your presence. We come to serve.
Doctor. My aides and she who is my wife.
Our pleasure, madam. As soon as you're settled I'll arrange a tour of the ship. Mister Spock will conduct you.
I'd prefer another guide, Captain.
As you wish, Ambassador. Mister Spock, we'll leave orbit in two hours. Would you care to beam down and visit your parents?
Captain, Ambassador Sarek and his wife are my parents.
After all these years among humans, you still haven't learned to smile.
Humans smile with so little provocation.
And you haven't come to see us in four years, either.
The situation between my father and myself has not changed.
Mister Spock. A moment, if you please.
I gave Spock his first instruction in computers, Captain. He chose to devote his knowledge to Starfleet instead of the Vulcan Science Academy.
I'm sorry, Ambassador. I did not mean to offend. I thought that
Mrs. Sarek, I just don't understand.
Amanda. I'm afraid you couldn't pronounce the Vulcan name.
After a fashion, and after many years of practice. Shall we continue the tour? My husband did request it.
It sounded more like a command.
Of course. He's a Vulcan. I'm his wife.
And Spock is his son.
You don't understand the Vulcan way, Captain. It's logical. It's a better way than ours. But it's not easy. It has kept Spock and Sarek from speaking as father and son for eighteen years.
Spock is my best officer, and my friend.
I'm glad he has such a friend. It hasn't been easy on Spock. Neither human nor Vulcan. At home nowhere except Starfleet.
I take it that Spock disagreed with his father on a choice of career.
My husband has nothing against Starfleet. But Vulcans believe that peace should not depend on force.
Starfleet force is used only as a last resort. We're an instrument of civilisation. And it's a better opportunity for a scientist to study the universe than he can get at the Vulcan Science Academy.
Perhaps. But Sarek wanted Spock to follow his teachings, as Sarek followed the teachings of his own father.
They are both stubborn.
A human trait, Captain?
Mister Ambassador, I understand you had retired before this conference was called. Forgive my curiosity, but as a doctor, I'm interested in Vulcan physiology. Isn't it unusual for a Vulcan to retire at your age? After all, you're only a hundred and two.
One hundred two point four three seven precisely, Doctor, measured in your years. I had other concerns.
The vote will not be taken here, Ambassador Gav. My government's instructions will be heard in the council chambers on Babel.
No! You! How do you vote, Sarek of Vulcan?
In council, his vote carries others. I will know where he stands and why.
Tellarites do not argue for reasons. They simply argue.
Gentlemen. Ambassador Sarek is quite correct when he points out this is not the council chamber of Babel. I'm fully aware that the admission of Coridan is a highly debatable issue, but you won't solve it here.
You are correct, Captain. Quite logical.
Have you met Gav before, Ambassador?
We debated during my last council session. Ambassador.
Spock, I've always suspected that you were a little more human than you let on. Mrs. Sarek, I know about the rigorous training of the Vulcan youth, but tell me, did he ever run and play like the human children, even in secret?
Well, he, he did have a pet sehlat he was very fond of.
It's sort of a fat teddy bear.
A teddy bear?
Excuse me, Doctor. It has been a rather long day for my wife. Captain.
A teddy bear.
On my way. All duty personnel on Yellow Alert. Don't alarm the passengers. Kirk out.
A small ship, Captain. It's been there five minutes, remaining outside phaser range at extreme limit of sensors.
Sensors indicate the size of a scout ship, but the configuration is unfamiliar. Most unusual.
Does she answer a hail?
I've tried all frequencies and hooked in the universal translator. No response, sir.
Starfleet records no authorised vessel in this quadrant except ours.
Care to guess what she is?
Guess, Captain? I shall need more data for my estimate.
Mister Chekov, plot course to intercept that vessel. I want to see what she looks like close up.
You embarrassed Spock this evening. Not even a mother may do that. He is a Vulcan.
He's also human.
He's a Starfleet officer.
I thought you didn't approve of Starfleet.
It is not a question of approval. The fact exists. He is in Starfleet. He must command respect if he is to function.
Sarek, you're proud of him, aren't you? You're showing almost human pride in your son.
It does not require pride to ask that Spock be given the respect which is his due. Not as my son, but as Spock. Do you understand?
Not really, but it doesn't matter. I love you anyway. I know. It isn't logical.
Interesting. They were travelling at approximately warp ten.
Captain, Starfleet acknowledges report on our situation and confirms no authorised Federation vessel in this quadrant.
Back on original heading, Captain. The intruder changed course immediately after we did. It's paralleling us again.
Well, we have a shadow. Faster, more manoeuvrable and unidentified. Mister Spock, full analysis of sensor readings. I want to know who that intruder is.
Vulcan, I would speak to you.
It does seem unavoidable.
How do you vote on the Coridan admission?
You seem unwilling to wait for the council meeting, Ambassador. No matter. We favour admission.
Under Federation law, Coridan can be protected and its wealth administered for the benefit of its people.
That's well for you. Vulcan has no mining interest.
Some of your ships have been carrying Coridan dilithium crystals.
Gentlemen. Gentlemen. Whatever arguments you have between yourselves is your business. My business is running the ship. As long as I command, there will be order.
Understood. There will be payment for your slander, Sarek.
Threats are illogical. And payment is usually expensive.
Security to Captain Kirk.
How was he killed?
His neck was broken. By an expert.
Well, from the nature and location of the break, I'd say the killer knew exactly where to apply pressure to snap the neck instantly.
Who aboard would have that knowledge?
Spock. A short time ago, I broke up an argument between Gav and your father.
Interesting? Spock, do you realise that makes your father the most likely suspect?
Vulcans do not approve of violence.
You're saying he couldn't have done it?
No, Captain. I'm merely saying it would be illogical to kill without reason.
But if he had a reason, could he have done it?
If there were a reason, my father is quite capable of killing. Logically and efficiently.
Mrs. Sarek, I'm sorry to disturb you. I must speak to your husband.
He's been gone for some time. It's his habit to meditate in private before retiring. What's wrong? Spock?
You want something of me, Captain?
Ambassador, the Tellarite. Gav has been murdered.
Yes. Ambassador, where were you during the past hour?
Captain, you're not accusing him?
Mother. If only on circumstantial evidence, he is a logical suspect.
I quite agree.
Then where were you during the hour?
In private meditation, Captain. Spock will tell you that such meditation is a personal experience, not to be discussed. especially not with Earthmen.
That's a very convenient excuse, Ambassador.
It's difficult to say with Vulcan physiology, but I believe it's something to do with his cardiovascular system.
Can you help him?
I don't know that yet either.
I'm sorry about your father.
Yes, it could adversely affect our mission.
Aren't you worried about him?
Worry is a human emotion, Captain. I accept what has happened. The ship's hull seems to have a high density level or is cloaked against sensor probes. It is manned, but sensors cannot make out specifics.
I see. Well, the Romulans have nothing like it. Certainly not the Federation or the neutral planets. What about the Klingons?
I think it unlikely it is one of theirs.
Captain? I picked up the last part of a transmission. Just like that other one. I put the recorder and the directional locator on it immediately.
It's the intruder ship, sir.
Switch recorder to Mister Spock's station for decode, Lieutenant.
Sir, the directional locator indicates reception point somewhere within the body of this ship.
A personal receiver? Somebody on board is in contact with that vessel?
Possibly, Captain. But I cannot decode this transmission.
It is in no known code. There's no detectable pattern. No standard references apply.
Only negative. It fits none of our computer records, and it is alien.
Murder? Someone out there playing tag? Lieutenant, you've got your sensor locator on a wide beam. You've established a receiver on board this vessel. Tighten your field to the interior of the ship.
If that alien vessel starts transmitting again, I want to know who on board the Enterprise is receiving.
Bones, how is he?
As far as I can tell from instrument readings, our prime suspect has a malfunction in one of the heart valve. It's similar to a heart attack in a human. But with Vulcan physiology, it's impossible to tell without an operation. Mrs. Sarek, has he had any previous attacks?
Yes. There were three others. My physician prescribed Benjisidrine for the condition.
Why didn't you tell me?
There was nothing you could have done.
Ambassador, when did you have these attacks?
Two before we left Vulcan, the third a few hours ago. I was on the observation deck. When the Tellarite was murdered, I was quite incapacitated.
There were no witnesses?
Doctor, do you propose surgery for the heart defect?
I'm not sure. It's tough enough on a human. On a Vulcan, an ordinary operation's out of the question.
Because of the construction of the Vulcan heart.
Well, I'm glad somebody's asking me something around here. Well, the procedure they're discussing would require tremendous amounts of blood for the patient.
I've checked the blood bank. There isn't enough Vulcan blood and plasma to even begin such an operation of this type.
There are other Vulcans aboard.
Yes, I'd say that's rare.
We've run a number of blood tests on Mister Spock. It isn't true Vulcan blood either. It has human blood elements in it.
It should be possible to filter out the human factors.
Even you couldn't give that much blood, Spock. It would kill you.
Indeed. I would estimate the odds
I see it, Spock, but that was a Rigelian.
Rigelian physiology is very similar to Vulcan.
Similar is not good enough. It's still experimental.
But it does look promising.
Spock, we would need such great amounts of blood that, even if the drug worked on the Vulcans as well as a Rigelian, which I'm doubtful, it would still drain Sarek to a critical level.
Plus the fact I've never operated on a Vulcan before. Oh, I've studied the anatomical types. I know where all the organs are. But that's a lot different from actual surgical experience. So if I don't kill him with the operation, the drug probably will.
What drug, Doctor? My husband is asleep. What drug?
A chemical stimulant to speed up reproduction and replacement of blood in the body. It's only experimental.
It has been used successfully on test subjects on Rigel Five.
It places a tremendous strain on the spleen and the liver. In Sarek's condition, the stimulant would kill him.
Miss Chapel? I underwent a physical examination last week. Would you pull those records, please?
Already pulled. You're perfectly healthy, Mister Spock.
What has that got
You're going to use it on yourself. A transfusion from you to your father.
It would seem the only answer.
It could damage you internally. It could kill you. I'm sorry, Spock. I can't sanction it.
And I refuse to permit it. I won't risk both of you.
Then you automatically condemn Sarek to death. And you, Doctor, have no logical alternative either. If you do not operate, Sarek will die. You now have the means to perform the operation. I am volunteering myself as the blood donor. I'll be at my station until you require me.
I'm on deck five, near my quarters. I've been attacked by an Andorian. Security. Security team.
It's a bad wound. Punctured left lung. A centimetre or so lower, it'd have gone through the heart.
I'll be in the brig questioning the Andorian prisoner.
Spock, your father is much worse. There's no longer a choice. I have to operate immediately. We can begin as soon as you're prepared.
My first responsibility is to the ship. Our passengers' safety is by Starfleet order of first importance. We are being followed by an alien, possibly hostile, vessel. I cannot relinquish command under these circumstances.
You can turn command over to Scotty.
On what grounds, Doctor? Command requirements do not recognise personal privilege. I'll be in the brig interrogating the Andorian.
He is Thelev, a minor member of my staff. I know nothing of him except that he has served adequately.
He has been subjected to questioning under verifier scan and truth drug. He reveals nothing. I suggest his mind has been so conditioned as part of a preconceived plan.
My people are a violent race, but we've no quarrel with Captain Kirk.
You suggest a plot. How could it profit us to harm the captain?
I do not know. There is no logic in Thelev's attack upon the captain. There is no logic in Gav's murder.
Perhaps you should forget logic and devote yourself to motivations of passion or gain. Those are reasons for murder.
Spock, you must turn command over to somebody else.
Mother, when I was commissioned, I took an oath to carry out responsibilities which were clearly and exactly specified.
Any competent officer can command this ship. Only you can give your father the blood transfusions that he needs to live.
Any competent officer can command this ship under normal circumstances. The circumstances are not normal. We're carrying over one hundred valuable Federation passengers. We're being pursued by an alien ship. We're subject to possible attack. There has been murder and attempted murder on board. I cannot dismiss my duties.
Duty? Your duty is to your father.
I know, but this must take precedence. If I could give the transfusion without loss of time or efficiency, I would. Sarek understands my reason.
Well, I don't. It's not human. That's not a dirty word. You're human, too. Let that part of you come through. Your father's dying.
Mother, how can you have lived on Vulcan so long, married a Vulcan, raised a son on Vulcan, without understanding what it means to be a Vulcan?
If this is what it means, I don't want to know.
It means to adopt a philosophy, a way of life, which is logical and beneficial. We cannot disregard that philosophy merely for personal gain, no matter how important that gain might be.
Nothing is as important as your father's life.
Can you imagine what my father would say if I were to agree, if I were to give up command of this vessel, jeopardise hundreds of lives, risk interplanetary war, all for the life of one person?
Oh, go to him. Now. Please.
I'd like to get my hands on the guy with the sledgehammer.
No, the one inside my head. How long have I
Now let that be a lesson to you. Just lie there and be happy you're still alive.
Not good. If I could only operate.
What's stopping you? I thought you were all ready.
I was. When you became injured, Spock assumed command. He's going to stay there until you're back on your feet, even if it costs Sarek his life. Regulations.
I can't damn him for his loyalty, for doing his duty, but I'm not going to let him commit patricide.
Jim, if you stand, you could start to bleed again.
Bones, Sarek will die without that operation, and you can't operate without transfusions from Spock. I'll convince Spock I'm all right and order him to report here. As soon as he leaves the bridge, I'll turn command over to Scotty and report to my quarters. Will that fill your prescription?
I'll take over, Mister Spock. You report to Sickbay with Doctor McCoy.
Captain, are you quite all right?
I've certified him physically fit, Mister Spock. Now since I have an operation to perform and both of us are required
Get out, Spock. Chekov, what's the status of the intruder?
Call Mister Scott to the bridge.
Captain, the alien vessel is moving closer.
Belay that order. I'll stay here.
Captain, I'm picking up the alien signal again, but it's coming from inside the Enterprise.
Security? Security to the brig. Search the prisoner immediately.
Mister Spock's blood reproduction rate is up over two hundred percent. Sarek's heartbeat has risen to three hundred and twenty four. Blood pressure ninety over forty, dropping.
I wish I knew whether that was good or bad. Initiate sterile field.
Where do you think you're going?
I must see the captain.
My patients don't walk out in the middle of an operation.
The alien ship. I've just realised that if their power utilisation curve is not the norm, it should be possible to identify them this way. Very important.
So is your father's life.
Captain, the alien ship has changed course and speed. Moving directly toward us at warp eight.
Bring the prisoner to the bridge. Deflectors on. Red Alert. Phasers stand by to fire on my order.
Moving away. Turning now. He's coming around again.
Fire as he passes, Ensign.
A clean miss, sir.
Report on his weaponry, Mister Chekov.
Standard phasers. Good. They may have more speed, but they're not giants.
Captain, the intercoms are jammed. All the ambassadors are asking what's going on.
Tell them to take a good guess, but clear that board, Lieutenant.
He's coming around again.
One more like that, and I'm going to lose both these men.
On my order, fire photon torpedoes two, four and six. Widest possible scatter.
Full spread missed, sir. They're moving too fast for us.
The systems are off.
Call engineering and have sickbay systems put on priority.
Number four shield has buckled, sir.
Switching over. Shields firming up. Number four is still weak, sir. If they hit us there again, it'll go altogether.
Your friends out there are good. They'll have to destroy this ship to win.
That was intended from the beginning, Captain.
You're not Andorian. Who are you?
Damage control procedures, all decks. That ship out there has phasers. At least our weapons are alike.
Number two shield is gone.
Engineering, this is the Captain. Cut power on port side except for phaser banks. At my signal, cut starboard power. Kirk out. Who are you?
Find your own answers, Captain. You haven't long to live.
You're a spy, surgically altered to pass as an Andorian. Planted in the ambassador's party to use terror and murder to disrupt us and prepare for this attack.
What are you doing?
We're starting to drift, sir. Shall I hold her on course?
No. Stand by your phasers, Mister Chekov.
Aye, sir. Phasers standing by. He's just hovering out there, sir.
Looking us over. We're dead as far as he knows.
You're baiting him. You're trying to lure him in.
Here he comes. Range decreasing. Speed dropping close to sublight.
Hold your fire, Mister Chekov.
Secure from general quarters. Lieutenant, open the hailing frequency. If they wish to surrender
Lieutenant, relay to Starfleet command. Tell them we have a prisoner.
Take him to Sickbay.
I seem to have miscalculated.
Are you quite through shaking the ship around?
Spock, Sarek how are they?
I don't mind telling you, you sure make it difficult for a surgeon trying
Some doctors have all the luck.
Captain, I believe you'll find the alien
We damaged their ship. They destroyed themselves to avoid capture. Bones, Thelev's body will be brought to your lab. I want an autopsy performed as soon as possible.
I think you'll find he's an Orion, Doctor.
Intelligence reports that Orion smugglers have been raiding the Coridan system.
But what would they gain by an attack on Starfleet?
Yes, of course. With Orion carefully neutral, they'd clean up supplying dilithium to both sides and continue to raid Coridan.
The thing that confused me was the power utilisation curve. It made them seem more powerful than a starship or anything known to us. That ship was constructed for a suicide mission. Since they never intended to return to their home base, they could use one hundred percent power on their attacks. The thing I don't understand is why I didn't think of it earlier.
You might have had something else on your mind.
No, but thank you anyway.
And you, Sarek. Would you also say thank you to your son?
I don't understand.
For saving your life.
Spock acted in the only logical manner open to him. One does not thank logic, Amanda.
Logic, logic! I'm sick to death of logic. Do you want to know how I feel about your logic?
Emotional, isn't she?
She has always been that way.
Indeed? Why did you marry her?
At the time, it seemed the logical thing to do.
Doctor, I'll return to my station now.
You are at your station, Mister Spock.
Doctor McCoy, I believe you're enjoying all this.
Indeed, Captain. I've never seen him look so happy.
We have reached projected point three, Captain. Adjust to new course two oh one mark one five.
How is she, Doc?
Small thanks to the Starfleet.
Now really, Commissioner, you can't blame the Starfleet.
I should've received the proper inoculations ahead of time.
Sakuro's disease is extremely rare. The chances of anyone contracting it are literally billions to one.
I was sent to Epsilon Canaris Three to prevent a war, Doctor. Thanks to the inefficiency of the medical branch of the Starfleet, I've been forced to leave before my job was done.
Commissioner, I can assure you that once we reach the Enterprise, with its medical facilities, we'll have you back to your job in time for you to prevent that war.
How soon will we rendezvous with that ship of yours, Captain?
Will you check your automatic scanner, please?
That's odd. I've never seen anything like that before.
Nor have I.
Staying right with us. Sensor readings, Mister Spock.
Vaguely like a cloud of ionised hydrogen, but with strong erratic electrical impulses.
We've got it.
Helm does not answer, Captain.
Neither do the pods. Communications are dead. Building overload. Cut all power relays.
What's happening? I demand to know.
You already know as much as we do, Miss Hedford. Whatever that thing is outside, it's yanked us off course from the Enterprise.
Jim, we've got to get Miss Hedford to the Enterprise. Her condition.
I know, Bones, but there's nothing I can do about it.
I insist you make your scheduled rendezvous with the Enterprise.
Miss Hedford, we'll do what we can, when we can. At the moment, we're helpless. You might as well sit back and enjoy the ride.
Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please, come in. Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please. It's no good. We're not transmitting. Bones?
Gravity is similar to Earth. Most unusual in view of its size. The bulk of the body seems to be iron and nickel. More than an asteroid. Like a small planetoid, I should say. Possibly a remnant of a planet breakup. Totally suitable for human life.
All right, we get out and get up. Issue phasers. Bones, maintain full alert. Commissioner, you'll stay inside.
Just how long am I supposed to stay inside, Captain?
That's a very good question. I wish I could answer it. All right. Let's go.
Most unusual. Unlikely. In fact, Captain, I would say quite impossible.
There must be a reason.
Let's look a little further.
Jim, I just took a tricording sweep, and I got the same readings almost as Spock got when we were pulled off course.
I think so, only it reads here on the surface with us. It's in that direction, and it doesn't read solid. It's more unstable, tenuous, like a collection of gases.
Bones, get a physiological reading on that, whatever it is.
Hello! Are you real? I mean, I'm not imagining you, am I?
We're real enough.
The F? Well, it doesn't matter. I'm Cochrane. I've been marooned here who knows how long. If you only knew how good it is to see you. And a woman. A beautiful one at that.
You're a Vulcan, aren't you?
Ma'am. You're food to a starving man. All of you. Hey, that's a nice ship. Simple and clean. Been trying to get her to go again? Well, forget it. It won't work.
He's human, Jim. Everything checks out perfectly.
Mister Cochrane. We were forced off our course and taken here by some force we couldn't identify.
Which seems to be on the surface of this body at the moment.
Well, I wouldn't know anything about that.
You say we'll be unable to get the ship to function again?
Not a chance. There's some sort of dampening field down here. Power systems don't work. Take my word for it.
You don't mind if we continue to try?
Go right ahead. You've got plenty of time.
What about you, Cochrane? How did you get here?
Marooned, I told you. Look, we'll have lots of time to learn about each other. I have a small place over that way. All the comforts of home. I can even offer you a hot bath.
How perceptive of you to notice I needed one.
If you don't mind, Mister Cochrane, I'd like more than just a statement that you were marooned here. It's a long way off the beaten path.
That's right. That's why I'm so glad to see you. Look, I'll tell you everything you want to know, but not here. Your ship is sure a beauty.
Yes, she is. And you've been out of circulation quite a while. The principles may be new to you. Mister Spock, why don't you explain our methods of propulsion to Mister Cochrane?
Talks a lot, but he doesn't say much.
I've noticed something else.
He looks familiar.
Familiar? Now that you mention it, he does.
I can't quite place him, but. What about Miss Hedford?
No temperature yet, but we've got to get under way soon, Jim. I guarantee you, it will develop. What are we going to do?
Yes. I had tools and supplies left over from my crash.
Not Earth, but it's livable. I grow vegetables in the fields over that next ridge. Come on in.
All the comforts of home indeed, Mister Cochrane. Where'd you get the antiques?
You mean my instruments? I imagine things have changed a lot since I crashed.
Must you keep it so terribly hot in here?
The temperature's a constant seventy two degrees. Let me get you something cool to drink.
Do you feel hot?
I feel infuriated, deeply put upon, and absolutely outraged.
It was quite a hike here. You're tired. Just take it easy for a while.
I'll rest later, Doctor.
Yes, I know. It means we're running out of time.
What was that?
Well, sometimes the light plays tricks on you. You'd be surprised what I've imagined I've seen around here sometimes.
We imagined nothing, Mister Cochrane. There was an entity out there and I suspect it was the same entity which brought us here. Please explain.
There's nothing to explain.
You'll find I have a very low tolerance level where the safety of my people are concerned. We find you out here, where no human has any business being. We were virtually hijacked in space and brought here. Now I'm not just requesting an explanation, Mister. I'm demanding one.
All right. It was the Companion.
That's what I call it. As a matter of fact, Captain, I didn't crash here. I was brought here in my disabled ship. I was almost dead. The Companion saved my life.
You were injured?
I was dying, Mister Spock.
You seem perfectly all right now. What was the matter?
I was an old man.
You were what?
Well, I don't know how it did it, but the Companion rejuvenated me, made me young again, like I am now.
I prefer to reserve judgment on that part of your story, sir. Meanwhile, would you please explain exactly what this Companion of yours is?
I told you, I don't know what it is. It exists, it lives, and I can communicate with it.
That's a pretty far out story.
Mister Cochrane, do you have a first name?
Zefram Cochrane of Alpha Centuri, the discoverer of the space warp?
That's right, Captain.
But that's impossible. Zefram Cochrane died a hundred and fifty years ago.
The name of Zefram Cochrane is revered throughout the known galaxy. Planets were named after him. Great universities, cities.
Isn't your story a little improbable, Mister Cochrane?
No, it's true. I was eighty seven years old when I came here.
You say this Companion found you and rejuvenated you? What were you doing in space at the age of eighty seven?
I was tired, Captain. I was going to die, and I wanted to die in space. That's all.
True, his body was never found.
You're looking at it, Mister Spock.
How do you feel?
Terrible. How should I feel?
You're running a little temperature. Perhaps you should lie down.
Doctor, will you please just leave me alone. It's the heat.
All right. Try to relax. Jim, it's started, the fever. It's over a hundred, and it's climbing.
How long do we have?
A matter of hours, that's all.
Mister Cochrane, you say you were brought here a hundred and fifty years ago? You don't look over thirty five.
I haven't aged. The Companion sees to that.
Captain. These instruments, they date from the time indicated. From your ship, Mister Cochrane?
I cannibalised it. The food, water, gardens, everything else I need the Companion gives me. Apparently, it creates it out of the native elements.
You say you can communicate with it. Perhaps you can find out what we're doing here.
I already know.
You wouldn't mind telling us?
You won't like it.
I already don't like it.
You're here to keep me company.
You mean you brought us here?
No, the Companion did. I told it I'd die of loneliness. I thought it would release me. Instead, it brought you here.
No! No! No! That's disgusting! We're not animals! No! Oh, no! It's inhuman! No! No!
Spock, run additional tricorder readings. Learn anything you can. Find me a weapon to use against this thing.
You ask me to find a weapon. Do you intend to destroy it?
I intend to do whatever's necessary to get us off this planet and Commissioner Hedford to the hospital. If the Companion stands in the way, then we push it out of the way. Clear, Spock?
I'd begin to age again, normally.
Do you want to leave here?
Believe me, Captain, immortality consists largely of boredom. What's it like out there in the galaxy?
We're on a thousand planets and spreading out. We cross fantastic distances and everything's alive, Cochrane. Life everywhere. We estimate there are millions of planets with intelligent life. We haven't begun to map them. Interesting?
How would you like to sleep for a hundred and fifty years and wake up in a new world?
It's all out there waiting for you, but we'll need your help to get away.
You've got it.
You seem to think this Companion of yours can do almost anything.
I said it was very powerful.
Could it cure her?
I don't know.
How do you communicate with it?
We've got to try. We're helpless. See if it can do something.
How do you do it?
I just sort of clear my mind and it comes.
Bones, what do you make of that?
Almost a symbiosis of some kind, a sort of joining.
Exactly what I think. Not exactly like a pet owner speaking to a beloved animal, would you say?
No, it's more than that.
Agreed. More like love.
Are you all right?
Yes. It kind of drains me a little, but I'm all right.
The Companion can't do anything to help Miss Hedford.
Then she'll die.
If there's anything I could do to help, I would, and I will, but we can expect nothing from the Companion.
Spock! Are you all right?
It attacked you?
Evidently. Unquestionably, a large part of its substance is simple electricity.
Oh, yes. I'm not a scientist or a physicist, Mister Spock, but am I correct in assuming that anything that generates electricity can be shorted out?
Put this in the proximity of the Companion, throw this switch, and it will scramble every electrical impulse the creature can produce. It cannot fail.
It troubles you, Cochrane?
The Companion saved my life. It's taken care of me all these years. We've been very close in a way that's hard to explain. I suppose I even have an affection for it.
It's also keeping you prisoner.
I don't want it killed.
We may simply render it powerless.
But you don't know. You could kill it. I won't stand for that.
We're getting out of here, Cochrane. Face up to it. I'll do anything I have to to save all of our lives.
I suppose from your point of view, you're right.
We understand how you feel, Mister Cochrane, but it has to be done.
All right. You want me to contact it?
There is some risk, Captain. We do not know the extent of its powers.
Nor it ours.
Stop it! You're killing them! Stop it, please! Stop it! You're choking them! Let them go. You're choking them! Stop it!
Cochrane got it off of us, but I don't know whether he did us a favour or not.
What kind of talk is that?
How do you fight a thing like that? I've got a ship up there somewhere, responsibility for four lives here, one of them dying because of me.
It isn't your fault.
I'm in command, Bones. It makes it my fault. How do you fight a thing like that?
Maybe you're a soldier so often that you forget you're also trained to be a diplomat. Why not try a carrot instead of a stick?
The universal translator on the shuttlecraft. We can try that, talk to that thing.
The translator is for use with more congruent life forms.
Adjust it, change it. The trouble with immortality is it's boring. Adjusting the translator will give you something to do.
It is possible. If I could widen its pattern of reception
Right down your alley, Spock. Get it here and get to work. That thing is still out there. Better go that way.
All scanners, spherical sweep. Range, maximum. They'll have to pick it up.
If the shuttlecraft powered away, Mister Scott, but if it were just towed?
There'd still be traces of residual matter floating around, Lieutenant.
Bearing two ten mark forty. Strong particle concentration. We're on it, Mister Scott.
Steady as she goes, Mister Sulu.
What do you think it means, Mister Scott?
The shuttlecraft was on schedule until it was shy five hours of rendezvous. Then something happened.
Well, I'd feel a lot better if it were a little more definite.
It didn't wreck. There was no debris. There's no trace of expelled internal atmosphere, no residual radioactivity. Ah, it's. Something took over. Tractor beams maybe. Something. They dragged it away on the heading we're now on.
If there are no further traces, how are we going to follow them?
We stay on this course, see what comes up.
It's a big galaxy, Mister Scott.
What's the theory behind this device?
There are certain universal ideas and concepts common to all intelligent life. This device instantaneously compares the frequency of brainwave patterns, selects those ideas and concepts it recognises, and then provides the necessary grammar.
With a voice or the approximation of whatever the creature is on the sending end. Not one hundred percent efficient, but nothing ever is. Ready, Mister Spock?
How can we communicate? My thoughts, you are hearing them. This is interesting.
Yes. The matter of gender could change the entire situation.
I'm way ahead of you.
Then it is not a zookeeper.
No. A lover. Companion. It is wrong to keep us here against our will.
A man needs the company of his own kind, or he will cease to exist. He felt it to me.
One of us will cease to exist if we don't get her to a place where we can care for her.
The man needs others of his species. That is why you are here. The man must continue.
Companion, try to understand. It is the nature of our species to be free, just as it is your nature to stay here. We will cease to exist in captivity.
Your bodies have stopped their peculiar degeneration. There will be nothing to harm you. You will continue, and the man will continue. This is necessary.
This is a marvellous opportunity to add to our knowledge. Ask it about its nature, its history.
This isn't a classroom. I'm trying to get us out of here.
A chance like this may never come again. It could tell us so much.
Captain, why did you build that translator with a feminine voice?
But I heard
The idea of male and female are universal constants, Cochrane. There's no doubt about it. The Companion is female.
I don't understand.
You don't? A blind man could see it with a cane. You're not a pet. You're not a specimen kept in a cage. You're a lover.
I'm a what?
Her attitude when she approaches you is profoundly different than when she contacts us. Her appearance is soft, gentle. Her voice is melodic, pleasing. I do not totally understand the emotion, but it obviously exists. The Companion loves you.
Do you know what you're saying? For all these years, I've let something as alien as that crawl around inside me, into my mind, my feelings.
What are you complaining about? It kept you alive.
That thing fed on me. It used me. It's disgusting.
There's nothing disgusting about it. It's just another life form, that's all. You get used to those things.
You're as bad as it is.
Your highly emotional reaction is most illogical. Your relationship with the Companion has for one hundred and fifty years been emotionally satisfying, eminently practical, and totally harmless. It may indeed have been quite beneficial.
Fascinating. A totally parochial attitude.
I heard him. He was loved and he resents it.
Approaching what seems to be an asteroid belt, sir. Scanners report approximately seven thousand bodies of sizes running from types A to N.
Approximately thirty four percent of the bodies of atmospherian types H to M.
All right, then. We'll do it the hard way. All sensors set for life form registration. Automatic selection.
Mister Scott, there are thousands of them out there they could be on, if they're on any of them at all.
That's right, Lieutenant. Thousands. And we'll look them over one by one.
Companion, do you love the man?
I do not understand.
Is he important to you, more important than anything? Is he as though he were a part of you?
He is part of me. The man must continue.
He will not continue. He will cease to exist. By your feeling for him, you are condemning him to an existence he will find unbearable. He will cease to exist.
He does not age. He remains forever.
You speak of his body. I speak of his spirit. Companion, inside the shelter, a female of our species is dying. She will not continue. That is what will happen to the man unless you release all of us.
I do not understand.
Our species can only survive if we have obstacles to overcome. You take away all obstacles. Without them to strengthen us, we will weaken and die. You regard the man only as a toy. You amuse yourself with him.
You are wrong. The man is the centre of all things. I care for him.
But you can't really love him. You haven't the slightest knowledge of love, the total union of two people. You are the Companion. He is the man. You are two different things. You can't join. You can't love. You may keep him here forever, but you will always be separate, apart from him.
What did you hope to gain by that, Jim?
Try to convince her of the hopelessness of it. Love sometimes expresses itself in sacrifice. I thought maybe if she loved him, she'd let him go.
But she or it is inhuman, Captain. You cannot expect her to react like a human.
It's useless. I know.
I don't understand it. She's not sick at all.
Don't you understand? It's the Companion.
She's perfectly healthy. Heart like a hammer, respiration normal, blood pressure normal. This is medically impossible.
We are here.
Both of us. Those you knew as the Commissioner and the Companion. We are both here.
Companion, you do not have the power to create life.
That is for the Maker of all things.
Commissioner Hedford was dying.
That part of us was too weak to hold on. In a moment, there would have been no continuing. Now we're together.
Then you are both here, in the one body?
We are one.
Zefram, we frighten you. We've never frightened you before. Loneliness. This is loneliness. Oh, what a bitter thing. Oh, Zefram, it's so sad. How do you bear it, this loneliness?
That will not be necessary, Captain. Your vehicle will operate as before, so will the communications device.
You're letting us go?
We could do nothing now to stop you. You said we would not know love because we were not human. Now we are human. We'll know the change of days. We will know death. But to touch the hand of man, nothing is as important.
You're very beautiful.
Part of me understands. Part does not. But it pleases me.
I could explain many things.
Oh, let me walk, Zefram. Let me feel the earth against my feet. Let me feel the warmth of the sun on my face. You beside me. Let me feel these things.
Go ahead, Cochrane We have a few things to do.
Mister Scott, it's the Captain.
Perfectly all right. Can you get a fix on us.
The helm is computing your position now, Captain.
Very good. I'll continue transmitting. Assume standard orbit when you arrive. We'll transport up in the shuttlecraft.
Interesting story, Scotty. I can't tell you now because, quite frankly, I don't know how it's going to end. Kirk out.
I can't go with you, Zefram.
Of course you can. You have to.
My life emanates from this place. If I should leave it for more than a tiny march of days, I'll cease to exist. I must return, even as you must consume matter to maintain your life.
You gave up everything to be human? But even if you stay here, you'll eventually die.
The joy of this hour. I am pleased.
Well, I can't just fly away and leave you here.
You must be free, Zefram Cochrane.
You saved my life, took care of me. You loved me. I never understood. I do now.
We're locked in, Captain. Standard orbit established. Shuttlecraft bay standing by to receive you.
The Enterprise is waiting, Mister Cochrane.
I can't take her away from here. If I do, she'll die. If I leave her, she'll die of loneliness. I owe everything to her. I can't leave her. I love her. Is that surprising?
Think it over, Mister Cochrane. There's a whole galaxy out there waiting to honour you.
I have honours enough.
But you will age, both of you. There will be no immortality. You'll both grow old here and finally die.
That's been happening to men and women for a long time. I've got the feeling it's one of the pleasanter things about being human, as long as you grow old together.
Are you sure?
There's plenty of water here. The climate's good for growing things. I might try to plant a fig tree. A man's entitled to that, isn't he? It isn't gratitude, Captain. Now that I see her, touch her, I know that I love her. We'll have a lot of years together. They'll be happy ones.
Captain, don't tell them about me.
Well, I'm sure the Federation can find another woman somewhere who'll stop that war.
Yes. There's something odd about that man, and I can't quite pinpoint it.
Perhaps you're making a rather hasty judgment. Mister Norman has only been aboard seventy two hours.
I know when something doesn't strike me right, and he doesn't.
Specifics, Doctor. Labels do not make arguments.
All right. There's something wrong about a man who never smiles, whose conversation never varies from the routine of the job, and who won't talk about his background.
I find your argument strewn with gaping defects in logic.
Maybe, but you can't evaluate a man by logic alone. Besides, he has avoided two appointments that I've made for his physical exam without reason.
That's not at all surprising, Doctor. He's probably terrified of your beads and rattles.
There's an unplanned course change being fed into the instruments, sir.
I can't, sir.
Auxiliary control, this is the captain. Auxiliary control, what's going on down there?
Sir, auxiliary control is on total override.
Kirk to Security.
Lieutenant Uhura, have Mister Spock report to the bridge.
Lieutenant Rowe, sir. I'm in auxiliary control. Ensign Jordan's been knocked out.
Any sign of the intruder?
No, sir. He's gone. I've put out a full security alert on all decks.
Find him. Kirk out. Mister Spock, we seem to be taking an unscheduled ride.
Sir, the instruments won't respond.
Emergency manual monitor, this is the captain. Report.
Here, you're not allowed
Kirk to Engineering.
Scotty, the intruder is in your area.
Captain, he's here.
Scotty? Security, the intruder is in the engineering section. Have all units converge on that point.
Sir, we're picking up speed. Warp five, six. Warp seven, sir.
I can't, sir. All the controls are jammed.
It will not be necessary, Captain.
Tell Security we've found the intruder. Do you mind telling me what this is all about, mister?
Confirmed, Captain. He's taken out all the override controls. If we tamper without knowing where the trigger relay is, we could extinguish ourselves.
Who are you?
I assure you we are no threat to humanity or humanoid life. We mean you no harm, but we require your ship.
You require? Who and what are we?
I control the trigger relay, sir. I cannot be overcome by physical means, and if you attempt to use your phasers, the trigger relay will be activated. We shall continue on our present course for approximately four solar days, at which time we shall arrive at our destination.
I am not programmed to respond in that area.
It seems we're going to take a little trip.
Captain Kirk. The following individuals will be transported down to our planet. Yourself, science officer, medical officer, communications officer and navigator.
Any meetings or discussions can be held aboard the Enterprise.
If you do not come with me, your engines will be destroyed and you will remain in orbit here forever.
I must say that's a gracious invitation.
There is a word. Among us there is no corresponding meaning, but it seems to mean something to you humans.
And what is that word?
I don't believe it.
Welcome aboard, Kirk. It's been a long time, eh?
Well, to be absolutely accurate, laddybuck, you should refer to me as Mudd the First, ruler of this entire sovereign planet.
Ruler? Harry, I want control of my ship returned immediately. We have no intention of staying as your guests.
Well, I'm afraid there's a bit of a problem there.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Now, now, now, now, Jamie boy, let's have no unauthorised communications.
You know this man, Captain?
Oh, do I know him. Harcourt Fenton Mudd, thief
Swindler and con man
Did I leave you with that impression?
And thereby hangs a tale, yes. But look around you, Kirk. Quite a place, isn't it? I hope you're all going to enjoy it.
Mudd, I want that trained machine of yours, Norman, to deactivate the trigger mechanism and free my ship.
I shall do that, Kirk, when I'm ready.
I'm telling you now.
And I do the telling on this planet, Kirk, old boy. You do the listening.
All right, I'll listen. What are you telling?
Harry Mudd, you're a liar and an outlaw and in deep trouble. I want navigational control restored, my ship released.
Sorry. That'd be against the law. My law. Decreed by Mudd the First. Voted in by the resident population. Lovely, aren't they? You must admit, Kirk, that I still retain my eye for beauty. I decreed that I should always be surrounded by it, and my decrees always come to pass. I've had five hundred of them made up to attend me. All of them identical, beautiful, compliant, obedient.
Five hundred of the same model? That seems rather redundant.
All right, Harry, explain. How did you get here? We left you in custody after that affair on the Rigel mining planet.
Yes, well, I organised a technical information service bringing modern industrial techniques to backward planets, making available certain valuable patents to struggling young civilisations throughout the galaxy.
Did you pay royalties to the owners of those patents?
Well, actually, Kirk, as a defender of the free enterprise system, I found myself in a rather ambiguous conflict as a matter of principle.
He did not pay royalties.
Knowledge, sir, should be free to all.
I sold the Denebians all the rights to a Vulcan fuel synthesiser.
How'd you know?
That's what I would have done.
It's typical police mentality. They've got no sense of humour. They arrested me.
Worse than that. Do know what the penalty for fraud is on Deneb Five?
The guilty party has his choice. Death by electrocution, death by gas, death by phaser, death by hanging.
The key word in your entire peroration, Mister Spock, was, death. Barbarians. Well, of course, I left.
He broke jail.
I borrowed transportation.
They've no respect for private property. They damaged the bloody spaceship. Well, I got away, but I couldn't navigate, so I wandered out through unmapped space, and here I found Mudd.
You went to substantial risk and effort to bring a starship here. Logically, you must have a compelling motive.
Spock, you're going to love it here. They all talk just the way you do.
Go on, get on with it, Harry.
Then I'm unable to discern your problem.
They won't let me go. They want to study me. They want to learn more about human beings.
Watch your tongue, lad. You're talking about Mudd the First. Well, anyway, I ran out of ideas. I simply ran out of things for them to do, and they insisted that I bring them more human beings. They need human beings to serve, to study. So I had to promise them a prime sample. A starship captain. Bright, loyal, fearless and imaginative. Any captain would have done. I was lucky to get you. So you are going to take over for me here, and I can get off this rock and back to civilisation.
I think not, Harry.
You misunderstand me, lad. I'm not asking you. I'm telling you. You've no choice. Show them to their quarters.
Ah. That, gentlemen, is a shrine to the memory of my beloved Stella.
Oh, no, no, no. Merely deserted. You see, gentlemen, behind every great man there is a woman urging him on. And so it was with my Stella. She urged me on into outer space. Not that she meant to, but with her continual, eternal, confounded nagging. Well, I think of her constantly, and every time I do, I go further out into space.
That's very interesting. You leave your wife and then bring her along.
I had the androids construct a perfect replica of Stella so that I could gaze upon her and rejoice in her absence. Gentlemen, attend. Stella, dear.
Marvellous, isn't it? I finally have the last word with her, and with you.
You'll find this quite comfortable. Your quarters are down the hall.
The makers designed us. They came from the galaxy of Andromeda.
They were, as you say, quite humanoid, but, unlike your civilisation, robots were common. We performed the necessary service functions and freed our makers to evolve a perfect social order.
What became of them?
Our home planet's sun became a nova. Only a few exploratory outposts survived. This unit, myself, was part of one such outpost in your galaxy.
Then some of your makers survive.
No, Captain. They died over the stretch of time.
Whom do you serve now?
You are free to visit them.
All right. We might later. In the meantime, would you mind leaving us?
Why should we leave you?
I think we're in a lot of trouble.
That's a great help, Mister Chekov. Bones?
I think Mister Chekov's right. We are in a lot of trouble.
Spock. And if you say we're in a lot of trouble.
We are, and we must direct our attack to the heart of the matter. Obviously this many androids cannot operate independently. There must be a central control system which guides the entire android population.
Try and find it. The rest of you, look around, learn everything you can. I'll see what else I can find out from Mister Mudd. Let's go.
I trust you are enjoying yourself, Mister Spock.
Very interesting. Very interesting. This is a most unusual device.
It is our central control complex.
Did I understand there are more than two hundred thousand of you?
This would seem to be a simple relay centre. Are all of you controlled through this device?
Oh, that's quite understandable.
I should say so.
I must say, I like the styling.
They were, of course, made to my personal specifications, as indeed were the Maisie series, the Trudie series, and particularly the Annabel series.
Don't you believe in male androids, Harry?
Male? Well, I suppose they have their uses.
How long does a body like that last?
Captain, I've just had a most fascinating meeting with Norman, and I'm convinced I've discovered a very important inconsistency.
I'm so glad you enjoyed it, Doctor.
Jim, you should see the research facilities. They've got a lab down there that. Well, I could spend the rest of my life studying it.
I do so admire a man who devotes himself to knowledge.
Don't lose your head, Bones. Nobody's staying anywhere.
I wouldn't be bored, I can tell you that.
Let go of me! Now what are you doing? What kind of a woman
Splendid. Splendid. Welcome to Mudd, Mister Scott.
Harry Mudd! Oh, you bogus frat, you. You're the cause of all this, are you?
Scotty, you were ordered to stay aboard.
Aye, sir. And I stayed until that female gargantua threw me into the transporter beams.
What does she mean, the last one?
Didn't I tell you, Kirk? I beamed a few dozen androids up to your ship. They've been sending your crew to the surface for the past couple of hours. They're all down now.
There is an entire crew aboard. An entire crew of androids. They learn very quickly, Captain. The fact is, I've taken over your whole ship. There's nothing you can do about it.
Harry, Harry, you'll never get away with it.
Well, who's to stop me?
But now, Captain, now I have a ship of my own as fast as any in the fleet, so how will they catch me, eh? Just think of it, laddybuck. Harry Mudd with his own crew of lovelies aboard your vessel. Think about that.
I'm trying not to.
He could successfully accomplish it, Captain. I've questioned a number of the androids, and they're totally loyal to Mudd. Perhaps of more concern is the fact that this android population can literally provide anything a human being could ask for in unlimited quantity.
Yes, I know. That's what worries me. How will my crew react in a world where they can have everything they want simply by asking for it.
And you're Alice
Oh, well, it doesn't make much difference. You're both lovely.
What a shame you're not real.
This place is even better than Leningrad.
You may command us to make anything for you, or do the work yourself for pleasure. You may have the services of any number of craftsmen, exclusive use of the computer facilities. Anything.
Captain, you should see this shop! Why, they have facilities we've never even thought of.
Is that the way you're going to do it, Mudd? Hit my people at their weakest point?
We only wish to make you happy and comfortable, Captain. If we are to serve your kind, we must understand you. Our Lord, Harry Mudd was only one example for us. Now we are learning a great deal from all of you.
All right, here we are, birds in a gilded cage. The question is, how do we get out of here?
I don't know, sir, but it's a very nice gilded cage.
And it is a very pleasant place, Captain.
What did they offer you, Uhura?
All right. We're getting back to the ship, and don't you forget it. Straighten up! This may be a gilded cage filled with everything you always wanted, but it's still a cage. We don't belong here. We belong on that ship up there.
Alice, give us back our ship to please us. Return us to our ship because we desire it.
But we're unhappy here.
Unhappiness is the state which occurs in the human when wants and desires are not fulfilled.
No, it's a beautiful lady, and we love her.
Bones, have you had time to take any psychological readings of the androids?
I did. And you can forget it. They're perfect, flawless, mentally and physically. No weaknesses, perfectly disciplined. No vices, no fears, no faults. Just a sense of purpose. Believe me, there's nothing tougher to overcome, even among humans.
Yes. That's what this crew needs, a little sense of purpose.
Mudd, a few questions I want to ask you.
Afraid I won't have time to answer them. My bags are all packed. The androids will take the Enterprise out of orbit in less than twenty four hours. But it's been a real pleasure having you here, Kirk. Is there anything I can get for you?
You're a stubborn fellow, aren't you? But I don't mind. I don't mind that at all. Because I'll be leaving here quickly enough, and then you can be stubborn at your own leisure. One last time. Stella, dear.
We can no longer take your orders, Harry Mudd.
Our makers were wise. They programmed us to serve.
Yes, but that's what I'm saying. Put my bags on the ship.
Harry, I think they have something else in mind.
We prefer to help ourselves. We make mistakes, but we're human. And maybe that's the word that best explains us.
We will not harm you, but we will take the starship, and you will remain on this planet.
Now, look here. You can't do that! Now, listen. To serve us, you must obey us.
Alice number One, obey me. Put my bags on that ship!
We cannot allow any race as greedy and corruptible as yours to have free run of the galaxy.
I'm curious, Norman. Just how do you intend to stop them?
We shall serve them. Their kind will be eager to accept our service. Soon they will become completely dependent upon us.
We shall take care of them.
The whole galaxy controlled by your kind?
Yes, Captain. And we shall serve them and you will be happy, and controlled.
So far this thing has had its amusing aspects, but that threat the androids made about taking over all the humans in the galaxy is not very funny.
Indeed, it is not. They may quite possibly be able to accomplish it.
Whatever method we use to stop them, we must make haste. They have only to install some cybernetic devices aboard the Enterprise and they'll be able to leave orbit.
How do you know so much?
I asked them.
Why shouldn't they answer our questions? They don't think we can do anything to stop them.
You wanted to leave us on this ruddy rock and leave by yourself.
All right, what have we got to work with?
Well, Captain, androids and robots, they're just not capable of independent, creative thought.
Yet the device that Norman claims to be their central control is totally inadequate to the task of directing more than two hundred thousand of them.
I agree. What in your opinion does direct them?
There are a large number of Alices and Trudies, Maisies, Annabels, and according to my research, a Herman series, an Oscar series, a whole plethora of series in fact. But only one Norman.
To function as they do, each android mind must be one component of a mass brain linked through a central locus.
That would seem logical.
Yes, logical. That's what it is. And that in turn gives us a weapon that we can use against them. We must use wild, insane, irrational illogic aimed right at Norman!
Captain, you sing and dance as well as anyone I've ever seen, but what the devil are you talking about?
What would seem to be a sound, and perhaps our only, opportunity.
Opportunity? Now, listen, Spock, you may be a wonderful science officer, but believe me, you couldn't sell fake patents to your mother.
I fail to understand why I should care to induce my mother to purchase falsified patents.
Let's get to the point. Harry, you said you wanted to help. Do you?
Captain, the kind of a wholesome, antiseptic galaxy that these androids would run would be purgatory for a man like me.
That's fine, Harry. The androids will be expecting us to make a break for it, and that's where you come in.
What can I do?
Nothing, Harry. Just go to sleep.
Oh, Harry. I do believe you're putting on weight.
We are caring for him, but our doctor needs his medical equipment aboard the Enterprise.
You are programmed to serve. If we're not allowed access to our medical equipment, Harry Mudd will die. He will cease to function. You will have failed to serve.
He is dying.
No, they're lying. It's a trick. Doctor McCoy injected something into Harry Mudd to make him look sick. It's a trick to get back on board and sabotage the ship.
Uhura, why did you tell her?
Because I want an android body. I want immortality. I'll live forever, Captain. I'll be young and beautiful.
I half believed it myself.
Next, we take the Alices on a trip through Wonderland.
Their captivity. Do you enjoy the music?
She likes him. Mister Chekov. The floor is no place for an officer. Attention! Now stand absolutely still.
That's better, Mister Chekov.
Your statement is illogical.
How does it look?
Completely inner directed. Oblivious to everything.
Of course. Your computations would inevitably lead to a total description of the parabolic intersection of dimension with dimension.
I love you. However, I hate you.
Yes, of course. That is exactly why I hate you. Because you are identical.
All right, it's worked so far, but we're not out yet.
Success, Captain. We've been pruning the leaves and branches of the tree. Now it is time to get to work on the root.
If Norman is the control centre, he should be in a bind by what we've done. If we can overload him further, we should be able to immobilise all of them. Does everybody remember what to do?
What are you doing here?
I want you to surrender.
That is illogical. We can move more quickly than you. We are invulnerable to attack. We are much stronger.
No, we are stronger. I'll prove it to you. Can you harm a man that you're programmed to serve?
But you already have, Norman, laddy. Human beings do not survive on bread alone, you poor soulless creature, but on the nourishments of liberty, for what indeed is a man without freedom? Naught but a mechanism trapped in the cogwheels of eternity.
Dying and crying and lamenting over our burdens.
Only this way can we be happy.
That is contradictory. It is not logical. Mister Spock. Explain.
Logic is a little tweeting bird chirping in a meadow. Logic is a wreath of pretty flowers which smell bad. Are you sure your circuits are registering correctly? Your ears are green.
You cannot have killed him. You have no weapons.
Scotty. Scotty's dead. He had too much happiness. But now he's happier he's dead, and we'll miss him. Let us hear it for our poor, dead friend.
What is a man but that lofty spirit, that sense of enterprise, that devotion to something that cannot be sensed, cannot be realised but only dreamed! The highest reality.
How did you like it?
That is irrational. Illogical. Dreams are not real.
Our logic is to be illogical. That is our advantage. Mister Spock, it is time. The explosive.
Don't panic. Women and children first.
I believe that is the correct amount, Captain. Mister Mudd, are you ready?
Be careful. I would not want you to drop it.
Easy now. Oh, he's caught it!
There is no explosive.
Are you all right?
But there was no explosion.
He lied. Everything Harry tells you is a lie. Remember that. Everything Harry tells you is a lie.
Listen to this carefully, Norman. I am lying.
You say you are lying, but if everything you say is a lie then you are telling the truth, but you cannot tell the truth because everything you say is a lie. You lie. You tell the truth. But you cannot for. Illogical! Illogical! Please explain.
You are human. Only humans can explain their behaviour. Please explain.
I am not programmed to respond in that area.
I believe they are all immobilised, Captain.
Kirk, old man, I'm beginning to develop considerable respect for you.
Would you consider entering a partnership arrangement with me? I've got some ideas.
A partnership arrangement? You and me?
I've got something else in mind. Let's go.
Well, you must be very unhappy, Mister Spock.
That is a human emotion, Doctor, with which I am totally unfamiliar. How could I be unhappy?
Well, we found a whole world of minds that work just like yours. Logical, unemotional, completely pragmatic. And we poor, irrational humans whipped them in a fair fight. Now you'll find yourself back among us illogical humans again.
Which I find eminently satisfactory, Doctor, for nowhere am I so desperately needed as among a shipload of illogical humans.
Kirk, now what's this I hear about my having to stay here?
Yes, Mudd, you've been paroled to the android population of this planet.
The androids are being reprogrammed. Their original purpose was to adapt this planet for productive use. They'll begin that work again.
But what do I do? Kirk, I'm no scientist.
As long as you continue to be an irritant, Harry. It's up to you.
I suppose that taking everything into consideration, as it were, and noting all the different possibilities, I could manage. And as detention sentences go, this one isn't too uncomfortable. And I'm back in the galaxy again!
Yes, you are. Oh, there's one more thing, Harry. We've programmed a special android attendant to take care of your every need. She'll help you find an incentive to work with the androids and not exploit them.
I call that unexpectedly civil of you, Captain.
I order you. Shut up, Stella!
Kirk, you can't do this.
No, keep it open. I don't like this. Nothing since the first check in. Scott and Sulu should've contacted us again a half an hour ago.
They may have nothing to report. Our sensors indicate no life forms except our landing party.
Both those men are well aware of landing party procedure. They should've checked in with us by now.
One? Jackson, where are Scott and Sulu?
I'm sorry. I can't clear it, Captain.
Notify Transporter room to prepare to beam up one member of the landing party. Then have Doctor McCoy report to me in the Transporter room on the double.
The man is dead.
Odd. Our probe data didn't indicate fog.
No indications of. A moment, Captain. Picking up life form readings. Twenty four degrees mark seven. Range one thirty seven point one six metres. Multiple readings, Captain.
Kirk to Enterprise.
What are the ship's sensors reading now, Lieutenant?
I am only picking up physical impulses from the three of them. As far as instruments can make out, there is nothing else down there that's alive.
Lieutenant, can you hear me?
Whatever this stuff is, it's getting thicker. Suppose that has anything to do with the interference?
I don't know. There has to be some explanation for the fact that the ship's sensors can't register anything but us, while we're picking up readings of multiple life forms. Are they still there, Spock?
Listen. Now, what do you think that
Who are you?
A more useful comment, Mister Spock.
What we've just seen is not real.
However, on azimuth twenty four, at just over one hundred metres, there are definitely life forms. Erratic, confused, but definitely registering.
That's where we're going.
That was a pretty real illusion, Mister Spock.
This is the source of the life form readings, Captain. They're inside, somewhere.
Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise, come in.
Is this how we lost contact with the first landing party?
What about it, Spock? Does this structure have anything to do with communicator interference?
I would say not, Captain. There's no indication of anything that would cause such interference.
And it doesn't pick up on our ship's sensors.
Nor do our sensors register the life forms inside.
Could it be exerting a force field of some kind that cuts into our sensor scan.
Then it would affect Spock's tricorder too, wouldn't it?
Three witches, what appears to be a castle and a black cat.
If we weren't missing two officers and a third one dead I'd say someone was playing an elaborate trick or treat on us.
Yes, Mister Spock. You'd be a natural. I'll explain it to you one day. Shall we have a look around?
That would seem to be in order.
They're gone, Mister DeSalle. The captain and the others simply stopped registering.
Check for malfunctions.
I did, sir, as soon as it happened.
Mister DeSalle, that's exactly what happened to Mister Scott and his party. They, they just disappeared.
Nobody just disappears. They may have encountered a magnetic field or some other obstruction. Mister Chekov, recalibrate your sensors. If you need help
I can do it, sir. I'm not that green.
Lieutenant Uhura, continue in your efforts to break through that static interference.
We know they're down there. I want them found.
The readings would so indicate.
Dust, cobwebs. Halloween is right.
Spock. Are you all right?
Yes. I am undamaged, Captain.
You were saying something about trick or treat.
Dungeons, curses, skeletons and iron maidens. They're all Earth manifestations. Why?
I do not know, Captain, but these things do exist. They are real.
Could this be an Earth parallel development of some sort?
None of this parallels any human development. It's more like a human nightmare.
As if someone knew what it was that terrifies man most on an instinctive level.
Ghost stories, ogres, demons. The whole
They appear to be drugged, Jim. Look at their eyes. Hardly blink at all.
Neither did Jackson just before he collapsed.
These two are alive. Scotty, do you hear me? Sulu, do you know who I am? What's happened to you?
They're going to release us.
Whoever you are, you've proven your skill at creating illusion. Now I want to know why and what you've done to my men.
Where did your race get this ridiculous predilection for resistance? You examine any object, you question everything. Is it not enough to accept what is?
Not when one of my men is dead because of it and two others turned into mindless
Who are you? Why did you bring us here?
My name is Korob. And as for bringing you here, it was you who quite contrarily insisted upon coming. You were warned to stay away.
Mapping expeditions have charted this solar system before. There never have been any life forms on Pyris Seven.
There are ancient Earth legends about wizards and their familiars.
Demons in animal forms sent by Satan to serve the wizard.
I do not create the legend, Captain. I merely report it.
You are the different one, Mister Spock. You do not think like the others. There are no colours to your patterns of logic. There's only black and white. You see all this around you, yet you do not believe.
He doesn't know about trick or treat.
I do not understand that reference, therefore it also is of no importance. Gentlemen, I can be most hospitable.
We're not hungry.
All right, Korob. What do you want from us?
For the moment, merely that you eat and enjoy. Oh, Doctor, do try the wine. You'll find it excellent.
Hopefully I can change that attitude.
They are, I assure you. Diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires. All the crystalline forms that you cherish above all things. A fortune of them for each of you if you leave here without further inquiry.
We could manufacture a ton of these on our ship. They mean nothing to us.
Valueless? I don't understand. I read
Whatever it is you read, you read it wrong. As for leaving, we'll leave when we're ready.
You are most unpredictable. Perhaps I have made a small mistake. Nevertheless, you have passed the tests.
Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock and Captain Kirk. You wanted to know what we did to your men. Actually it's a simple matter for us to probe the minds of creatures like yourself.
You like to think of yourselves as complex creatures, but you're flawed. One gains admittance to your minds through many levels. You have too many to keep track of yourselves. There are unguarded entrances to any human mind.
Not entirely, no. Telepathy doesn't imply control and I assure you that I have full control over your friends.
You can't think a man to death.
Don't. Sylvia, don't.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Come in.
Captain, are you all right? Where are you? Are the others all right, sir?
The temperature, sir. It keeps rising. Reading, Mister.
It's up sixty degrees in the past thirty seconds. We're burning up, sir.
DeSalle, channel bypass power into your heat dissipation units.
You can relax now, Captain. Your ship is safe.
Temperature is almost back to normal, dropping down fast.
Lieutenant, try to raise the captain again.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, please. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Acknowledge. We've lost him again, Mister DeSalle.
Captain, you've seen something of our science. Now tell us about yours.
You seem to be singing a different tune. I'd rather know more about yours. You call it magic, you call it science. It seems unrelated to both of them.
What would you name it, Captain?
I wouldn't attempt to name it, but you seem to do with your mind what we do with tools. You alter matter, move it about by telekinesis.
Yes, we can change the molecular structure
You kept Scott and Sulu as catspaws to lure us down here. How'd you know we'd come?
Oh, we didn't have to know. They knew.
Enough of this! You will tell us what we want to know.
It's too late for threats. You let me contact the ship. How long do you think it will it be before a search party arrives?
There will be no search party, Captain Kirk. An impenetrable force field around your ship, Captain. It will not hinder orbit, but your people are prisoners within it.
It's some kind of a force field, sir, but not like any other I've ever heard of before. It's not coming from anywhere. It's simply all around us.
We have nothing to discuss.
Wait. The doctor will stay. Your turn will be next, Captain. It makes little difference. Take them out of here.
It will not analyse, sir.
All right, but it's there and it's real. If it's real, it can be affected. Engineering, stand by to divert all power systems to the outer hull. Prepare impulse engines for generation of maximum heat directed as ordered. Maybe we can't break it, but I'll bet you credits to navy beans we can put a dent in it.
How long has it been?
Thanks. I wonder what they're doing to Doc.
I'm sure we'll find out shortly. Jim, all of these things that we've seen. To an Earthman like yourself, they must seem quite familiar.
Precisely. I refer you to the psychological theory of the racial subconscious. The universal myths, symbols.
And dungeons and castles and black cats. They all belong to the twilight world of consciousness.
They tried to tap our conscious mind.
And they missed. They reached basically only the subconscious. Korob seemed puzzled by your reaction to the environment he'd provided.
He expected me to react as though it were all normal. Well, he admitted that they weren't native to this planet.
And not to have a knowledge of our scientific methods is most unlikely for any life form we've met in this galaxy.
They refer to us as creatures, as though we were some species that they were unfamiliar with. If we're creatures, I wonder what they're really like.
Agreed. Totally alien. And I don't like hostile strangers showing such an acute interest in our galaxy, our world, Spock. Not at all like friendly visitors. We're going to have to stop them, cold. But at the moment
I, too, am at a loss at this time to suggest a course of action.
You forget what we were sent here for.
I forget nothing. I'm not a puppet, Korob, like you.
You're a traitor.
You are a fool. We have nothing like this and I like it. To touch, to feel to understand the idea of luxury I like it. And I don't intend to leave it.
We have a duty to the old ones.
What do they know of sensations? This is a new world.
You're cruel. You torture our specimens.
And that, too, is a new sensation. I find it stimulating.
You're wrong! You're discarding everything we live by.
I live by my own decisions. You're a weak fool, Korob.
I have the power.
But you're afraid to use it. Don't threaten me. I can squash you and that would be an interesting sensation, yes. I find I like these new sensations. Don't try to push me.
Captain. It's time for our talk. Korob, leave us alone and take these men with you.
This is not ended, Sylvia.
There's no real damage to the mind, Captain, simply a drain of knowledge and will.
You don't call that damage?
Why should I?
You'd know if you had compassion. A woman should have compassion, but I forget you're not a woman.
But you're mistaken, Captain. I am a woman now. I come from a world without sensation as you and I now know it. It excites me. I want more.
You seem to need us. Why?
Because you have knowledge which I lack. but were our abilities put together. Tell me about power, Captain. How does it feel?
He is a fool. I'll do without him. But you? Why do I find you different? Why would it be so difficult to dispose of you?
Why don't you simply probe my mind and get what you want?
No, not that, not for you. What I want is a joining. My mind to yours willingly. Think of the secrets you could learn. Think of the power that would be yours. Anything you can imagine, I can give you.
You're very persuasive. What happens if I go along?
Then everything would be ours together. I've never conceived of the idea of togetherness before. It excites me. You excite me. Why?
For the same reasons you excite me. You're a very beautiful woman.
Your people, when they come here
They're like, like feathers in the wind without the transmuter.
The source. You will learn. I will teach you later. Later.
Then it's a device. You do use tools.
It gives only form. You're teaching me substance.
You haven't changed your mind? You won't return home?
My home is here with you. A billion worlds of sensation to pick and choose.
And why not? You've been using me and my crew.
You will be swept away. You, your men, your ship, your worlds!
I don't see any change.
It's there, Lieutenant.
It was that electrical field we set up, Mister DeSalle, that dent you wanted. It's not much, but it is a start.
Keep it up, Mister Chekov. Channel the entire output of reactors one, two, and three into the relay stations. Whatever it is, it's starting to weaken.
I'm not leaving without my men.
They're not your men anymore. They belong to Sylvia. I can no longer control them or her. She's irrational. The strain of adopting to your form, the insatiable desire for sensation and experience. She's a great danger and it was not necessary. We could have entered your galaxy in peace.
Transmuter. Yes, she mentioned that.
There's no time to explain now. She means to destroy us all. There might still be a chance. Quickly. Come.
I think I can stop her.
It's my problem. She's one of my kind. Come quickly.
Do you think you can make it?
Korob, that door won't last.
Korob seemed to think this was important. Said something about a transmuter.
Captain, a bit more alacrity, if you please.
You're very clever, Captain. More so than I'd imagined. Clever, resourceful and handsome.
Don't let her touch the wand, Captain.
Don't you get tired of these games?
I've never played games. Give it to me.
I wasn't sure before, but I am now. This is the source of your power, isn't it. The transmuter.
No, not the source. It's merely an amplifier. The mind is the source. Mine is simple, but yours has the key but you don't know how to use it.
It is not too late, Captain James Kirk. Come with me. I'll teach you. You'll teach me.
Why? Because your people have nothing of your own? Is that why you need us?
We need your dreams, your ambition. With them, I can build. Give me the transmuter.
You fool. Don't you know what you're giving up? Everything that your species finds desirable. Look at me. I am a woman. I am all women.
I don't know what you are but you're not a woman. You've tortured my men and taken their minds from them. You ask for love and return pain instead.
That'll take some explaining, Bones.
Korob and Sylvia as they really are. Their forms were an illusion, just like the castle and everything else. Only the power pack gave them reality.
Fascinating. A life form totally alien to our galaxy. If we could preserve and study this
Too late. All of this, just an illusion.
No illusion. Jackson is dead. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Five to beam up.
The distress call definitely came from one of the solar systems in this sector.
Can you pinpoint it any closer, Lieutenant?
Negative. It was so badly garbled all we got was the name Constellation, then we lost it.
Captain, sensors show this entire solar system has been destroyed. Nothing left but rubble and asteroids.
But that's incredible. The star in this system is still intact. Only a nova could destroy like that.
Every solar system in this sector blasted to rubble and still no sign of the Constellation. Matt Decker's in command. What could have happened to him?
Captain, the two inner most planets of this system appear to be intact.
Sir, I'm picking up a ship's disaster beacon.
Try to raise it, Lieutenant.
I have it on the sensors, Captain. By configuration, a starship stopped in space. She appears to be drifting.
No answer, Captain. All I get is the automatic beacon.
Sensors not recording normal energy output.
It's the Constellation. Look at that.
She may have been wrecked by whatever destroyed these solar systems.
She was attacked. Red alert! Red alert! Man your battle stations!
Red alert. Red alert. Man your battle stations.
Very good. Initiate a full sensor scan of the immediate area for any other vessel.
I can't raise the Constellation, sir. I'm still getting the distress beacon, but there's heavy subspace interference. It's almost blocking the signal.
Keep trying. Mister Spock, full evaluation of the damage to the Constellation.
Also operative at a low power level. The entire Bridge is damaged and uninhabitable. The rest of the ship seems able to sustain life.
All hands, go to Yellow Alert. Stand by battle stations. Lieutenant, have Doctor McCoy, Mister Scott, and a damage control party report to me in the transporter room.
We're going to board her. Mister Spock, you're in command.
Filtration systems are out, sir.
The whole communication system looks to be shorted out, too, sir.
Scotty, check the phaser banks. See if they've been fired. Bones, you come with me.
What do you think did it, sir?
I don't know, lad. But I want a full structural and control damage check, and I'm going to have a look at those engines.
The crew wasn't abducted, they just left. Kirk to Enterprise.
Improbable, Captain. The surface temperature of the inner planet is that of molten lead. The other has an atmosphere poisonous to human life.
We'll continue our search. Kirk out.
Captain, I've checked the engines. The warp drive is a hopeless pile of junk. The impulse engines are not too badly off. We ought to be able to do something with them.
Exhausted. They didn't give up without a battle.
But where are they? I can't imagine a man like Matt Decker abandoning ship while his life support systems were still operative.
Computer system is still intact. We can playback the duplicate Captain's Log from the auxiliary control room.
Matt. Matt, it's Jim Kirk.
Kirk. It's Jim Kirk.
What happened to your ship, Matt?
A ship. Attacked. That, that thing.
What thing? What was it?
Answer me! What was it? What happened, Matt?
Jim, give him a minute. He's in a state of shock.
Ready with the duplicate log, sir.
The fourth planet. Only two left now. Scotty, pull the microtapes from the sensor memory banks and beam them aboard to Spock. I want a full analysis, a complete report of what happened when they went in on that planet.
We tried to contact Starfleet. No one heard. No one! We couldn't run.
What happened to your crew?
Oh, I had to beam them down. We were dead. No power, our phasers useless. I stayed behind, the last man. The Captain, the last man aboard the ship. That's what you're supposed to do, isn't it? And then it hit again and the transporter went out. They were down there, and I'm up here.
They say there's no devil, Jim, but there is. Right out of hell, I saw it.
Matt, where's your crew?
There is no third planet.
Captain, Washburn has our report.
We made a complete check on structural and control damage, sir. As far as we can tell, something crashed through the deflectors and knocked out the generators. Somehow the antimatter in the warp drive pods has been deactivated.
Deactivated? Scotty, could some kind of general energy dampening field do that, and would the same type of thing account for the heavy subspace interference?
Aye, that all adds up. But what sort of a thing could do all that?
If you'd seen it, you'd know. The whole thing's a weapon. It must be.
What does it look like?
Well, it's miles long, with a maw that could swallow a dozen starships. It destroys planets, chops them into rubble.
What is it, an alien ship? Or is it alive, or is it
Both or neither. I don't know.
Matt, your log stated that the fourth planet was breaking up. You went in to investigate.
We saw this thing hovering over the planet, slicing out chunks of it with a force beam.
Did you run a scanner check on it? What kind of a beam?
Unable to raise Starfleet Command due to heavy subspace interference.
A robot weapon that purposely destroys entire solar systems. Why?
Unknown, Captain. However, Mister Sulu has computed the path of the machine, using the destroyed solar systems as a base course. Projecting back on our star charts, we find that it came from outside, from another galaxy.
If it follows its present path, it will go through the most densely populated section of our galaxy.
This whole thing's incredible. A robot? A machine like that, who would build it?
We don't know. An alien race, apparently from another galaxy.
Bones, did you ever hear of a doomsday machine?
No. I'm a doctor, not a mechanic.
Oh, forget about your theories! That thing is on the way to the heart of our galaxy. What are you going to do about it?
The first thing we're going to do is get you back to the Enterprise.
Oh, no, I stay here. I'm not leaving my ship!
There's no ship to leave. It's a dead hulk! We'll take her in tow. I'll stay onboard and get her ready. You go back to the Enterprise with the doctor and let him help you.
It's just that I, I, I never lost a command before.
Kirk to Enterprise. Have the transporter room beam Doctor McCoy and Commodore Decker on board immediately.
It came up on us fast, Captain, but we seem able to maintain our distance.
We are more manoeuvrable, but it is gaining on us. Sensors indicate some kind of total conversion drive.
Whatever it is, we can't let it go beyond us to the next solar system. We have to stop it. If it's a robot, what are the chances of deactivating it?
I would say none, Captain. The energy generated by our power nacelles seems to attracts it. I doubt we could manoeuvre close enough without drawing a direct attack upon ourselves.
It's closing on us, Mister Spock.
All right. Lower your deflector screens Long enough to beam us aboard.
Ready to beam, sir.
Captain, we've been attacked. The transporter is damaged. We're taking evasive action.
Mister Spock, communication's damaged. We're unable to override interference.
Spock? Spock? Come in, Spock. Spock? We're stuck, blind, and deaf.
Well, we just can't stand around while our ship is being attacked. Scotty, you've got to get me some manoeuvering power.
I can't repair warp drive without a spacedock.
Aye, the impulse engines are still in fair shape. I might coax them.
Washburn, you get in there. Let's see what we can do about this viewing screen. I've got to find out what's happening out there.
No casualties, Mister Spock. How are we doing?
We have outrun it, Doctor.
Impulse and warp engines operative, transporter and communications under repair. Random chance seems to have operated in our favour.
It's veering off, back on course for the next solar system. The Rigel colony, sir.
Evidently programmed to ignore anything as small as a ship beyond a certain radius. We'll maintain a discreet distance and circle back to pick up the Captain.
You can't let that reach Rigel. Why, millions of innocent people would die.
I am aware of the Rigel system's population, Commodore, but we are only one ship. Our deflector shields are strained, our subspace transmitter is useless. Logically, our primary duty is to survive in order to warn Starfleet Command.
Our primary duty is to maintain life and safety of Federation planets. Do you deny that?
Mister Sulu, you will lay in an evasive course back to the Constellation.
Belay that last order, helmsman. One hundred and eighty degree turn, hard about. We're going to attack.
You will carry out my last order, Mister Sulu.
Mister Spock, I'm officially notifying you that I'm exercising my option under regulations as a Starfleet Commodore, and that I am assuming command of the Enterprise.
You have the right to do so, but I would advise against it.
That thing must be destroyed.
You tried to destroy it once before, Commodore. The result was a wrecked ship and a dead crew.
Sensors show the object's hull is solid neutronium. A single ship cannot combat it.
Mister Spock, that will be all. You have been relieved of command. Don't force me to relieve you of duty as well.
You can't let him do this, Spock.
Doctor, you are out of line.
To blazes with regulations! You can't let him take command when you know he's wrong!
If you can certify Commodore Decker medically or psychologically unfit for command, I can relieve him under Section C.
I'll certify that right now.
You'll also be asked to produce your medical records to prove it.
Now, you know I haven't had time to run an examination on him.
Then your statement would not be considered valid.
What about the Captain? We can't leave
Captain, the impulse engines' control circuits are fused solid.
You worry about your miracles, Scotty, I'll worry about mine. Get to work.
Deflector shields at full power. They can't take much more of this.
Helmsman, hold your course. Stand by all phaser banks.
Deflectors holding, but weakening. We must retreat, Commodore. The energy drain
I'm in command here, Mister Spock. Maintain your course, helmsman. Get us in closer.
Ready to give it a try?
Scotty, how you doing?
Controls are all hooked up, sir. We should have some power for you soon.
Try it now, Captain.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Enterprise, come in. Mister Spock, come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, where's that power?
Coming, sir. If I push these impulse engines too hard in the condition they're in, they'll blow apart.
Washburn, get down to Engineering. Assist Mister Scott.
Scotty, push it right to the edge. This ship has got to manoeuver.
It has ceased fire. We're being held in a tractor beam. We're being pulled inside, Commodore. You must veer off.
We have lost warp power. If we don't break the tractor beam within sixty seconds, we never will.
But don't you understand? We've got to destroy it!
That, sir, is illogical. It is suicide. Attempted suicide would be proof that you are psychologically unfit for command. If you don't veer off, I shall relieve you on that basis.
We can't break loose!
We haven't got it. We're being pulled inside.
Scotty, give me that power.
You've got it, Captain. Just enough to move us. I can't do better.
That's it, Mister Scott. Keep that power coming.
Aye, sir. We still can't move.
Keep pouring it on, Scotty.
Captain, I still don't know what we're doing.
We're moving, the Enterprise isn't. Maybe that thing will see us and let the Enterprise go. If I only had some phasers.
Phasers? You've got 'em. I have one bank recharged.
Scotty, you've just earned your pay for the week. Stand by. Fire phasers.
We're loose, Commodore.
Good boy, Jim. Between the two of us, we'll kill that thing.
It's closing fast on the Constellation.
Commodore, I suggest
We're moving away, Commodore.
This machine seems to have a programmed defensive sphere. Any energy source entering that field is subject to attack.
Warp drive and deflectors will be out for a solar day. Repairs proceeding on transporter and communications.
It's closing with us again, sir.
It's sucking in space rubble from those destroyed planets. Refueling itself.
We can maintain this speed for only seven hours before we exhaust our fuel, but it can refuel itself indefinitely.
Then we'll have to fight it now before it gets any stronger.
Illogical. We cannot destroy it. Therefore, we cannot save Rigel. We must transport the Captain and the others from the Constellation and escape this thing's subspace interference in order to warn Starfleet Command.
Mister Spock, we've pierced the interference locally.
Can you raise Starfleet?
Mister Spock, I am still in command. I will speak for this ship. Enterprise to Kirk.
Matt. What's going on? Give me Mister Spock.
I'm in command here, Jim.
Nothing. I assumed command according to regulations
You are speaking to a senior officer, Kirk.
Give me Spock.
I told you, I am in command here, according to every rule in the book, Captain. Anything you have to say at all, you will say to me.
There's only one thing I want to say to you, Commodore. Get my ship out of there.
Warp drive out. Deflector shields down. Transporter under repair. We are on emergency impulse power.
How long to repair warp drive?
At our present rate of consumption, we'll exhaust our impulse power long before then.
It's gaining on us, sir.
I told you, I am in command here and I will give the orders, Captain. We're going to turn and attack.
Mister Spock, relieve Commodore Decker immediately. That's a direct order.
You can't relieve me and you know it. According to regulations
Blast regulations! Mister Spock, I order you to assume command on my personal authority as Captain of the Enterprise.
Commodore Decker, you are relieved of command.
I don't recognise your authority to relieve me.
You may file a formal protest with Starfleet Command, assuming we survive to reach a Starbase. But you are relieved. Commodore. I do not wish to place you under arrest.
No. No, I don't suppose that they do. Very well, Mister Spock. The Bridge is yours.
Captain, I have assumed command.
One moment, sir. Commodore. I believe you are scheduled for medical examination. Mister Montgomery.
You will accompany the commodore to Sickbay.
Captain, we are taking an evasive course back to you. We will try to stay ahead of the object until we can transport you aboard.
Fine. Just make sure you stay ahead of it.
I've hooked in ship's communication. The best I can give you on impulse is one third power. The shields are up but they won't last long.
Keep it going, Scotty, keep it going. Mister Spock.
I'm plotting an intercept course. Will rendezvous with you at fourteen thirteen point seven hours.
It's too late, sir.
Kirk to Enterprise. Why are you launching a shuttlecraft?
Whoever it is, Captain, has no authorisation. Lieutenant, raise the shuttlecraft.
Enterprise to shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Decker here.
Commodore, I must insist that you return to the ship.
You said it yourself, Spock. There is no way to blast through the hull of that machine, so I'm going to take this thing right down its throat.
This is Kirk. Matt, you'll be killed.
I've been prepared for death ever since I, ever since I killed my crew.
No one expects you to die for an error in judgment.
The commander is responsible for the lives of his crew, and for their deaths. Well, I should have died with mine.
You cannot succeed, Commodore. Your only logical alternative is to return to the ship.
Matt. Matt, listen to me. You can't throw your life away like this. Matt, you're a starship commander. That makes you a valuable commodity.
We're stronger with you than without you!
He's gone. Constellation, come in, please.
Sir, may I offer my condolences on the death of your friend. It is most regrettable.
It's regrettable that he died for nothing.
Mister Spock, sensors indicate a minute drop in the machine's power emanations. Do you think the shuttlecraft explosion might have done some damage?
The drop in power is definite, Captain but negligible. The object is still pursing us, thereby causing us to drain our power reserve at a much greater rate.
Mister Spock, the transporter is now operational.
Transporter operational, Captain. Shall we beam you aboard?
There's little to be gained by staying aboard the Constellation.
Except possibly the destruction of that thing out there. Carry out your orders, Mister Spock.
Spock, listen. Maybe Matt Decker didn't die for nothing. He had the right idea but not enough power to do it. Am I correct in assuming that a fusion explosion of ninety seven megatons will result if a starship impulse engine is overloaded?
Ninety seven point eight three five. Will it be powerful enough to destroy that thing out there?
Negative, Captain. Its hull is pure neutronium. There is no known way of blasting through it.
Not through it, Spock, from inside it. Will it be enough?
Insufficient data. I shall try to take further sensor readings.
Do the best you can and make it fast. Kirk to Scott.
Here, sir. The damage control party just beamed back to the Enterprise.
Good. Scotty, can you set the ship's impulse engines to overload?
Aye. The shape the thing's in, it's hard to keep her from blowing.
Set it and get up here as fast as you can.
The object's neutronium hull makes sensor readings of the inner mechanism impossible.
Spock, you don't know?
Captain, you're getting dangerously close to the planet killer.
I intend to get a lot closer. I'm going to ram her right down that thing's throat.
Jim, you'll be killed, just like Decker.
No. No, I don't intend to die, Mister Spock. We've rigged a delay detonation device. You'll have thirty seconds to beam me aboard the Enterprise before the Constellation's impulse engines blow.
Your chances of survival are not promising. We don't even know if the explosion will be powerful enough.
A calculated risk, Mister Spock.
Thirty seconds is very slim timing.
A chance I'll have to take. Kirk out.
A cranky transporter's a mighty finicky piece of machinery to be gambling your life on, sir.
Understood. Mister Spock. Prepare to beam Scotty on board.
What's the matter with that thing?
It's a power drain somewhere, sir. I almost lost you.
It'll never work like this. It's the main junction circuitry. I'll get it.
Transporter is out, Captain. You'll have to stand by.
I can't. Power level's dropping too fast. You'd better hurry.
He's two thousand miles from the planet killer and closing fast.
Prepare to beam me aboard on my signal.
Beam me aboard.
Energising. Bridge, it's shorted out again.
Och, what's wrong with it?
Gentlemen, beam me aboard.
Mister Scott, twenty seconds to detonation.
Sixty, fifty, forty
Gentlemen, I suggest you beam me aboard.
Try her now, Mister Kyle.
Bridge, we got him through!
Welcome aboard, Captain. Sensors show all energy sources deactivated. It's quite dead.
Mister Sulu, ease us back to minimum headway. Conserve power as much as possible. Lieutenant Palmer, tell Mister Scott to expedite repairs on the warp drive. Poor Matt. He gave his life in an attempt to save others. Not the worst way to go.
Indeed, Captain. I presume your log will show that Commodore Decker died in the line of duty.
Appropriate, Captain. However, I can't help wondering if there are any more of those weapons wandering around the universe.
Start your readings.
It is spectacular, isn't it?
It's a shame to have to intrude.
Well, the last scout ship reported some pretty strange sensor readings. Starfleet wants it investigated and the inhabitants contacted. We do what we're told.
The soil here is remarkably rich and fertile, Captain. Husbandry would be quite efficacious.
Are you sure about that?
It makes me homesick. Just like Russia.
More like the Garden of Eden, Ensign.
Of course, Doctor. The Garden of Eden was just outside Moscow. A very nice place. It must have made Adam and Eve very sad to leave.
Just outside Moscow. All right. There's a village about seventeen kilometres away on bearing two three two. We'll head that way.
What did somebody say? That paradise must've looked like this?
As soon as we get out of the way, beam the body up.
Aye, Captain. It's a shame about Hendorff.
What is it?
We're losing potency in our antimatter pods. I don't think it's serious, but we're looking into it.
But you say there's nothing to worry about?
Well, sir, I didn't exactly say that.
Well, stay on top of it. We've got a job to down here. We might as well finish it.
I hear it's nice down there.
Yeah, it's nice. If we're a little more careful, we shouldn't run into any more trouble.
I could do with a nice walk in a garden with green leaves and grass.
We'll do the walking, Scotty. You get on the antimatter pod. If it gets worse, let me know, we'll beam up. Kirk out.
Scotty will handle it. We've got a job to do. Turn up anything on your tricorder?
Indeed. Subsurface vibrations for miles in all directions.
We're heading for the village. Avoid contact with the humanoids. I want you and Marple to make a full reconnaissance. And be careful. There may be other dangers besides poisonous plants. Keep in constant communication.
What is it?
There's a humanoid hiding directly behind us, moving with remarkable agility, bearing one eight.
What is it, Mister Spock?
A visitor. One wanting to retain his anonymity, I should say.
All this beauty, and now Mister Hendorff dead, somebody watching us. It's frightening.
If you insist on worrying, worry about me. I've been wanting to get you in a place like this for a long time.
Mister Chekov, Yeoman Landon. I know you find each other fascinating, but we're not here to conduct a field experiment in human biology.
I was about to take some readings.
Whatever it is, it moves like a cat.
Jim, I don't like this.
Neither do I. All hands. We've been watched, we'll probably be watched. We're moving out. Formation L.
Would you mind being careful where you throw your rocks, Mister Spock?
Obviously highly unstable, Captain. This could be a find of some importance. In large quantities, it could be a considerable source of power.
Garden of Eden, with land mines.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk.
I couldn't stop it, but I know why.
Something from the surface. It's like a pail of water on a fire. A beam, maybe, or a transmission. And it's still on. I'm having it analysed, but it's like nothing I've seen before.
We're heading there now, Scotty. You need any help?
There's nothing you can do about it, sir.
All right, Scotty. We'll try and find out what's going on down here. Kirk out.
If Scott is correct about the force from the surface, it may have to do with the vibrations I read earlier.
Some kind of generator?
Some of the thorns like those that killed Hendorff. See the stuff on the end? It's like saplin, only it's a thousand times stronger.
Peculiar stuff to find in paradise.
I filled him with enough masiform D to make the whole crew turn handsprings, and he's not responding. Got to get him back to the ship, Jim.
Kirk to Enterprise.
We're beaming up. Notify transporter room. And make arrangements to pick up Mallory and Marple. They're scouting ahead of us.
Aye, aye, sir. Transporter room, stand by to beam up landing party.
We can't make transporter contact, sir. The entire system's inhibited. The way it is now, we couldn't beam up a fly.
Scotty, is the transporter malfunction tied in with trouble you're having with the antimatter pods?
I don't know, sir. I'll check it and get back with you. Scott out.
Spock. Are you all right?
Doctor McCoy's potion is acting like all his potions, turning my stomach. Other than that, I am quite well.
If your blood were red instead of green, you wouldn't have an upset stomach.
Just what do you think you were trying to do?
I surmised you were unaware of that plant, so I
I assure you, Captain, I had no intention of doing that. It was merely my own clumsiness prevented me which prevented me from moving out of the way.
I see. Well next time, just yell. I can step out of the way as quickly as the next man.
I shall do so.
Trying to get yourself killed. Do you know how much Starfleet has invested in you?
One hundred twenty two thousand two hundred
Not only is something after us, but it's after the ship as well.
Captain, to affect the ship at this extreme range would require a highly sophisticated planetary defence system.
Thirty seconds ago, there wasn't a cloud in the sky.
The village is primitive. Strictly tribal from the looks of it. And Captain, there's something else. Captain, come in.
It's over there! That way! I never saw anything like
Jim, you couldn't have stopped any of this.
His father helped me get into the Academy.
Captain. In each case, this was unavoidable.
I could've prevented all of it.
I don't see how.
A walk in paradise, among the green grass and flowers. We should've beamed up at the first sign of trouble.
You are under orders to investigate this planet and this culture.
I also have the option to disregard those orders if I consider them overly hazardous. This isn't that important a mission, Spock. Not worth the lives of three of my men. I drop my guard for a minute because I like the smell of growing things, and now three men are dead. And the ship's in trouble.
Mister Chekov, your tricorder readings are totally inefficient!
Mind your own business, sir! For your information, I have a very high efficiency rating.
Ensign, I will not have you address me in that tone of voice!
What do you want, violence?
I won't hurt you. Do you understand? I won't hurt you.
Well, I won't strike you again. You've been following us, watching us. Why?
I am the eyes of Vaal. He must see.
Who is Vaal?
Vaal is Vaal. He is everything.
Do you have a name?
I am Akuta. I am the leader of the feeders of Vaal.
They're not going to hurt you. I promise you. Akuta, Akuta, we come in peace. We would like to speak to this Vaal.
Akuta alone speaks to Vaal. I am the eyes and the voice of Vaal. It is Vaal's wish.
Captain, this is fascinating. If you will permit me, sir?
They are my ears for Vaal. They were given to me in the dim time so the people could understand his commands and obey.
You speak of the people of Vaal. Are they nearby?
We are close to Vaal so we may serve him. I shall take you there.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk.
Condition red. Condition red. Captain, something has grabbed us from the planet surface
It's no use, Mister Scott. We're just barely holding our own.
Aye, sir. All we have is impulse power.
Put it on maximum. Full emergency circuits.
They're all on, Captain.
No, sir. We're slipping.
Computer banks, Kyle. Feed in a rate, get me a figure. We might be able to pull out with warp drive, but without it
We're starting to lose ground. Hurry up on that figure, Kyle.
Maintain full reverse thrust against the pull. Put a team on that warp drive. Get it working.
Scotty, you're my Chief Engineer. You know everything about that ship there is to know. More than the men who designed it. If you can't get those warp engines working
I'll do everything there is to do, sir. Scott out.
Tell me about Vaal.
All the world knows about Vaal. He causes the rains to fall and the sun to shine. All good comes from Vaal.
Take me to him. I wish to speak to him.
I shall take you to him, but he will not speak to you. He speaks only to me.
I'll take my chances.
Fascinating. A very high order of workmanship, very ancient, generating great power.
But this is not the centre, Mister Spock.
No, Captain. The centre is deep in the earth beneath us. This is an access point. It would also seem to be a
A force field?
Akuta, how do you talk to Vaal?
Well, we can't get to it. We can't talk to it unless it wants to talk to us.
Vaal sleeps now. When he is hungry, you may be able to speak with him, if he desires it.
When does he get hungry?
Soon. Come. We will give you food and drink. If you are tired, you may rest.
These are the people of Vaal.
Where are the others?
There are no others.
Children? You use unknown words to me.
Little ones like yourselves. They grow.
Replacements. None are necessary. They are forbidden by Vaal.
Love. Strange words. Children. Love. What is love?
Love is when two people are
Ah, yes. The holding, the touching. Vaal has forbidden this.
These people, are from another place. They have come among us. Welcome them!
Welcome to Vaal.
Well, thank you. It does something for you.
Yes, indeed it does, Captain. It makes me uncomfortable.
I am Sayana. You have a name?
Yes. Spock. I am Spock.
I fail to see what they find so amusing.
This house is your house. I will send you more food and drink. You are welcome in the place of Vaal.
Now we're welcome. A while ago this whole planet was trying to kill us. It doesn't make sense.
Nothing makes sense down here. Kirk to Enterprise.
No change, Captain. The orbit is decaying along computed lines. No success with the warp drive. We're going down and we can't stop it.
I'm sick of hearing that word can't. Get that ship out of there.
Sir, we're doing everything within engineering reason.
Then use your imagination. Tie every ounce of power the ship has into the impulse engines. Discard the warp drive nacelles if you have to, and crack out of there with the main section, but get that ship out of there!
I just ran a thorough check on the natives, and there's a complete lack of harmful bacteria in their systems, no decalcification, no degeneration of tissue, no arteriosclerosis. In simple terms, Jim, they're not growing old, and I can't begin to tell you how old they are, twenty years or twenty thousand years.
Quite possible. It checks with my atmospheric analysis. Their atmosphere completely negates any harmful effects from their sun.
Add to that a simple diet, a perfectly controlled temperature, no natural enemies, apparently no vices, no replacements needed. Maybe it is paradise after all.
Apparently, our hypothesis is correct. There is no living being there. It is a machine, nothing more.
Well, the field's down, people are going in. Let's see what kind of luck we have.
That's not the way.
Evidently not. This is no ordinary machine, Captain. It may well possess a rudimentary intelligence.
But it needs to eat. Frequently. So it can't have any great power reserves.
That may not be of any help. The Enterprise has only ten hours left in which to break free.
What happens if Vaal weakens around feeding time? Spock, check the electromagnetic section of the astrophysics lab. Get an estimate of the total amount of energy being expended against the ship. Have them measure it hour by hour.
In my view, a splendid example of reciprocity.
It would take a computerised Vulcan mind such as yours to make that kind of a statement.
There are certain absolutes, Mister Spock, and one of them is the right of humanoids to a free and unchained environment, the right to have conditions which permit growth.
Another is their right to choose a system which seems to work for them.
Jim, you're not just going to stand by and be blinded to what's going on here. These are humanoids, intelligent. They need to advance and grow. Don't you understand what my readings indicate? There's been no progress here in at least ten thousand years. This isn't life. It's stagnation.
Doctor, these people are healthy and they are happy. What ever you choose to call it, this system works, despite your emotional reaction to it.
It might work for you, Mister Spock, but it doesn't work for me. Humanoids living so they can service a hunk of tin.
Gentlemen, I think this philosophical argument can wait until our ship's out of danger. Kirk here.
Scotty, sir. We have a reading on the power source Mister Spock requested. When we first monitored, it was generating alternating cycles totalling one hundred to the twentieth power Waltham units.
Did it maintain, Scotty?
No, sir. Power's dropping bit by bit. Nominal, but a definite drain.
Good. Keep monitoring. How are you coming along with the circuit switchover?
We're putting everything but the kitchen sink into impulse power, sir. It will take us another eight hours to complete the work.
That's cutting it a bit fine, Scotty.
Aye, but if we don't break out, I'd rather we didn't have to wait too long for the end of it.
Every time I think of the Enterprise burning up and us
Yeoman, you're wasting energy.
Captain, we're trapped,
Sit down, and have something to eat.
The Enterprise is up there
That hasn't happened yet. I wonder what would happen? Yeoman, speculate. What would happen if someone on this planet died?
But they can't. You said that Vaal takes care of them.
Yes, I suppose if someone were to fall off a cliff or something, that might upset the balance of the population. Then they would need a replacement.
They'd need a replacement. Opinion, Mister Spock?
But these people, I mean, if they don't know anything about. What I mean is, they don't seem to have any natural er. I mean, how is it, done?
Mister Spock? You're the science officer. Why don't you explain it to the young lady.
From a machine? That I'd like to see.
I understand, Vaal. It shall be done.
You know, if it weren't for Vaal this place would be a paradise.
Any place we can be together is paradise.
I don't know.
Will we be able to get back aboard?
Martha, I don't know. But if we do have to stay here, would it be so very bad?
No, not if you're with me.
Why do you look like that?
The way they touched. I do not understand.
They were not angry. I think it was pleasant for them.
But what is to be gained? It is not a dance. It gathers no food. It does not serve Vaal. But it did seem as though it was, pleasant to them.
It is pleasant, Makora.
Yes. They touched in this way.
Vaal! He is angry.
The law is plain. I have given you the words of Vaal. Do you beg the lightning to strike?
We saw the strangers, the two of them, do this thing.
Vaal speaks truly to me. The newcomers are a danger. Tell the men of Vaal to meet me in the clear place when the strangers are asleep. It is Vaal's own words.
Kill, Akuta? We do not understand.
It is a simple thing. It is the word of Vaal. It will be done to all of them when the sun returns in the morning.
I am concerned, Captain. This may not be an ideal society, but it is a viable one.
Bones was right. These people aren't living, they're existing. They don't create, they don't produce, they don't even think. They exist to service a machine.
These are people, not robots. They should have the opportunity of choice. We owe it to them to interfere.
I'll take my chances. Why don't you have a look around? Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott?
How's it going, Scotty?
You realise that within forty five minutes, the ship will be pulled down into the atmosphere?
I know that. As you said, that's cutting things fine.
Kirk out. What is it?
Disturbing. The people of Vaal seem to have disappeared.
Vaal, we are on a peaceful mission. We mean no harm to you or your people.
Variation in impulses, Captain. I believe it is reading us. A strong jump on all wavelengths.
Let's get out of here!
Second degree burns. Not serious, but I'll bet they smart.
Doctor, you have an unsurpassed talent for understatement.
The good doctor was concerned that the Vaalians achieved true human stature. I submit there is no cause for worry. They've taken the first step. They've learned to kill.
We're ready here, sir. All available power has been channelled into the impulse engines. We have twelve minutes before entering atmosphere.
All right, Scotty, put her in full reverse. Get her out of there.
Captain, we're doing it. We're pulling away!
It's no good, sir. There's only a few systems responding.
There's nothing left to try again. I guess you'll have to fire me, sir.
You're fired. Four hundred people
They'll die because I couldn't see a warning sign. I had to follow orders, always orders.
Fine time to ring the dinner bell.
Bones, that's it. Stay with Chekov. Keep those people from feeding Vaal. Don't let them feed Vaal. Keep them in the hut. Mister Spock.
Scotty, do you still have phaser power?
Aye, but what
Aye, sir, but they won't penetrate that force field.
If my guess is correct, they won't have to. Stand by.
Vaal calls to us. Let us go to him. He hungers. Please.
I would assume so.
Good. The ship's pulling away must have weakened it considerable. It has to be fed, but its reserve capacity could hold out for days.
If it had to reinforce its energy field to ward off a phaser attack, it would have to draw more heavily on its reserves.
A tremendous upsurge in generated power, Captain. Obviously Vaal is trying to reinforce his energy field.
Good. Let's see how long he can do it.
No power generation at all, Captain. Vaal is dead.
Tractor beam gone. Potency returning to antimatter pods.
But it was Vaal who put the fruit on the trees, caused the rain to fall. Vaal cared for us.
You'll learn to care for yourselves, with our help. And there's no trick to putting fruit on trees. You might enjoy it. You'll learn to build for yourselves, think for yourselves, work for yourselves, and what you create is yours. That's what we call freedom. You'll like it, a lot. And you'll learn something about men and women, the way they're supposed to be. Caring for each other, being happy with each other, being good to each other. That's what we call love. You'll like that, too, a lot. You and your children.
What are children?
The little ones? Look like you? Just go on the way you're going. You'll find out.
I don't agree with you at all, Mister Spock.
That's not unusual, Doctor.
Jim, I want you to hear this.
Captain, I'm not at all certain we did the correct thing on Gamma Trianguli Six.
We put those people back on a normal course of social evolution. I see nothing wrong in that.
Well, that's a good object lesson, Mister Spock. It's an example of what can happen when a machine becomes too efficient, does too much work for you.
Captain, you are aware of the biblical story of Genesis.
Yes, of course I'm aware of it. Adam and Eve tasted the apple and as a result were driven out of paradise.
Precisely, Captain, and in a manner of speaking, we have given the people of Vaal the apple, the knowledge of good and evil if you will, as a result of which they too have been driven out of paradise.
Doctor, do I understand him correctly? Are you casting me in the role of Satan?
Is there anyone on this ship who even remotely looks like Satan?
I am not aware of anyone who fits that description, Captain.
No, Mister Spock. I didn't think you would be.
We believe what you say, Captain Kirk, but our position has not altered. The Halkan Council cannot permit your Federation to mine dilithium crystals on our planet.
We have shown the council historical proof that our missions are peaceful.
We accept that your Federation is benevolent at present, but the future is always in question. Our dilithium crystals represent awesome power. Wrongful use of that power, even to the extent of the taking of one life, would violate our history of total peace. To prevent that, we would die, Captain. As a race, if necessary.
I admire your ethics and hope to prove ours. Kirk to Enterprise.
Stand by to beam up landing party.
The council will meditate further, but do not be hopeful of any change. Captain, you do have the might to force the crystals from us, of course.
But we won't. Consider that. Enterprise. Transporter room, energise.
Spock was right. It was a rough trip.
Status of mission, Captain?
Regrettable that this society has chosen suicide. Mister Kyle, you were instructed to compensate during the ion storm.
Carelessness with the equipment cannot be tolerated.
But Mister Spock, I
No, Mister Spock! I tried. I really tried.
Mister Scott, the storm has caused some minor damage in your section. There are also injuries requiring your attention, Doctor. Well, gentlemen?
The power beam jumped for a moment, sir, as the landing party was about to materialise. I never saw it happen before.
Due to your error, Mister Kyle?
Possibly a result of the severe storm. Captain, do you feel any abnormal effects?
Captain, what is all this?
How did we get in these
What is this? Everything's all messed up and changed around, out of place.
No, not everything. That spot, I spilt acid there a year ago. Jim, What in blazes is this?
I don't know. It's our Enterprise but it isn't. Maybe
Any of you feel dizzy when we were in the transporter beam?
When we first materialised.
It happened twice. First we were in our own transporter chamber, then we faded, and then when we finally materialised, we were here. Wherever this is.
Captain, the transporter chief mentioned a surge of power. The transporter lock might have been affected by the ion storm and we just materialised somewhere else.
Another Captain Kirk, another Doctor McCoy, another
An exchange. If we're here
Then our counterparts must have been transporting up at the exact same time. Similar storms on both universes disrupted the circuits. We're here, and they're on our Enterprise. Probably asking the same questions. Are we in another universe, and if so, how do we get back to our own? They'll use the computer, and we have to.
What about the Halkans? We can't let them be destroyed.
Then get on this technology. It's all we have to work with if we want to get back home. The intercom may be monitored. Use your communicators for private messages. Subfrequency and scramble.
Get to your post. Run today's communication from Starfleet Command. I want to know my exact orders and options, if any.
Uhura, you're the only one who can do it. I'll be right there.
Bones. Let's take a look at the library. We have a lot to learn.
Mister Chekov, phaser setting for planetary target A.
Still no interest, Uhura? Hmm? I could change your mind.
You are away from your post, Mister.
Is the captain here? Is Spock here? When the cat's away
Phasers Locked on target A, Captain. Approaching optimum range. Commence fire, Captain? Captain?
I've been ordered to check phaser couplings for possible damage by the storm.
Do you have authorisation from security, sir?
I'll have to check with Security Chief Sulu, sir.
Never mind. I'll attend to it.
Planet's rotation is carrying primary target beyond arc of phaser lock.
Shall I correct orbit to new firing position?
Lock on to secondary city.
Lieutenant Uhura, contact the Halkan council. I wish to talk to them again.
This is a new race. They offer other things of value besides dilithium crystals.
Secondary target now moving beyond our phaser lock.
A serious breach of orders, Captain.
I have my reasons, and I'll make them clear to you in my own good time.
Captain, I have the leader on the Halkan Council waiting on channel B.
It is useless to resist us.
You have twelve hours to consider your position.
We will level your planet and take what we want. That is destruction. You will die as a race.
We will not argue. Twelve hours. No more. Close communications. Turn phasers off.
Twelve hours, Captain? That is unprecedented.
I shall be in my quarters. Lieutenant Uhura, have Doctor McCoy and Mister Scott meet me there.
Captain, you've placed yourself in a most grave position. This conduct must be reported.
You're at liberty to do so, Mister Spock.
Your men, Captain. Easy, Farrell. I did your job. Ask the captain.
Yes, he did your job.
Smart boy, switching to the top dog.
Get him out of here.
Mister Chekov was going to make me a chief. You could make me an officer.
All right. You're working for me.
You're in line. You might even make captain.
Not on my ship.
The booth for this one, sir?
It's called blood. Watch your step. The officers move up by assassination. Chekov tried it on me.
Mister Sulu is Security Chief, like the ancient Gestapo.
And my Sickbay is a chamber of horrors. My assistants were betting on the tolerance of an injured man. How long it would take him to pass out from the pain.
Mostly variations in instrumentation. Nothing I can't handle.
Everything's exactly where it should be, except us.
Let's find out where we stand. Computer.
This is the Captain. Record security research, to be classified under my voice print or Mister Scott's.
Produce all data relevant to the recent ion storm. Correlate following hypothesis. Could a storm of such magnitude cause a power surge in the transporter circuits creating a momentary interdimensional contact with a parallel universe?
At such a moment, could persons in each universe, in the act of beaming, transpose with their counterparts in the other universe?
Could conditions necessary to such an event be created artificially using the ship's power?
Record procedure. Scotty, can you do it?
Not by myself. I'll need help. And you'd be too conspicuous.
I'm a doctor, not an engineer.
Now you're an engineer. I'll have to tap the power we need from the warp engines and balance it for the four of us.
Jim, the way this ship is run, what kind of people are we in this universe?
Let's find out. Computer.
Read out official record of current command.
Captain James T. Kirk succeeded to command ISS Enterprise through assassination of Captain Christopher Pike. First action, suppression of Gorlan uprising through destruction of rebel home planet. Second action, execution of five thousand colonists on Vega Nine.
Captain? We can do it.
We have to lay in the automatic transporter setting, but when we interrupt engine circuits to tie the power increase into the transporter, it'll show up on Sulu's security board. Of course, we'll only need a second.
I'll tell Uhura to create a diversion to distract Sulu, at your signal. Let's get back to our posts. Keep me advised.
Jim, if we're here, what do you suppose our counterparts doing back in our universe?
On our Enterprise.
I think not. Your authority on this ship is extremely limited, Captain. The four of you will remain her in the Brig and in custody until I discover how to return you to wherever it is you belong.
I can answer none of your questions at this time.
Apparently some kind of transposition has taken place. I find it extremely interesting.
Captain, I am pleased that you frustrated Mister Chekov's plan. I should regret your death.
I do not desire the captaincy. I much prefer my scientific duties. I am frankly content to be a lesser target.
The agony booth is a most effective means of discipline. I presume you've ordered full duration.
I haven't decided.
I said I haven't decided.
That is, of course, your affair. Captain, may I inquire if you intend to persist in your unusual course of action regarding the Halkans?
They are, of course, in contradiction to standard Empire procedure. You cannot ignore the consequences.
I do not threaten, Captain. I merely state facts. I have found you to be an excellent officer. Our missions together have been both successful and profitable. However, I shall not permit your aberrations to jeopardise my position.
Spock, do you think we should destroy the Halkans?
Terror must be maintained or the Empire is doomed. It is the logic of history.
Conquest is easy, control is not. We may have bitten off more than we can chew.
Captain, I do not wish to find myself opposing you, but if you continue on your present course, this confusing, inexplicable behaviour,
Is my concern, not yours. You would find me a formidable enemy.
I'm aware of that, Captain. I trust that you are aware of the reverse.
Release Chekov. Confine him to quarters.
That ought to hold him for about six hours.
I fell asleep. We had quite a time in the chem lab picking up after the storm. Nothing compared to your day, I gather. I heard about Chekov.
I was preoccupied.
Further than that, if I'm successful.
Really? Well, you must know what you're doing. You always do. If I'm to be the woman of a Caesar, can't I know what you're up to?
I have received a private communication from Starfleet Command. I am committing a breach of regulations by informing you of its contents.
I am instructed to wait until planet dawn over principal target to permit you to carry out our mission.
And if I don't?
In that event, I am ordered to kill you and to proceed against the Halkans as the new captain of the Enterprise.
Let's drink a toast to Spock, The only man aboard with the decency to warn you, and he'll die for it. They'll never find another man like him.
I don't intend to kill him.
Are you going to act against the Halkans before the deadline?
No, but I'll avoid killing Spock.
Just get him out of the way, he and his men.
I'll get out of his way.
Shall I activate the Tantalus field? You'll at least want to monitor him, won't you?
I hate this thing.
It's not that bad.
Of course not. It made you captain. How many enemies have you simply wiped out of existence by the touch of a button? Fifty? A hundred? Now, I always thought that was funny, The great, powerful Captain Kirk who owes everything to some unknown alien scientist and a plundered laboratory.
Well, if you don't take advantage of your opportunities
You don't rise to the command of a starship or even higher.
That magnificent mind of his. But it can't protect him from this. I press it and he dies. Now?
You really mean it. It doesn't matter. If Spock fails his order, he'll be killed anyway.
I'll see to it that the circumstances of his failure will clear him.
You're not even afraid of Starfleet Command. Can your scheme bring you that much power so quickly? And what about me? How does Marlena fit in?
How does Marlena want to fit in?
We have to get out of here within three hours. Spock has orders to kill me unless I complete the mission.
We've got another deadline, too, sir.
You've got to get down there and free the board so we can lock in. Give me about ten minutes.
All right. I'll be in the transporter room in ten minutes. I'll meet you in Sickbay afterward.
A security research is in progress.
Who is conducting the research?
What is the nature of the research?
Programme is classified under voice index log.
Why are you monitoring my communications, Mister Sulu?
My security board has detected extensive use of computer, Mister Spock. I was about to inform you.
He's working on escape or defence.
That is my concern.
Correct. It's your play. I hope you succeed, because the order would fall on me next and you know how Captain Kirk's enemies have a habit of disappearing.
If I am successful, you see yourself a step nearer to the captaincy. I do not want to command the Enterprise, but if it should befall me, I suggest you remember that my operatives would avenge my death and some of them are Vulcans.
Oiling my traps, darling. I'm afraid I'm a little out of practice. Maybe that's what happened to us? It's very hard for a working officer to shine as a woman every minute, and you demand perfection.
I've never seen perfection, but no woman could come closer to it.
I still do.
I've got to go.
Ship's business? An important task on the crew deck? Well, I guess it's over. Commander Kenno will take me temporarily. He's made that quite clear. I'll call a yeoman to help me with my things.
You don't have to do that.
Are you feeling sorry for me? Do I see hesitation in your eyes about anything? I want one thing, Captain. Transfer me. On the Enterprise, I am humiliated! On another ship, I can hunt fresh game. I've got my rank, and. Don't I? I've been a captain's woman, and I like it. I'll be one again if I have to go through every officer in the fleet.
It's been a long time since you've kissed me like that. You're a stranger. Mercy to the Halkans, mercy to Spock, to me. Am I your woman?
You're the Captain's woman until he says you're not.
Scotty's signal should be coming through any moment. You know what to do.
You aren't very persistent, Mister Sulu. The game has rules. You're ignoring them. I protest and you come back. You didn't come back.
I was getting bored. Of course this isn't the time.
I'm afraid I changed my mind. Again.
You take a lot of chances, Lieutenant.
Mister Scott, all clear. On my way to Sickbay.
Now it's up to the captain.
Please restrict your movements, Captain.
What are you doing? Are you going to shoot me now, Spock? I thought I had until dawn.
I shall make that decision. Since your return from the planet, you've behaved in a most atypical and illogical manner. I want to know why.
Shoot. You're wasting time.
I shall not waste time with you. You're too inflexible, too disciplined once you've made up your mind. But Doctor McCoy has a plenitude of human weaknesses, sentimental, soft. You may not tell me what I want to know, but he will.
You're running a big risk, Spock.
I have the phaser, Captain, and I do not intend to simply disappear as so many of your opponents have in the past. If you please. Sickbay.
Yes, of course. The entire landing party. Captain, stand over there. Doctor, it is time for answers.
How much time, Scotty?
Hardly fifteen minutes, sir. The field density between the two universes is starting to close very fast.
Help me get him on the table. Well, come on. Help me get him on the table. He'll die without immediate treatment.
Everything laid in, Scotty? The time lag so the operator can get into the transporter chamber?
All laid in, sir. Come on, McCoy! We're taking a chance of not getting back home.
We'll get home. This won't take long.
Do you want me to stop, Jim? It'll only take a minute.
He is very much like our own Mister Spock, isn't he? You've got that minute.
What is this, Mister Sulu?
Mister Spock has orders to kill you, Captain. He will succeed, apparently. You will also appear to have killed him after a fierce battle. Regrettable, but it will leave me in command.
Captain, we've barely got ten minutes.
Let's go, Bones.
I can't let him die, Jim. You get on to the transporter room. I'll be there in five minutes.
I guarantee it. Now, go on, please.
Our minds are merging, Doctor. Our minds are one. I feel what you feel. I know what you know.
A friend. Activate the transporter. You saved us back at Sickbay with the Tantalus field.
I can't. I'm sorry. Our power is balanced for four. There's no guarantee that we'll make it with five. All could die. Scotty?
It's working, sir.
But there are only three of you.
One is coming. I'd help you if I could, Marlena. Believe that.
If you kill us, you'll still stay.
Where's McCoy? Time, Scotty.
Do you know what they'll do to me?
The power's cut, sir. They're on to us.
Aye, it's available.
Can you bridge to your setup?
I can get us the power, but the automatic setting is linked to the transporter main. If we bypass, that means that someone has got to operate the controls manually.
One of us will have to stay.
I'll stay, Captain.
Get to the transporter chamber. You, too, Uhura.
That's an order, Scotty.
You're a man of integrity in both universes, Mister Spock.
You must return to your universe. I must have my captain back. I shall operate the transporter. You have two minutes and ten seconds.
In that time I have something to say. How long before the Halkan prediction of galactic revolt is realised?
The Empire shall be overthrown, of course.
The illogic of waste, Mister Spock. The waste of lives, potential, resources, time. I submit to you that your Empire is illogical because it cannot endure. I submit that you are illogical to be a willing part of it.
You have one minute and twenty three seconds.
If change is inevitable, predictable, beneficial, doesn't logic demand that you be a part of it?
One man cannot summon the future.
But one man can change the present. Be the captain of this Enterprise, Mister Spock. Find a logical reason for sparing the Halkans and make it stick. Push till it gives. You can defend yourself better than any man in the fleet.
A man must also have the power.
In my cabin is a device that will make you invincible.
What will it be? Past or future? Tyranny or freedom? It's up to you.
It is time.
In every revolution, there's one man with a vision.
What I don't understand is how were you able to identify our counterparts so quickly?
It was far easier for you as civilised men to behave like barbarians, than it was for them as barbarians to behave like civilised men. I assume they returned to their Enterprise at the same time you appeared here.
Probably. However, that Jim Kirk will find a few changes, if I read my Spocks correctly.
Jim, I think I liked him with a beard better. It gave him character. Of course almost any change would be a distinct improvement.
What worries me is the easy way his counterpart fitted into that other universe. I always thought Spock was a bit of a pirate at heart.
Indeed, gentlemen. May I point out that I had an opportunity to observe your counterparts here quite closely. They were brutal, savage, unprincipled, uncivilised, treacherous, In every way, splendid examples of homo sapiens, the very flower of humanity. I found them quite refreshing.
I'm not sure, but I think we've been insulted.
Marlena Moreau. I was just assigned last week.
You've met her before, Captain?
Uh, why do you ask?
Your reaction, One of recognition.
Oh, no. No, no. We haven't met before, exactly. She just seemed a nice, likable girl. I think we could become friends. It's possible.
Nothing since their original distress call, sir.
There's nothing, sir. I'm scanning all frequencies.
They have to answer.
That can't be. The last census reported a total inhabitation of more than four billion people.
That's impossible. What could have happened?
Unknown, sir. Sensor readings would have revealed the presence of any disease organisms. They do not. In addition, we received the routine report from this system only a week ago. Even the Symbalene blood burn does not act that swiftly.
An extremely powerful bolt of energy, Captain.
Full power to the shields, Mister Scott.
All hands, Red Alert. Phaser banks stand by. Photon torpedoes to Condition Red, Condition Red.
It's going to hit.
Temporarily, Captain. Our shields absorbed energy equivalent to ninety of our photon torpedoes.
I may add, the energy used repulsing this first attack reduced our shielding power twenty percent.
I think we can expect others, Lieutenant.
We can resist three more such attacks. The fourth will shatter our shields completely.
Lieutenant, contact Starfleet Command. Patch in my log. Tell them what has happened. Tell them the entire Malurian race seems to have been destroyed by an unknown agency, and that we are under attack by an unidentified force.
We're losing power, sir.
I'm having to divert the warp engine power into the shields, sir, if you want the protection.
Mister Spock, speed of those bolts.
That's our target, Mister Sulu. Prepare photon torpedo.
Shields still holding, sir, but the drain on the engines is reaching the critical point. Ach, we lost warp manoeuvreing power. Switching to impulse.
No effect. Target absorbed full energy of our torpedo.
Absorbed it? There must be damage to your instruments, Spock .
They are in good working order, Captain.
But what could have absorbed that much energy and survived? Lieutenant, try to make contact.
Sir, they've fired another.
Can we take it, Mister Scott?
That's problematical, sir.
Captain, shields are down. We cannot survive another hit.
I'm trying, sir.
To unidentified vessel. This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We are on a peaceful mission. We mean no harm to you or any lifeforms. Please communicate with us. Any further readings, Mister Spock?
Computing now, Captain. Weight, five hundred kilograms. Shape, roughly cylindrical. Length, a fraction over one metre.
What kind of intelligent creatures can exist in a thing that small?
Intelligence does not necessarily require bulk, Mister Scott.
Captain, we're getting a signal from the spacecraft.
Put it on audio, Lieutenant.
Yes, sir. It's impossible to get it any clearer, sir.
Captain, this message is a sort of binary. Extremely sophisticated, compressed, carrying several channels at once.
Can you decode it?
No clue as yet, Captain. A moment. Transmission speed has stepped down. Much slower. Seems to be a single binary.
It would seem so, Captain.
This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We are on a peaceful mission in this part of the galaxy. We have no hostile intentions. We request identity.
It's another signal now, sir.
It's a formula, Captain. They're sending us a mathematical message and requesting language equivalence. They're trying to communicate.
Tie in the ship's translator to the communication channel. Let them take it at their own speed.
I guess they can take it faster than we give it.
Captain, the message is coming in now.
Apparently they got what they needed before the computers burned out.
It is impossible to come aboard your ship because of the size differential.
We are prepared to beam you aboard our ship.
Do you require any special conditions, any particular atmosphere or environment?
Captain, you're not really bringing that thing in here?
Do we have any choice, Scotty? Besides, once it's aboard, it won't be taking any more shots at us. Lieutenant, get a repair crew on that computer. Get Doctor McCoy down to the transporter room. Spock, you come with me. Scotty, you too.
Negative, Captain. It has a protective screen. I cannot get through.
What do we do now, go up and knock?
Relate your point of origin.
We are from the United Federation of Planets.
Insufficient response. All things have a point of origin. I will scan your star charts.
A reasonable course.
If you care to leave your ship, we'll provide the necessary life support systems.
Non sequitur. Your facts are uncoordinated.
Jim, I don't think anybody's in there.
I contain no parasitical beings. I am Nomad.
It is reacting much like a highly sophisticated computer.
I am Nomad. What is opinion?
An opinion is a belief, a view, a judgment.
What's your source of power?
It has changed since the point of origin. There was much taken from the other. I am perpetual now. I am Nomad.
Yes. It was reported destroyed. There were no more in the series. But if this is that probe
I will scan your star charts.
I will bring them.
I have the capability of movement within your ship.
Now, Scotty, get our warp power up to full capacity.
Spock, Bones, come with us.
This is our point of origin, the star we know as Sol.
You are from the third planet?
A planet with one large natural satellite?
The planet is called Earth?
You are the creator, the Kirk. The sterilisation procedure against your ship was unnecessary.
You are the Kirk, the creator. You programmed my function.
Well, I'm not the Kirk. Tell me what your function is.
This is one of your units, creator?
It functions irrationally.
Sometimes, but tell him your function nevertheless.
My function is to probe for biological infestations, to destroy that which is not perfect. I am Nomad.
Biological infestation. There was never any probe sent out for that.
I believe the history computer can answer that question. I'll have the readout in a moment.
Did you destroy the Malurian system?
Not the system, creator Kirk. Only the unstable biological infestation. It is my function.
Unstable infestation? The population of four planets? What kind of function
Doctor. Why do you call me the creator?
The usage is correct. The creator was simply testing your memory banks.
There was much damage in the accident.
Mister Singh. Come here a moment. This unit will see to your needs.
I'll be back in a moment. Gentlemen, come with me.
You're on to something, Spock. What is it?
I've correlated all the available information on the Nomad probe, and I'm convinced that this object is indeed that probe.
Ridiculous. Earth science couldn't begin to build anything with those capabilities that long ago.
Nomad was destroyed.
Presumed destroyed by a meteor collision. I submit that it was badly damaged and somehow managed to repair itself.
I heard some lectures at the Academy on the Nomad probe. Its mission was essentially peaceful.
Did I disturb you? Did you wish anything?
This is the creator of Nomad, perhaps the most brilliant though erratic scientist of his time. His dream was to build a perfect thinking machine, capable of independent logic. You recall his name.
Yes. Similar. Captain, I believe that Nomad thinks you are Roykirk. That may well be why the attack was broken off. It responded to your name as well as its damaged memory banks permitted.
What do we have on Nomad itself, Spock?
Essentially it is, Doctor. I believe that more happened to it than just damage in the meteor collision. It mentioned the other. The unanswered question is, the other what?
Its purpose was certainly altered. Its directive, to seek out and destroy biological infestations, could not have been programmed into it.
If what you say is true, then we've taken aboard our vessel a device which sooner or later must destroy us. Security.
This is the captain. The mechanism we brought aboard is in the auxiliary control room. Have a security team meet me there in five minutes.
Captain, Mister Singh reports that Nomad is no longer in the auxiliary control room.
Security, cancel that order. Implement a full search for the mechanism. All decks report to me here.
Where my heart is, Where a scented miracle
That mechanical beastie is up here.
On my way, Scotty.
Tomorrow the path along the way, There's where my love
What is the meaning?
What form of communication?
For what purpose is singing?
I don't know. I like to sing. I felt like music.
Lieutenant! Keep away from that
He's dead, Jim.
Why did you kill him?
The unit touched my screens.
Sickbay. What did you do to her?
That unit is defective. Its thinking is chaotic. Absorbing it unsettled me.
That unit is a woman.
A mass of conflicting impulses.
Will the creator effect repairs on the unit Scott?
His biological functions have ceased.
Does the creator wish me to repair the unit?
There's nothing I can do, Jim. If there's a chance, it'll have to be soon.
Well, he'll need tapes on general anatomy, the central nervous system, and then one on the physiological structure of the brain. We'd better give it all the neurological studies we have, as well as tracings of Scotty's hyperencephalogram.
Nomad, I have arranged the tapes for flash feed at the top speed of the computer. Please do not draw the information faster than the machine's capacity.
It serves me as it is, Nomad. Repair it.
Where is the unit Scott now?
The body is in Sickbay.
Show me Sickbay.
Doctor McCoy will show you.
Security. I want a twenty four hour, two man armed surveillance on Nomad. Pick it up in Sickbay.
I could have told you that without looking.
What are the lot of you staring at me for?
It's all right.
That thing did something to Lieutenant Uhura!
Scotty, she's being taken care of. It's all right.
Take it easy. Lie down, Scotty. We just want to check you out.
The unit Scott is repaired. It will function correctly if your information to me was correct.
I'd like to check it out, if you don't mind. A man is not just a biological unit that you can patch together.
What did it do to me?
Doctor McCoy will explain it to you.
Nurse, I want him prepared for a full physical examination.
You restored Scott. He had much more extensive damage.
The unit Scott required simple structural repair. The knowledge banks of this unit have been wiped clean.
Yes. I'll get on it right away. Oh, and in spite of the way you repaired Scotty, you metal ticking
Does the creator wish Nomad to wait elsewhere?
That's a laugh.
The study of it would be of great use, Captain.
It's a killer, Spock. I intend to render it harmless. Get down to the Brig. Run a full analysis on the mechanism. I want to know what makes that thing tick.
Nomad, you will allow Mister Spock to probe your memory banks and structure.
Mister Spock is also one of your biological units, Creator?
Follow your instructions, Nomad.
My screens are down.
Sound it out.
That's it, Uhura. That's very good. Now try the next one.
Not Swahili, Uhura. In English. The dog has a ball. See? B, ah, ll. Ball. Now you go ahead.
How's she doing?
Well, she checks out with no brain damage. We've got all the educational tapes in our library. Now it's up to us.
It is not sufficient, Captain. I get certain references to the accident, the other, but nothing clear. There are areas I simply cannot scan.
We've got to know about it, Spock. what makes it operate, its compulsion for perfection.
Get into direct mental contact with that thing?
You saw what it did to Uhura.
There is a risk, but I have formed a partial hypothesis. I must check it out.
Nomad, the unit Spock will touch you. It is not an attack. It is a form of communication. You will permit it.
I will permit it, Creator.
Spock. Spock! Nomad! You're in contact with the unit Spock. Stop! Stop!
What does it mean, we are Nomad?
It was, it was damaged in deep space. Undoubtedly, the meteor collision. Its memory banks were destroyed, or most of them. It wandered without purpose, and then it met the other. The other was an alien probe of great power. Somehow they merged, repaired each other, became one.
Then it isn't Nomad?
Not the Nomad we lost from Earth. It took from the other a new directive to replace its own. The other was originally programmed to secure and sterilise soil samples from other planets, probably as a prelude to colonisation.
I beg your pardon?
An ancient Earth legend, Mister Spock. A changeling was a fairy child that was left in place of a human baby. The changeling assumed the identity of the human child. So, it is to sterilise, and for sterilise read kill.
And that is the only thing that has saved us until now.
Notify the captain. What are you doing here? Watch your panels, everyone. Watch that polymass. Roger, help with the interfactor. Leave that alone.
Inefficiency exists in the antimatter input valve. I will effect repair.
How are you doing that?
The energy release controls are also most inefficient. I shall effect repair.
Throw your dampers.
Cut your circuits, all of them.
Impossible. It can't go that fast.
It just won't stop, Mister Scott. Warp eleven!
Nomad, stop what you're doing. Scotty?
Is there a problem, Creator? I have increased engine efficiency fifty seven percent.
You will destroy my ship. Its structure cannot stand the stress of that much power. Turn off your repair operation.
Acknowledged. It is reversed as ordered, Creator.
Mister Scott, give Sulu warp two and keep her there.
Captain. I've examined the brig. The forcefield door on the security cell is damaged and the guards have vanished. I must assume they are dead.
You killed two of my
Creator, your biological units are inefficient.
Nomad, it's about time I told you who and what you are! I'm a biological unit, and I created you.
Nomad, there are two men waiting outside. You will not harm them. They will escort you back to the waiting area. You will stay there. You will do nothing.
I am programmed to investigate.
I have given you new programming and you will implement it.
It was a foolish mistake.
Even worse. Nomad just now made a reference to its launch point, Earth.
Spock, do you think it's possible that it got a fix on Earth when it tapped the computers earlier?
I do not believe there is much beyond Nomad's capabilities.
And we've shown it the way home. And when it gets there
It will find the Earth infested with imperfect biological units.
And it will carry out its prime directive. Sterilise.
Is she all right?
I think so. Looks like some kind of shock.
Nomad examined the personnel files and the medical histories. She tried to stop him.
And found that its creator is as imperfect as all the other biological units.
Manual override has been blocked. Source, Engineering.
Jim, with all the systems out we'll only have enough air and heat for
Get Scotty, some antigravs and meet me in Engineering.
You're programmed to obey the orders of your creator.
Nomad, I admit that biological units are imperfect, but a biological unit created you.
I am perfect. I am Nomad.
No, you're not Nomad. You're an alien machine. Your programming tapes have been altered.
You are in error. You are a biological unit. You are imperfect.
But I am your creator.
You are the Creator.
I created you?
You are the Creator.
But I admit I'm imperfect. How could I have created such a perfect thing as you?
Answer unknown. I shall analyse.
Analysis complete. Insufficient data to resolve problem, but my programming is whole. My purpose remains. I am Nomad. I am perfect. That which is imperfect must be sterilised.
Then you will continue to destroy that which thinks and lives and is imperfect?
I shall continue. I shall return to launch point Earth. I shall sterilise.
You must sterilise in case of error?
Error is inconsistent with my prime functions. Sterilisation is correction.
Everything that is in error must be sterilised.
There are no exceptions.
The creation of perfection is no error.
I did not create perfection. I created error.
Your data is faulty. I am Nomad. I am perfect.
I am the Kirk, the creator?
You are the Creator.
You are wrong! Jackson Roykirk, your creator, is dead. You have mistaken me for him. You are in error. You did not discover your mistake. You have made two errors. You are flawed and imperfect and you have not corrected by sterilisation. You have made three errors.
You are flawed and imperfect! Execute your prime function!
We've got to get rid of it while it's trying to think.
Your logic was impeccable, Captain. We are in grave danger.
Scotty, set the controls for deep space. Two ten, mark one.
Nomad, you are imperfect!
Exercise your prime function.
My congratulations, Captain. A dazzling display of logic.
You didn't think I had it in me, did you Spock?
I thought you might like to know that Lieutenant Uhura is back to college level. She'll be back on the job within a week.
The destruction of Nomad was a great waste, Captain. It was a remarkable instrument.
Which might well have destroyed more billions of lives. It's well gone. Besides, what are you feeling so badly about? It's not easy to lose a bright and promising son.
Well, it thought I was its mother, didn't it? Do you think I'm completely without feelings, Mister Spock? You saw what it did for Scotty. What a doctor it would've made. My son, the doctor. Kind of gets you right there, doesn't it?
Here's the report on Pollux Five, Captain. This entire system has been almost the same. A strange lack of intelligent life on the planets. It bugs the percentages.
Lieutenant, you look a bit tired this morning.
Well, I was up all night working on this report, sir.
Well in that case, there's nothing like a wee bit of coffee to get you back in shape. Join me, Carolyn?
All right, Scotty. Just let me give this to Mister Spock.
Bones, could you get that excited over a cup of coffee?
Even from here I can tell his pulse rate's up.
I'm not sure I like that, Jim.
And he thinks he's the right man for her, but I'm not sure she thinks he's the right man. On the other hand, she's a woman. All woman. One day she'll find the right man and off she'll go, out of the service.
I like to think of it not so much losing an officer as gaining
Actually, I'm losing an officer.
Pollux Four. Class M type planet, oxygen and nitrogen atmosphere. Sensors indicate no life forms. Approximate age four billion years. Judged no reason for contact. In all respects, quite ordinary, Captain.
What is it, Mister Spock? Is it a hand?
A trick, then? A projection?
Not a projection, sir. A field of energy.
Hard about. We can't seem to get away from it.
It's almost as if it means to grab us.
We're dead still, Captain. Helm doesn't answer. We can't move.
Lieutenant, relay our position and circumstances to Starbase Twelve immediately.
Applying thrust, sir. No results, Captain. We're stuck tight.
The ship is almost completely encircled by the field. It resembles a conventional force field but on unusual wavelengths. Despite its appearance, that of a human appendage, it is definitely not living tissue. It is energy.
Thank you. Mister Sulu. Our forward tractor beams, adjust to repel.
Ineffective, Captain. There doesn't seem to be anything to push against.
Captain, a most curious development on scanner five seven.
Let's all take a look at it, Mister Spock.
This is Captain James T. Kirk, commanding the USS Enterprise. Please identify yourself.
Are you responsible for stopping the ship?
Give it back, then we'll talk.
I don't know who or what you are, but I must warn you we have the power to defend ourselves. If you value your safety, release this ship.
All right! Whatever you're doing, turn it off! You win!
Pressure is gone, Captain. Space normal on hull.
Let's go, Bones. You in good voice?
Sure it's wise, Jim?
If we don't accept his invitation, we'll have a crushed eggshell where this ship used to be.
Verbose, isn't he?
Insults are effective only where emotion is present.
Good. We'll tackle him together. We already know the questions. You're the best man to find the answers.
Well, you're the A and A officer, aren't you? Archaeology, anthropology, ancient civilisations.
We're going to need help in all those areas.
My children, long have I waited for this moment. The memories you bring of your lush and beautiful Earth, the green fields and blue skies, the simple shepherds and their flocks.
You know of Earth? You've been there?
Once I stretched out my hand, and Earth trembled. And I breathed upon it, and spring returned.
You mentioned Agamemnon, Hector, Odysseus. How do you know about them?
Search your most distant memories, those of the thousands of years past, and I am there. Your fathers knew me, and your father's fathers. I am Apollo.
And I am the tsar of all the Russias.
I'm sorry, Captain. I never met a god before.
And you haven't yet. Readings, Doctor.
Evidently not so simple.
Earth, mother of the most beautiful of women in the universe. That at least has not changed. I am pleased. Yes, my children. Zeus, Athena, Aphrodite, Artemis. A gallant band of travellers. We knew your Earth well, five thousand of your years ago.
All right. We're here at your invitation. Would you mind telling us what you want without all the Olympian generalities?
You will not leave this place.
I will not permit that device to work, either, Captain.
What is it you want?
You will worship me, as your fathers did before you.
If you want to play god and call yourself Apollo, that's your business, but you're no god to us, Mister.
I said you would worship me.
And you've got a lot to learn!
Mister Spock, I can't contact the landing party. All frequencies are jammed.
Try to break through it, Lieutenant.
Very efficient. Mister Sulu, rig all transmission circuits for maximum power generation. Compute for reversal of polarity of the field around the ship.
Lieutenant Kyle, I want a complete sensor scan of the planet.
Locate all the lifeforms. I want to know what's going on down there.
Analysis. Lieutenant Palamas, what do you know about Apollo?
Apollo, twin brother of Artemis, son of the god Zeus and Leto, a mortal. He was the god of light and purity. He was skilled in the bow and lyre.
Obviously he has some knowledge of Earth. His classical references and the appearance of all this.
I think the appearance of this is for our benefit. Bones?
I can't say much till I check our these readings. He looks human, but of course that doesn't mean a thing.
Whatever he is, he seems to control a remarkable technology.
Power is what he controls. You can't do tricks like that without energy.
Fine, but what power, and where is it? Scout around with your tricorders. Find the source of that power. Bones.
Bones, I wonder if five thousand years ago
You have a theory?
I have an idea. What if he is really Apollo?
I want from you that which is rightfully mine. Your loyalty, your tribute, and your worship.
May I ask what you offer in exchange for this worship?
Life in paradise. As simple and as pleasureful as it was those thousands of years ago on that beautiful planet so far away.
Apollo, we're willing to talk, but you'll find we don't bow to every creature who happens to have a bag of tricks.
Agamemnon was one such as you, and Hercules. Pride and arrogance. They defied me until they felt my wrath.
I would like to point out that we are quite capable of some wrath ourselves.
I have four hundred and thirty people on that ship up there.
No, you do not, Captain. They are mine. To save, to cherish, or to destroy at my will.
But why? What you've said so far makes no sense at all.
How like Aphrodite and Athena. The beauty, grace. And you seem wise for a woman. What is your name?
I mean your name.
Carolyn. Yes. You are beautiful. You would do Aphrodite credit. I will tell you a thousand tales, stories of courage and love. You will know what it is to be a goddess.
Leave her alone.
And so do you.
I've grown weary of discussion and argument.
Captain, the phasers. All the working parts are fused.
None of your toys will function. Yes. You are a beauty. But like Artemis, the bow arm should be bare.
Oh, it's beautiful.
She's not going with you.
He shall learn the discipline of the temple. So shall you all. Come.
It's all right, Captain. I'll go.
Without fear. She is fit indeed.
Bones, how is he?
Stunned but coming around. I'm not sure it's wise to let her go off like that.
He would have been rather difficult to stop.
You saw how capricious he is. Benevolent one minute, angry the next. One more wrong move from her and he could kill her.
Mister Chekov, I think you'd better continue your investigation.
How do you feel, Scotty?
I am tingling all over. Did he take her with him?
It would seem so.
Captain, we've got to stop him. He wants her. The way he looks at her.
Mister Scott, I understand your concern over her, but she volunteered to go with him, hopefully to find out more about him. She's doing her job. I think it's about time you started doing yours. We've got to find out the source of his power. You've got a tricorder. Use it if you're able to.
I'm able, sir.
And one more thing. I want no more unauthorised action against Apollo or whatever he is. That's an order!
Scotty doesn't believe in gods.
Apollo's no god. But he could have been taken for one, though, once. Say five thousand years ago, a highly sophisticated group of space travellers landed on Earth around the Mediterranean.
Yes. To the simple shepherds and tribesmen of early Greece, creatures like that would have been gods.
Especially if they had the power to alter their form at will and command great energy. In fact, they couldn't have been taken for anything else.
Ready to reverse polarity, Mister Sulu?
Computed and standing by to generate, sir.
No good, Mister Spock. We didn't even faze it. We're still locked tight.
Cut power, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant, we must restore communications with the landing party.
I'm working, sir, but I can't do anything with this.
I might be able to rig up a subspace bypass circuit.
I've located the landing party, but one of them seems separated from the other four.
I've just picked up readings for our own people, sir.
Mister Spock, here's something. There seems to be a radiated energy pulsation coming from the planet. I don't know what it is, sir.
I can't seem to pinpoint it.
I would suggest, Mister Sulu, if you cannot find out where the power source is, you should find out where it is not. A simple process of elimination.
Oh, it's lovely.
I've known other women. Daphne, Cassandra, but none more beautiful than you. Are you frightened of me?
Frightened? No, I don't think so. Of course, a girl doesn't go walking with a
All right, a god every day. What happened to the others? Artemis, Hera?
They returned to the cosmos on the wings of the wind.
No, not as you understand it. We're immortal, we gods. But the Earth changed. Your fathers changed. They turned away until we were only memories. A god cannot survive as a memory. We need love, admiration, worship, as you need food.
You really think you're a god?
In a real sense, we were gods. We had the power of life and death. We could have struck out from Olympus and destroyed. We have no wish to destroy, so we came home again. It was an empty place without worshippers, but we had no strength to leave, so we waited, all of us, through the long years.
But you said the others didn't die.
Even for a god, there's a point of no return. Hera was first. She stood in front of the temple and spread herself upon the wind, thinner and thinner, until only the wind remained. But I knew you would come. You striving, bickering, foolishly brave humans. I knew you would come to the stars one day. Of all the gods, I knew and I waited, waited for you to come and sit by my side.
I don't understand.
Even five thousand years ago, the gods took mortals to them to love, to care for, like Zeus took Leto, my mother. We were gods of passion, of love.
There is a repeated occurrence of registrations, a regular pulsating pattern of radiated energy.
Unquestionably, an immensely powerful field of energy is being generated around here somewhere. We're just having difficulty focusing on it.
Apollo has no difficulty focusing. He taps that energy, Mister Scott.
Sir, some creatures can generate and control energy with no harm to themselves. The electric eel on Earth, the giant dry worm of Antos Four, the fluffy
Spock's contaminating this boy, Jim.
Are you suggesting that he, Apollo, taps a flow of energy and channels it through his body?
That would seem most likely, sir.
Mister Chekov, I think you've earned your pay for the week. But where is the source of that power?
Number one on our list of things to do.
Is that all you have to offer?
Yes, except my estimation for his physical condition. In spite of Apollo's bag of tricks, he comes up essentially normal with just a few variations. However, there's an extra organ in his chest that I can't even make a guess about.
Bones, is it possible
Where's Lieutenant Palamas?
She is no longer of any concern to you.
You bloodthirsty Saracen, what have you done with her?
All right, mister. You wanted worshippers? You've got enemies. You want us to bow down, you'll have to
You will learn discipline. You will learn
Chekov, give me a hand.
Are you all right, Captain?
He disappeared again like the cat in that Russian story.
Don't you mean the English story, the Cheshire Cat?
Cheshire? No, sir. Minsk perhaps, but
Sir, there is something I noticed. Apollo looked very strange when he disappeared, tired or in pain. I don't know if it means anything.
How do you feel?
I can't get my arm to move.
We've got to get out of here.
Well, let's assume that five thousand years ago creatures like our friend Apollo did indeed visit Earth and form the basis of the Greek classic myths.
Most mythology has its basis in fact. If I remember my ancient legends, the gods, after expending energy, required rest, even as we humans.
And Apollo's gone, after attacking you and Mister Scott. You think maybe he's off somewhere recharging his energy cells?
Something like that. Remember, he's keeping a force field on the ship and he's expending energy down here. You said he looked pained and tired when he disappeared. If we can wear him out, overwork him, that might do it.
The trouble with overworking him is that it can get us killed.
If we can provoke him so that he strikes one of us again, there's a chance that he'll be drained enough so the rest of us can jump him.
I still say it can get us killed.
Not all of us, Bones. When he comes back, it's a chance we'll have to take.
I'm connecting the bypass circuit now, sir. It should take another half hour.
Speed is essential, Lieutenant.
Mister Spock, I haven't done anything like this in years. If it isn't done just right, I could blow the entire communications system. It's very delicate work, sir.
I can think no one better equipped to handle it, Miss Uhura. Please proceed.
Sectors one through twenty five charted and examined. No chance at all of power originating in those areas.
We're unable to break completely loose from this force field, but we might be able to punch some holes through it.
Come here! I know you're trying to escape me. It's useless. I know everything you do. I tried to be compassionate toward your kind.
You know nothing about our kind. You know only our remote ancestors who trembled before your tricks. Your tricks don't frighten us, neither do you. We've come a long way in five thousand years.
But you're of the same nature. I could sweep you out of existence with a wave of my hand and bring you back again. I can give life or death. What else does mankind demand of its gods?
Mankind has no need for gods. We find the one quite adequate.
You will gather laurel leaves, light the ancient fires, kill a deer, make your sacrifices to me. Apollo has spoken!
Go! Gather laurel leaves? You must be joking!
Kill a deer. That's the funniest thing I ever heard.
You shall reap the rewards of your insolence!
We're tired of your phony fireworks!
Mortal, you have earned this!
A father doesn't destroy his children. You said you were gentle and understanding.
How can they worship you if you hurt them?
I shall be lenient with you, for her sake. You will make plans to bring the rest of your people down. Be sure your artisans bring tools. You will need homes.
And you will supply the herds of sheep, and the pipes we'll play, and the simple skins we'll wear for clothes.
You will dismantle your ship for the supplies you need, and I'll crush its empty hull. I have been too patient. I shall be patient no longer.
Captain, we've got to do something!
We were doing something until our brave lady stepped in and saved us.
Yes, I have. One more. And it depends on the lieutenant's loyalty. If she fails us, we'd better get used to herding goats.
Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in. Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Kirk to
Carolyn. What's happened to her?
Scotty, I'll find out.
How old are you?
Oh, yes, I'm all right. I have a message for you.
Come over there. Well?
He wants us to live in peace. He wants to provide for us. He'll give us everything we ever wanted, and he can do it, too.
All right, Lieutenant, you can come down from Mount Olympus now. You've got work to do.
I don't understand.
We can't give him that worship, none of us can. Especially you.
Spurn him. Reject him. You must. You're special to him.
Yes. I love him.
Lieutenant. All our lives, here and on the ship, depend on you.
On you, Lieutenant! Reject him, and we have a chance to save ourselves. Accept him, and you condemn all of us to slavery, nothing less than slavery. We might never get help this far out. Or perhaps the thought of spending an eternity bending knee and tending sheep appeals to you.
Oh, but you don't understand. He's kind, and he wants the best for us. And he's so lonely. What you ask would break his heart. How can I?
Yes. Yes, I understand. He's calling me.
Lieutenant. You have your orders and your duty.
Yes, sir. My orders and my duty.
I think we can try it now, sir. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain.
Is there a structure of some sort near you?
There is indeed, Mister Spock.
Very good. How are you doing on the force field?
We can negate sections of it, creating openings through which we can fire our phaser banks.
Well, that ought to do it. Have Sulu lock all phaser banks onto the structure. Fire on my order only. Cut it fine. We'll be standing nearby.
Captain. I would recommend a discreet distance.
If that structure is the source of his power, I want to know where he is when we attack it.
Bones, do you think that mysterious organ in Apollo's chest could have something to do with the transmission of energy?
Well, it doesn't serve any other purpose I know of.
Captain, we've got to wait until Carolyn comes back before we fire on the temple. We don't know what would happen to her if he was suddenly attacked. She might get killed.
Yes, I know. I know. Scotty. We'll wait.
I must say, Apollo, the way you ape human behaviour is remarkable, but there are some other things I must know. Your evolutionary patterns and your social development.
I'm sure they're unique. I've never encountered a specimen like you before.
I am Apollo. I've chosen you.
I'm sure that's very flattering, but I must get on with my work now.
I'm a scientist. My particular specialty is ancient civilisations, relics, and myths. Surely you know I've only been studying you.
I don't believe it. You love me.
Love you? Be logical. I'm not some simple shepherdess you can awe. Why, I could no more love you than I could love a new species of bacteria.
Carolyn! I forbid you to go. I order you to stay.
Is that the secret of your power over women, the thunderbolts you throw?
What the devil is that?
Sensors are picking up an atmospheric disturbance in your area.
Stand by your phasers, Mister Spock. Prepare to fire on my signal. Kirk out.
Captain, we've got to go and find her!
We've got to be here when he comes back.
But what if he doesn't. What if he
All right. The temple is his power source. Let's bring him back to it. Get to cover. Mister Spock, fire those phasers.
Fire those phasers! That's an order, Mister Spock!
More power to the shields.
I would have cherished you, cared for you. I would have loved you as a father loves his children. Did I ask so much?
We've out grown you. You asked for something we could no longer give.
Carolyn, I loved you. I would have made a goddess of you. I've shown you my open heart. See what you've done to me.
Zeus, Hermes, Hera, Aphrodite. You were right. Athena, you were right. The time has passed. There is no room for gods. Forgive me, my old friends. Take me. Take me.
I wish we hadn't had to do this.
So do I. They gave us so much. The Greek civilisation, much of our culture and philosophy came from a worship of those beings. In a way, they began the Golden Age. Would it have hurt us, I wonder, just to have gathered a few laurel leaves?
It's Spock. Have you noticed anything strange about him?
No, nothing in particular. Why ?
Well, it's nothing I can pinpoint without an examination, but he's become increasingly restive. If he were not a Vulcan, I'd almost say nervous. And for another thing, he's avoiding food. I checked and he hasn't eaten at all in three days.
That just sounds like Mister Spock in one of his contemplative phases.
Oh! Vulcan plomeek soup, and I'll bet you made it too. You never give up hoping, do you?
Well, Mister Spock hasn't been eating, Doctor, and I, I just happened to notice.
It's all right. Carry on, Miss Chapel.
Bones, I'm a busy man.
Captain, I should like to request a leave of absence on my home planet. On our present course you can divert to Vulcan with a loss of but two point eight light days.
Spock, what the devil is this all about?
I have made my request, Captain. All I require from you is that you answer it. Yes or no.
All right, Spock, let's have it.
It is undignified for a woman to play servant to a man who is not hers.
I'm more interested in your request for shore leave. In all the years
You have my request, Captain. Will you grant it or not?
In all the years that I've known you, you've never asked for a leave of any sort. In fact, you've refused them. Why now?
Captain, surely I have enough leave time accumulated.
Agreed, but that isn't the question, is it? If there's a problem of some sort, illness in the family
No. Nothing of that nature, Captain.
Then since we're headed for Altair Six, and since the shore facilities there are excellent
No! I must. I wish to take my leave on Vulcan.
Spock, I'm asking you. What's wrong?
I need rest. I'm asking you to accept that answer.
Alter course to Vulcan. Increase speed to warp four.
I suppose most of us overlook the fact that even Vulcans aren't indestructible.
Put it on audio over here, Lieutenant.
Mister Chekov, compute course and speed necessary for compliance.
Head directly for Altair Six. Sailor's luck, Mister Spock. Or, as one of Finagle's Laws puts it, 'Any home port the ship makes ill be somebody else's, not mine'. The new president of Altair Six wants to get himself launched a week early, so we have to be there a week early. Don't worry. I'll see that you get your leave as soon as we're finished.
I quite understand, Captain.
Mister Chekov, how late will we arrive for the ceremonies if we increase speed to maximum and divert to Vulcan just long enough to drop off Mister Spock?
How far behind schedule will diverting to Vulcan put us?
Mister Spock. Come with me, please.
Deck five. You've changed course for Vulcan, Mister Spock. Why?
Do you deny it?
No. No, by no means, Captain. It is quite possible.
Then why'd you do it?
Captain, I accept on your word that I did it, but I do not know why, nor do I remember doing it. Captain, lock me away. I do not wish to be seen. I cannot. No Vulcan could explain further.
I'm trying to help you, Spock.
Ask me no further questions. I will not answer.
I order you to report to the Sickbay.
Come in, Spock. I'm all ready for you.
My orders were to report to Sickbay, Doctor. I have done so. And now I'll go to my quarters.
My orders were to give you a thorough physical. In case you hadn't noticed, I have to answer to the same commanding officer that you do. Come on, Spock. Yield to the logic of the situation.
Examine me, for all the good it'll do either of us.
How do you figure it, Chekov? First we're going to Vulcan, then we're going to Altair, then we're headed to Vulcan again, and now we're headed back to Altair.
I think I'm going to get space sick.
Jim, you've got to get Spock to Vulcan.
Bones, I will, I will. As soon as this mission is
No! Now. Right away. If you don't get him to Vulcan within a week eight days at the outside, he'll die. He'll die, Jim.
Why must he die? Why within eight days? Explain.
I don't know.
You keep saying that. Are you a doctor, or aren't you?
There's a growing imbalance of body functions, as if in our bodies huge amounts of adrenalin were constantly being pumped into our bloodstreams. Now, I can't trace it down in my biocomps. Spock won't tell me what it is. But if it isn't stopped somehow, the physical and emotional pressures will simply kill him.
You say you're convinced he knows what it is?
He does, and he's as tightlipped about it as an Aldebaran Shellmouth. No use to ask him, Jim. He won't talk.
Stay. McCoy has given me his medical evaluation of your condition. He says you're going to die unless something is done. What? Is it something only your planet can do for you? Spock! You've been called the best first officer in the fleet. That's an enormous asset to me. If I have to lose that first officer, I want to know why.
No, I do not understand. Explain. Consider that an order.
Captain, there are some things which transcend even the discipline of the service.
Would it help if I told you that I'll treat this as totally confidential?
It has to do with biology.
What kind of biology?
You mean the biology of Vulcans? Biology as in reproduction? Well, there's no need to be embarrassed about it, Mister Spock. It happens to the birds and the bees.
The birds and the bees are not Vulcans, Captain. If they were, if any creature as proudly logical as us were to have their logic ripped from them as this time does to us. How do Vulcans choose their mates? Haven't you wondered?
I guess the rest of us assume that it's done quite logically.
No. No. It is not. We shield it with ritual and customs shrouded in antiquity. You humans have no conception. It strips our minds from us. It brings a madness which rips away our veneer of civilisation. It is the pon farr. The time of mating. There are precedents in nature, Captain. The giant eelbirds of Regulus Five, once each eleven years they must return to the caverns where they hatched. On your Earth, the salmon. They must return to that one stream where they were born, to spawn or die in trying.
But you're not a fish, Mister Spock. You're
No. Nor am I a man. I'm a Vulcan. I'd hoped I would be spared this, but the ancient drives are too strong. Eventually, they catch up with us, and we are driven by forces we cannot control to return home and take a wife. Or die.
I haven't heard a word you've said, and I'll get you to Vulcan somehow.
Mister Sulu, you don't think
Maybe you ought to plot a course back for Vulcan, just in case.
Let me alone. Let me alone!
I'm aware of that, sir, but it's of the utmost importance. You must give me permission to divert to Vulcan.
I can't, sir, but believe me, I wouldn't make such a request
Sir, the delay would be, at most, a day. I can hardly believe that
Well, that's that.
No, it's not. I know the Altair situation. We would be one of three starships. Very impressive, very diplomatic, but it's simply not that vital.
You can't go off to Vulcan against Starfleet orders. You'll be busted
I can't let Spock die, can I, Bones? And he will if we go to Altair. I owe him my life a dozen times over. Isn't that worth a career? He's my friend. Bridge. Navigation.
Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Vulcan. Tell Engineering I want warp eight or better. Push her for all she'll take.
Course already plotted. Laying it in, sir.
I had a most startling dream. You were trying to tell me something, but I couldn't hear you. It would be illogical for us to protest against our natures. Don't you think?
I don't understand.
Your face is wet.
I came to tell you that we are bound for Vulcan. We'll be there in just a few days.
My name is Christine.
Yes, I know, Christine. Would you make me some of that plomeek soup?
Oh, I'd be very glad to do that, Mister Spock.
It is obvious that you have surmised my problem, Doctor. My compliments on your insight. Captain, there is a thing that happens to Vulcans at this time. Almost an insanity, which you would no doubt find distasteful.
Will I? You've been most patient with my kinds of madness.
Then would you beam down to the planet's surface and stand with me? There is a brief ceremony.
Is it permitted?
It is my right. By tradition, the male is accompanied by his closest friends.
I shall be honoured, sir.
Captain. We're standing by on Vulcan hailing frequencies, sir.
Open the channel, Lieutenant. Vulcan Space Central, this is the USS Enterprise requesting permission to assume standard orbit.
This is Spock.
T'Pring, parted from me and never parted, never and always touching and touched. We meet at the appointed place.
She's lovely, Mister Spock. Who is she?
She is T'Pring. My wife.
He described it to me as meaning marriage or challenge. In the distant past, Vulcans killed to win their mates.
They still go mad at this time. Perhaps it's the price they pay for having no emotions the rest of the time.
It's lovely. I wish the breeze were cooler.
Yeah. Hot as Vulcan. Now I understand what that phrase means.
The atmosphere is thinner than Earth.
The marriage party approaches. I hear them.
Marriage party? You said T'Pring was your wife.
Bones, you know who that is? T'Pau. The only person to ever turn down a seat on the Federation Council.
He never mentioned that his family was this important.
They are not outworlders. They are my friends. I am permitted this.
This is Kirk.
What is it? What happened?
Ma'am, I don't understand. Are you trying to say that she rejected him? That she doesn't want him?
Think Spock can take him?
I doubt it. Not in his present condition.
No! I am to be the one. It was agreed.
Hear me. I have made the ancient claim. I claim the right. The woman is
I ask forgiveness.
My friend does not understand.
He does not know. I will do what I must, T'Pau, but not with him! His blood does not burn. He is my friend!
I burn, T'Pau. My eyes are flame. My heart is flame. Thee has the power, T'Pau. In the name of my fathers, forbid. Forbid! T'Pau. I plead with thee! I beg!
What happens to Spock if I decline?
You can't do it, Jim.
No. She said their laws and customs were not binding on you.
And you said Spock might not be able to handle him. If I can knock Spock out without really hurting him
In this climate? If the heat doesn't get you, the thin air will. You can't do it!
If I get into any trouble, I'll quit. And Spock wins, and honour is satisfied.
Jim, listen, if you
Bones. He's my first officer and my friend. I disregarded Starfleet orders to bring him here. Another thing, that's T'Pau of Vulcan. All of Vulcan in one package. How can I back out in front of her?
What do you mean, if both survive?
Now wait a minute, ma'am. Who said anything about a fight to the death?
These men are friends. To force them to fight until one of them is killed
Is this Vulcan chivalry? The air's too hot and thin for Kirk. He's not used to it.
You're going to have to kill him, Jim.
Kill Spock? That's not what I came to Vulcan for, is it? What's that?
McCoy to Enterprise.
Why the challenge, and why you chose my captain as your champion.
I see no logic in preferring Stonn over me.
Stonn. She is yours. After a time, you may find that having is not so pleasing a thing after all as wanting. It is not logical, but it is often true. Spock here. Stand by to beam up. Live long, T'Pau, and prosper.
I shall do neither. I have killed my captain and my friend. Energize.
Doctor, I shall be resigning my commission immediately, of course.
So I would appreciate your making the final arrangements.
Doctor, please, let me finish. There can be no excuse for the crime of which I'm guilty. I intend to offer no defence. Furthermore, I shall order Mister Scott to take immediate command of this vessel.
Don't you think you better check with me first?
I'm pleased to see you, Captain. You seem uninjured. I am at something of a loss to understand it, however.
Nurse, would you mind, please?
Ah, yes, the girl. Most interesting. It must have been the combat. When I thought I had killed the captain, I found I had lost all interest in T'Pring. The madness was gone.
Response to T'Pau's request for diversion of Enterprise to planet Vulcan
Well, a little late, but I'm glad they're seeing it our way. How about that T'Pau? They couldn't turn her down. Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Altair Six. Leave orbit when ready. Kirk out.
There's just one thing, Mister Spock. You can't tell me that when you first saw Jim alive that you weren't on the verge of giving us an emotional scene that would have brought the house down. .
Merely my quite logical relief that Starfleet had not lost a highly proficient captain.
Of course, Mister Spock, your reaction was quite logical.
Come on, Spock. Let's go mind the store.
Oh, about another thirty minutes. I've come across some most interesting organic compounds. Hey, Starfleet was right.
No sign of the inhabitants so far. Kirk out.
Yes, the mugato. No problem, though. Those prints are several days old. They seldom stay in one place.
Aside from that, you say it's a Garden of Eden?
Or so it seemed to the brash young Lieutenant Kirk on his first planet survey.
Except these people stayed in their Garden of Eden. Bows and arrows for hunting, but absolutely no fighting among themselves. Remarkably peaceful and tranquil.
Villagers with flintlocks? That's impossible. They hadn't progressed nearly that far.
Captain, use of our phasers is expressly forbidden.
Enterprise, alert! Stand by to beam up landing party.
No, Captain. I can travel.
Pressure packet. Lucky his heart's where his liver should be, or he'd be dead now.
Bones, can you save him?
On my way. Scotty. Bones?
I don't know yet, Jim.
Captain, we're holding the planet between us and the Klingons. I don't think they've spotted us.
Make that definite, sir. They're sending a routine message to their home base with no mention of us.
Good. Go to Yellow Alert.
Yellow Alert. All stations go to Yellow Alert.
Do you think you can keep us out of their sight, Chekov?
I can try, Captain.
Message to Starbase, sir?
We can hide for a while, sir, but we may have to go out of orbit to keep it up for long.
Kirk to Sickbay.
So, they've broken the treaty.
Not necessarily, Captain. They have as much right to scientific missions here as we have.
Research is not the Klingon way.
When I left there thirteen years ago, those villagers had barely learned to forge iron. Spock was shot with a flintlock. How many centuries between those two developments?
On the other hand, a flintlock would be the first firearm the inhabitants would normally develop.
Yes, I'm aware of that, Mister Scott.
And, sir, the fact Earth took twelve centuries doesn't mean they had to.
We've seen different development at rates on different planets.
And were the Klingons behind it, why didn't they give them breechloaders?
I did not invite a debate. I'm sorry. I'm worried about Spock and concerned about what's happened to something I once knew down there. You have the conn, Scotty. I'll be in Sickbay.
He'll live or die now, Jim. I don't know which. Doctor M'Benga interned on a Vulcan ward. He couldn't be in better hands.
Then you and I are transporting down.
I can't leave Spock at this time.
You just indicated you could. There are Klingons here. If their mission is a legitimate research interest in the planet's organic potential, then you're the one man who can tell me.
And if that's not it?
Then I need help. Advice I can trust as much as Spock's.
I appreciate the compliment, Jim, but
Bones, I'm as worried about Spock as you are, but if the Klingons are breaking the treaty it could be interstellar war. Kirk to Bridge.
McCoy and I are transporting back down. Inform ship's stores that we'll need native costumes.
Captain, we may have to break out of orbit any minute to keep out of their sight. We'd be out of communicator range with you.
I understand. We'll arrange a rendezvous schedule. Kirk out.
Perfect. Tyree's camp's a quarter of a mile away.
Want to think about it again, Jim? Starfleet's orders about this planet state no interference with
No interference with normal social development. I'm not only aware of it, it was my survey thirteen years ago that recommended it.
I read it. Inhabitants superior in many ways to humans. Left alone, they undoubtedly someday will develop a remarkably advanced and peaceful culture.
Indeed. And I intend to see that they have that chance. You coming with me?
Do I have a choice?
They left. Out of orbit.
Tyree. Some of his men. Cure.
Are you hill people? Do you know a hunter named Tyree? A mugato attacked him. He's James Kirk. He's a friend of Tyree's. Blast it! Do something! He's dying!
Take him to the cave. I bring Tyree.
You and your Garden of Eden.
We must obtain the same firesticks, husband. You could be killing them instead. We could take their houses, their goods.
Nona, enough. In time the villagers will return to their ways of friendship.
I took you because you cast a spell upon me.
And I have spells that help me keep you. Remember this leaf? The night we camped by the water?
The night of madness.
Oh, Tyree, did you really hate that madness?
No, Nona. No! It brought up evil beasts from my soul.
What is it?
There are strangers in our camp. One has taken the mugato bite. He dies.
It is said the dying one is a friend of Tyree, from long ago.
The stranger, where is he?
Nona, where's Kirk? The cave?
Tyree, you wish me to save him?
You must. He is the one I told you of. The friend of my younger days.
My remedies require I know what kind of man he is. All that is known of him.
I gave him my promise of silence. He was made my brother.
And I am your wife, his sister. I promise silence also.
You mean he's conscious?
A good nurse always treats her patients that way. It proves she's interested.
I am Tyree.
And I'm Tyree's woman.
It is Kirk. She will cure him.
A mahko root.
A plant? It moves.
For those who know where to find it, how to use it, how to pick it.
Take this of my soul. This of my soul. Thine own. Into thine. Deeply. Together. Your pain is mine. All mine. Your soul and mine, together! Return. It is past. Return. Return!
Bones. I had the strangest dream.
How do you feel, Jim?
Tired. Very tired. You did a fine job, Bones. I think I'll sleep.
Our blood has passed through the mahko root together. Our souls have been together. He is mine now.
She must sleep also.
He is hers?
When a man and woman are joined in this manner, he can refuse her no wish. But it is only legend.
Yes, James! James, it's good to see you.
Yes, of course. I should've guessed. Congratulations. Tyree, we must talk now. The villagers, their new weapons. I want to hear all about that. We must make plans.
Good. It is past time to plan.
Much has happened since you left, James. Come, we'll speak of it.
And of things to be done.
The readings are beginning to fluctuate.
Do whatever he says?
The firesticks first appeared nearly a year ago. Since that time, many of my people have died.
You say they make the firesticks themselves? How can you be sure?
I've looked into their village. I have seen it being done.
Have you seen any strangers among the villagers?
Can you take us to their village while it's still dark?
Yes, but the mugatos travel at night also. You killed one. Its mate will not be far.
I've seen them also, and I know you have many ways to make your friend Tyree a man of great importance.
Many ways? What else does she know about us?
Tyree has told me much of you. Do not blame him. It was the price for saving your life.
We're simply strangers from
From one of the lights in the sky, and you have ways as far above firesticks as the sky above our world.
You will not speak of this to others.
I will not if I am made to understand. Teach me. There's an old custom among my people. When a woman saves a man's life, he is grateful.
I am grateful.
A splendid custom if not carried to extremes.
We once were as you are, Spears, arrows. There came a time when our weapons grew faster than our wisdom, and we almost destroyed ourselves. We learned from this to make a rule during all our travels, Never to cause the same to happen to other worlds. Just as a man must grow in his own way and in his own time.
Perhaps not as fast or in the way another thinks he should. But we're wise enough to know that we are wise enough not to interfere with the way of a man or another world.
You must let the villagers destroy us? You will not help your friend and brother kill them instead?
No! I said I will not kill!
What's bothering you, Jim? If we find the Klingons have helped the villagers, there's certainly something we can do.
That's what's bothering me. The something we may have to do.
The guard. We must wait.
Tyree, supposing you had to fight? What then?
Jim, this man believes in the same thing we believe in. That killing is stupid and useless.
You are late, my friend Apella.
A quarrel by my people. A division of some skins and a hill woman taken this morning. It's hard to divide one woman.
Give her to the man who killed the most of her people. The others will see the profit in bravery. I'll make a Klingon of you yet.
A way to shoot further and straighter.
Jim. Coal for forge, sulphur for gun powder.
Let's take a look inside.
Well, here's your forge. People's exhibit number one. A chrome steel drill point.
Right. It's a pity we can't include a live Klingon. That'd just about wrap it
I thought my people would grow tired of killing. But you were right. They see that it is easier than trading and it has pleasures. I feel it myself. Like the hunt, but with richer rewards.
You will be rich one day, Apella, beyond your dreams. The leader of a whole world. A governor in the Klingon Empire.
Hit me. The pain will help me to consciousness. Hit me.
Hit you? No! I can't
Again. Continue. The pain will help me to consciousness.
Leave me alone!
Have you gone daft?
That will be quite enough. Thank you, doctor.
What's this all about?
Here, let me help you, Mister Spock.
Thank you, nurse. I'm quite fully recovered.
Yes, I see you are.
Jim, I want to talk to you.
Do I have to say it? It's not bad enough there's one serpent in Eden teaching one side about gun powder. You want to make sure they all know about it!
Exactly. Each side receives the same knowledge and the same type of firearm.
Have you gone out of your mind? Yes, maybe you have. Tyree's wife, she said there was something in that root. She said now you can refuse her nothing.
Is it a coincidence this is exactly what she wants?
Is it? She wants superior weapons. That's the one thing neither side can have. Bones. Bones, the normal development of this planet was the status quo between the hill people and the villagers. The Klingons changed that with the flintlocks. If this planet is to develop the way it should, we must equalize both sides again.
Jim, that means you're condemning this whole planet to a war that may never end. It could go on for year after year, massacre after massacre.
All right, Doctor! All right. Say I'm wrong. Say I'm drugged. Say the woman drugged me. What is your sober, sensible solution to all this?
I don't have a solution. But furnishing them firearms is certainly not the answer.
Bones, do you remember the twentieth century brush wars on the Asian continent? Two giant powers involved, much like the Klingons and ourselves. Neither side felt could pull out.
What would you have suggested, that one side arm its friends with an overpowering weapon? Mankind would never have lived to travel space if they had. No. The only solution is what happened back then. Balance of power.
And if the Klingons give their side even more?
Then we arm our side with exactly that much more. A balance of power. The trickiest, most difficult, dirtiest game of them all, but the only one that preserves both sides.
And what about your friend Tyree? Will he understand this balance of power?
No. Probably not. But I'm going to have to try and make him understand. I never had a more difficult task.
Well, Jim, here's another morsel of agony for you. Since Tyree won't fight, he will be one of the first to die.
Well, war isn't a good life, but it's life. His wife is the only way to reach him. If I tell her we're going to supply guns, maybe she'll convince him.
They haven't spotted us yet, sir. Looks like they're beaming someone aboard.
Stand by to signal the captain.
You are here because I wished you here.
Oh? I thought it was my idea.
Yes. They always believe they come of free will. Tyree thought the same when I cast my first spell on him.
Can you smell this fragrance? Some find it pleasing.
I'd like to talk to you.
Again. Some find it soothing. Yes.
I would like
I feel dizzy. Yes, you are lovely. You're beautiful.
Where's Captain Kirk? Tyree, the firestick. Where is it?
There! I left it there.
That's a fine thing to leave lying around. Show us where it is.
I do not want it.
I bring you victory for Apella!
Take me to him. He will have the strength to use this new weapon.
Touch me again, and this small box will kill you.
No, no. I'm all right. My phaser. She took it.
This weapon I bring you is far greater than your firesticks.
I want more of these, Kirk. Many more! Yutan, two of those who killed my wife have escaped. Track them down. I will kill them.
Tomorrow in the palm of her hands.
Well, you got what you wanted.
Spock, are you alive?
An illogical question, Doctor, since obviously you are hearing my voice.
Well, I don't know why I was worried. You can't kill a computer.
Spock, ask Scotty how long it would take him to reproduce a hundred flintlocks.
A hundred serpents. Serpents for the Garden of Eden. We're very tired, Mister Spock. Beam us up home.
You say your people built all this. Who are you? What planet are you from?
My impression is that your race is not yet ready to understand us, Captain.
I tend to agree.
No, everything is in order, Lieutenant. Stand by.
If you would use the proper caution, this amusement planet of ours could be an ideal place for your people to enjoy themselves, if you wish.
It's what the doctor ordered, Jim.
Commence transporting shore leave parties. Tell them to prepare for the best shore leave they've ever had. Kirk out.
Did you enjoy your rest, gentlemen?
The ceremony will be carried on all viewing screens, sir.
There was a call for you from the Bridge.
Maintain course to outpost four. Keep me informed. Kirk out.
Since the days of the first wooden vessels, all shipmasters have had one happy privilege. That of uniting two people in the bonds of matrimony. We are gathered here today with you, Angela Martine, and you, Robert Tomlinson, in the sight of your fellows, in accordance with our laws and our many beliefs so that you may pledge your
Our speed is now maximum, sir.
Position, eight minutes from Outpost four at this velocity, sir.
I've talked to my engine room, sir. We'll get more speed out of her.
There can't be much doubt who's attacking, sir.
Mister Spock, put this star sector on our screen. Now show our position. Signal this to all decks, Lieutenant.
What you do not know and must be told is that my command orders on this subject are precise and inviolable. No act, no provocation
Both these outposts and this vessel will be considered expendable. Captain out.
We know Outpost four has been attacked, sir, so if we intercept Romulans now
After a whole century, what will a Romulan ship look like, Mister Stiles? I doubt they'll radio and identify themselves.
I had no idea that history was your specialty.
Family history. There was a Captain Stiles was in the space service then. Two Commanders and several junior officers. All lost in that war, sir.
Their war, Mister Stiles. Not yours. Don't forget it.
Open a channel to our nearest command base. Quarter hour reports on our position and status.
Battle stations. All hands to battle stations. Battle stations. Battle stations. All decks acknowledge. All decks acknowledge, sir. All stations show green.
Energise main phasers, Mister Styles. All weapons to full power.
All weapons to full power. Phaser control room.
You won't get off my hook this easily. I'm going to marry you, Mister, battle or phaser weapons notwithstanding.
Well, meanwhile, temporarily at least, I am still your superior officer. So get with it, Mister.
And showing on my sensors, Captain. At least it's still there.
Sir, regaining contact with Outpost four. Switching to speakers.
Kirk here. We're minutes away, Hansen. What's your status?
Can you locate the intruder for us?
Affirmative. You're visual, Hansen. What do you have on the intruder?
Lock us onto your screen.
Do you have phaser capacity? We're still out of range.
Trying to, sir. They don't acknowledge.
Position of the intruder, Mister Spock.
Disappeared. Interesting how they became visible for just a moment.
Go to full magnification.
Screen is on full mag, sir.
I don't see anything. I can't understand it.
Invisibility is theoretically possible, Captain, with selective bending of light. But the power cost is enormous.
Continuing to challenge, sir. Still no response.
Discontinue. Contact remaining outposts. Have them signal us any sightings or sensor readings in their area.
Blip has changed its heading. And in a very leisurely manoeuvre. They may not be aware of us.
Their invisibility screen may work both ways. With that kind of power consumption, they may not be able to see us.
His heading is now one eleven mark fourteen. The exact heading a Romulan would take, Jim, for the Neutral Zone and home.
Don't you mean interception course, sir?
Negative. You and Mister Sulu will match its course and speed with the object on our sensors exactly, move for move. If he has sensors, I want him to think we're a reflection, an echo. Under no circumstances are you to cross into the Neutral Zone without my direct orders.
Captain, may I respectfully remind the Captain what has happened? The Romulans have crossed the Neutral Zone, attacked our outposts, killed our men.
Add to that the fact it was a sneak attack.
Mister Stiles, are you questioning my orders?
Negative, sir. I'm pointing our that we could have Romulan spies aboard this ship.
Picking up communication. It's from their ship.
Pipe it in.
Sounds like code, sir.
I have a fix on it, Captain. I believe I can lock on it, get a picture of their Bridge.
Put it on the screen.
Cryptography is working on it, sir.
Give it to Spock.
I didn't quite get that, Mister Stiles.
I was suggesting that Mister Spock could probably translate it for you, sir.
I assume you're complimenting Mister Spock on his ability to decode.
I'm not sure, sir.
Well, here's one thing you can be sure of, Mister. Leave any bigotry in your quarters. There's no room for it on the Bridge. Do I make myself clear?
Something visual ahead, Captain, at extreme range. He's changing course, sir.
Stay with him, helm.
We grow visible. Attend the cloaking system.
It consumes much power, Commander. With no enemy to concern us.
That Earth outpost called to an Earth vessel. Now it follows us.
Which neither retreats nor grows nearer. It turns as we turn. Commander, it is our judgment we run from a reflection.
It is good we approach the Neutral Zone. Not too soon for me to see the stars of home. I know they are following.
First study the enemy, seek weakness. If I were their commander, that is what I would do.
My Commander sent for Decius.
A message was dispatched. You've broken the rule of silence.
Your carelessness might have ended this glorious mission. You're reduced two steps in rank. Return to post.
Take care, Commander. He has friends, and friends of his kind mean power. And power is danger.
Danger and I are old companions.
We've seen a hundred campaigns together, and still I do not understand you.
I think you do. No need to tell you what happens when we reach home with proof of the Earthmen's weakness. And we will have proof. The Earth commander will follow. He must. When he attacks, we will destroy him. Our gift to the homeland, another war.
If we are the strong, isn't this the signal for war?
Must it always be so? How many comrades have we lost in this way?
They're turning, sir. We're staying with them.
Steady on one eleven mark fourteen. Back on their original course, Captain, toward the Neutral Zone.
What's our position, navigator?
We'll enter the Neutral Zone in less than an hour, sir. Assuming, of course, that we don't turn back.
Bring it to the briefing room. Are you ready, gentlemen?
From the outpost's protective shield. Cast rodinium. This is the hardest substance known to our science.
Obviously, their weaponry is superior to ours, and they have a practical invisibility screen.
You're discussing tactics. Do you realise what this really comes down to? Millions and millions of lives hanging on what this vessel does.
Or on what this vessel fails to do, Doctor.
Yes, well gentlemen, the question still remains. Can we engage them with a reasonable possibility of victory?
No question. Their power is simple impulse.
Meaning we can outrun them?
Go ahead, Mister Styles. I called this session for opinions.
We have to attack immediately.
They're still on our side of the Neutral Zone. There would be no doubt they broke the treaty.
Attack, without a visible target? How do we aim our phasers?
Aim with sensors. Not accurate, but if we blanket them
And hope for a lucky shot before they zero in on us?
And if we don't? Once back, they'll report that we saw their weapons and ran.
And if they could report they destroyed us?
These are Romulans! You run away from them and you guarantee war. They'll be back. Not just one ship but with everything they've got. You know that, Mister Science Officer. You've the expert on these people, always left out that one point. Why? I'm very interested in why.
Are you suggesting we fight to prevent a fight?
Based on what? Memories of a war over a century ago? On theories about a people we've never even met face to face?
We know what they look like.
Yes, indeed we do, Mister Stiles. And if Romulans are an offshoot of my Vulcan blood, and I think this likely, then attack becomes even more imperative.
War is never imperative, Mister Spock.
It is for them, Doctor. Vulcan, like Earth, had its aggressive colonising period. Savage, even by Earth standards. And if Romulans retain this martial philosophy, then weakness is something we dare not show.
Do you want a galactic war on your conscience?
Captain to Bridge.
What's our position?
Are you continuing to broadcast tactical reports?
And at this distance?
Thank you, Lieutenant. Check our course ahead, Mister Spock.
A comet, magnitude seven, dead ahead, and the intruder changing course toward it.
Quite ordinary. An ionised mass, a trail of frozen vapour particles.
Our chance, gentlemen. Prepare to attack. All hands, battle stations. I hope we won't need your services, Bones.
Amen to that. We're taking a big gamble, Jim.
Phaser weapons energised. Set for proximity blast.
Intruder now bearing directly for comet's tail.
Plot his exact point of entry, Mister Stiles.
The moment he begins entering the comet's tail, he becomes visible. End run, gentlemen. We'll swing around the other side and catch him at that moment.
He's maintaining that bearing, Captain.
Let's get him, Mister Sulu.
How pleasing to the eye it is. Behold a marvel in the darkness.
You spoke of entrapment.
Its many particles will obscure their sensing device, Centurion.
Once fully obscured, we will turn suddenly back upon our adversary.
At last the screen is clear, Commander.
We're losing sensor contact, Captain.
Steady as she goes. Phaser crews ready?
Sir, nothing in
At the last moment he must have guessed our move. Hard to starboard, helm!
Hard to starboard.
He did exactly what I would have done. I won't underestimate him again. Now, fire blind. Lay down a pattern.
Divert all power to weapons.
It'll take time to correct, sir.
Captain, are they surrendering?
Do we have emergency warp?
Full power, sir. It's still overtaking us. If we can get one phaser working, sir, one shot might detonate it.
Estimate it'll overtake us in two minutes, sir.
Feed this to the space recorder and jettison immediately.
Ten seconds to impact. Captain, It's dissipating, sir.
It must have a range limit.
Back to his old course.
He may think we're destroyed, Captain.
I wouldn't make that assumption. I don't think their Captain will either.
Activate our cloak.
It moves as we move.
Its commander is not one to repeat a mistake.
We'll enter the Neutral Zone in one minute, Captain.
We're still on our side, Captain.
Let's get them while we are. Before we enter the Neutral Zone. Full ahead, Mister Sulu. Maximum warp.
Sir, at this distance?
We know their Achilles heel, Mister Stiles. Their weapon takes all their energy. They must become visible in order to launch it.
A phaser hit at this distance would be the wildest stroke of luck.
I'm aware of that, Mister Stiles. Are phasers ready?
Twenty seconds to Neutral Zone, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, inform Command base, In my opinion, no option. On my responsibility, we are proceeding into the Neutral Zone. Steady as we go, Mister Sulu. Continue firing.
Commander, they stay within range. I will tend to the centurion.
No need. The Centurion is dead.
Why don't we fire, Commander?
No. No, he's shrewd, this starship commander. He tries to make us waste energy. He has estimated we have only enough. It is time. All debris into disposal tubes.
The body of the Centurion, too. Forgive me, my old friend, but I must use all my experience now to get home.
Debris scatter ahead, sir. We've hit him.
Simple debris. Not a vessel, a trick.
Go to sensor probes.
Nothing, sir. No motion out there at all. We've lost them, Captain.
Captain, I must make further repairs on the transfer coil. It's giving out again.
Now twenty full cycles, Commander. Still no sign. I say he's been fooled. He must have gone on.
Shh. He is there, somewhere. I feel it.
Can I get you something from the galley, sir? Coffee, at least?
Thank you, Yeoman. Bring it to the Bridge. I'll be there in a moment.
I wish I were on a long sea voyage somewhere. Not too much deck tennis, no frantic dancing, and no responsibility. Why me? I look around that Bridge, and I see the men waiting for me to make the next move. And Bones, what if I'm wrong?
No, I don't really expect an answer.
It's all right. It's all right.
A signal, Commander.
We have him. Move toward him.
Power on. Reverse course. He'll try to slip under us.
He's a sorcerer, that one. He reads the thoughts in my brain. Our fuel supply all but gone and he stays out of reach.
We are beaten. Can it be true? The Praetor's finest and proudest flagship beaten.
Place one with the debris. Proximity fuse.
More wreckage, sir, scattering across our path.
Debris on our scanners.
They're at our mercy. Commander, I remind you of your duty.
Captain to Sickbay.
Nuclear device of some kind, sir. Our phasers detonated it less than one hundred metres away.
Sir, my first assignment was in weapons control.
We have engine power now, Captain, if you'd like to move off and make repairs.
Maybe we can pull them back to our side of the Neutral Zone. Hold our position. Play dead.
Still no sign of movement, Commander.
We've damaged ourselves. Our fuel reserve is gone.
And it is our duty to crush the Praetor's enemies.
I do not trust their Captain.
We are in the Neutral Zone. They will not enter. If you refuse, permit me the glory of the kill, Commander.
We will attack, but on my order.
Will you require assistance here?
This time, we'll handle things without your help, Vulcan.
Stiles, can you hear me? Fire! Stiles!
Captain. Standing by to beam your survivors aboard our ship. Prepare to abandon your vessel.
What purpose will it serve to die?
Are you all right, Mister Spock?
I'm alive, sir. But I wouldn't be. Mister Spock pulled me out of the phaser room. He saved my life. He risked his life after I
I saved a trained navigator so he could return to duty. I am capable of no other feelings in such matters.
We finally received an answer from Command base, sir. They say they'll support whatever decision you have to make.
It never makes any sense. We both have to know that there was a reason.
I'm all right.
Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hands.
That voice. He's back. That man on the stage. I'm certain of it. That's Kodos the Executioner.
You mean to tell me you've called me three light years off my course just to accuse an actor of being Kodos?
He is Kodos. I'm sure of it.
You said you discovered a new food concentrate. What am I supposed to put in my log, that you lied? That you diverted a starship with false information? You're not only in trouble, you've put me in trouble, too.
I did it to trap Kodos!
Kodos is dead.
Is he? Is anyone sure? A body burned beyond recognition?
Then let's reopen it. Jim, four thousand people were butchered.
I can't tell him anything, Jim. He's been like this since the company of actors arrived.
Kodos is dead. I'm satisfied of that.
Well, I'm not. I remember him. That voice. The bloody thing he did.
Jim, Jim, I need your help. There were only eight or nine of us who actually saw Kodos. I was one, you were another. If he's to be exposed,
Then it will be a ghost Martha and I receive in our home tonight. I invited the entire company to a cocktail party. I have to be sure.
And I have to get back to my ship and figure out how I'm going to enter all this in my log. Tom. Martha.
History files. Subject, former Governor Kodos of Tarsus Four, also known as Kodos the Executioner. After that, background on actor Anton Karidian.
Director and star of travelling company of actors sponsored by galactic cultural exchange project, touring official installations last nine years. Has daughter, Lenore, nineteen years old,
Give information on actor Karidian prior to Kodos' death.
No information available, Anton Karidian, prior to twenty years ago
Mister Spock. You know Doctor Leighton, don't you? Would you say he's given to fantasy?
A good empirical research scientist. Steady, reputable, occasionally brilliant.
With a very long memory.
I have no information on that, Captain. We are ready to leave orbit.
We'll delay departure for a time. I'm beaming back down to the planet.
He went to town. He called. He's on his way back.
The others are on the patio.
Why not? I saw your performance today. May I extend my appreciation?
My father will be delighted, Mister. Mister?
We are honoured.
I had hoped to meet your father, here, tonight, personally.
I'm sorry, Captain Kirk. He has a rigid rule about that. He never sees anyone personally, and he never attends parties.
An actor turning away his admirers? Very unusual.
Karidian is a most unusual man. You saw Macbeth. That was my father.
Then I'll talk to Lady Macbeth.
So. Captain of the Enterprise. Interesting.
So, Lady Macbeth. Interesting. What's your next move?
We play two performances at Benecia, if the AstraI Queen can get us there.
Very impressive. Lenore. I'd like to see you again.
I think I'd like that. Unfortunately, we must keep a schedule.
You don't have a schedule now, do you?
You mean leave? But I've only just arrived.
And you hate to overstay a welcome.
Good. I'll make our apologies to our hostess. I'll meet you outside.
At the party, you were such a brash young man.
Now somehow different. Not a ship's Captain with all those people to be strong and confident in front of. You know, you're really very dear, aren't you? In some ways, very lonely.
It's Tom Leighton. He's dead.
At least he has peace now. He never really had that before. Oh, why was Tom killed if what he suspected wasn't true?
I don't know. I'll try and find out.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Put me through to Captain Jon Daily of the AstraI Queen on orbit station, and put it on scramble.
Can you do me a favour?
I'll pick them up. And if there's any trouble, it'll be my responsibility.
Just keep this between the two of us and accept my thanks. Over and out. Kirk to Enterprise.
Transporter room, ready to beam up.
Ready to resume course, Captain.
Captain? A Miss Karidian has been transported aboard ship. She requests permission to see you.
Tell her to come up to the Bridge, Lieutenant.
How did you know this lady was coming aboard?
I'm the Captain.
Captain Kirk, I didn't think we'd be meeting again so soon.
You probably wouldn't believe me if I told you I arranged it.
No, but it's a delightful thought. Captain, I'm afraid we need your help. We've been stranded. It seems that our transportation has cancelled out on us.
Can't you make other arrangements?
Yes, but not in time. You see, our schedule is like a chain. One break and it all collapses.
It'd be a shame if that happened.
I appeal to you.
The regulations are very clear about taking on passengers.
I'll make a bargain with you, Captain.
What have you got to trade?
Special performance for the crew in exchange for a lift.
You make it sound very interesting. The crew has been on patrol for a long time. They could use a break in the monotony.
Then you'll do it?
You've got me backed into a corner. The men would never forgive me if I deprived them of your performance, and your presence.
Thank you, Captain. I'm eternally grateful. I'll get the company ready. This means so much to them.
Mister Spock, prepare to leave orbit as soon as the Karidian company is aboard the ship.
May I inquire as to our course, Captain?
Benecia Colony is eight light years off our course.
If my memory needs refreshing, Mister Spock, I'll ask you for it. In the meantime, follow my orders.
Data on question submitted to personnel files.
Data being received. Kodos file of all survivors. There are nine actual eye witnesses who can identify Kodos.
Lieutenant Kevin Riley in communications, I wish to have him transferred down to the engineering decks.
I'm sending him back.
Any explanation? He's a fine young officer. He's bound to consider this transfer a disciplinary action.
I don't wish to discuss it, Mister Spock. Please follow my orders.
Mister Spock, the man on top walks a lonely street. The chain of command is often a noose.
Spare me your philosophical metaphors, Doctor. The Captain is acting strangely. I'm asking if you've noticed.
Negative. Did you know this is the first time in a week I've had time for a drop of the true? Would you care for a drink, Mister Spock?
My father's race was spared the dubious benefits of alcohol.
Now I know why they were conquered. What are you so worried about, anyway? I find Jim generally knows what he's doing.
It was illogical for him to bring those players aboard.
Illogical? Did you get a look at that Juliet? That's a pretty exciting creature. Of course your, personal chemistry would prevent you from seeing that. Did it ever occur to you that he simply might like the girl?
It occurred. I dismissed it.
Did you know that he suddenly transferred Lieutenant Riley to engineering?
Lots of things go on around here that I don't know, Mister Spock. Now, he's the Captain. He can transfer whoever he pleases. You can look that up in a hundred volumes of space regulations somewhere. All right? Come on, have a drink.
You're welcome. But I will. And please, Mister Spock, if you won't join me, don't disapprove of me. At least not until you've tried it, huh?
This is the observation deck. That's the flight deck down there with the shuttle craft.
Did you order the soft lights especially for the occasion?
If I had ordered soft lights, I'd also have arranged for music and flowers. Unfortunately, it isn't so. On the Enterprise, we try to duplicate earth conditions of night and day as closely as possible.
Star light, star bright. I wish I may, I wish I might. Do you remember that, Captain?
It's very old.
Almost as old as the stars themselves. And this ship. All this power, surging and throbbing, yet under control. Are you like that, Captain? All this power at your command, yet the decisions that you have to make
You can count on it.
Tell me about the women in your world, Captain.
I'd rather talk about you. You must have wanted to perform since you first saw your father act. When was that?
Tell me about it.
That's not fair. You haven't answered my question about the women.
What would you like to know?
Has the machine changed them? Made them just people instead of women?
Worlds may change, galaxies disintegrate, but a woman always remains a woman.
All this and power too. The Caesar of the stars and the Cleopatra to worship him.
Correlate. Check their past histories. Report any item, any past episode or experience they all have in common.
I appreciate whatever concern you may have for the ship's company, Mister Spock,
I will continue, Doctor. According to our library banks, it started on the Earth colony of Tarsus Four, when the food supply was attacked by an exotic fungus and largely destroyed. There were over eight thousand colonists and virtually no food. And that was when Governor Kodos seized full power and declared emergency martial law.
I've heard of it.
You may not have heard it all. Kodos began to separate the colonists. Some would live, be rationed whatever food was left. The remainder would be immediately put to death. Apparently he had his own theories of eugenics.
Unfortunately, he wasn't the first.
Perhaps not. But he was certainly among the most ruthless, to decide arbitrarily who would survive and who would not, using his own personal standards, and then to implement his decision without mercy. Children watching their parents die. Whole families destroyed. Over four thousand people. They died quickly, without pain, but they died. Relief arrived, but too late to prevent the executions. And Kodos? There never was a positive identification of his body.
What has Karidian to do with it?
His history begins almost to the day where Kodos disappeared.
You think Jim suspects he's Kodos?
He'd better. There were nine eye witnesses who survived the massacre, who'd actually seen Kodos with their own eyes. Jim Kirk was one of them. With the exception of Riley and Captain Kirk, every other eye witness is dead. And my library computer shows that wherever they were, on Earth, on a colony, or aboard ship, the Karidian Company of Players was somewhere near when they died.
Not me. I am down. In the engineering room.
Maybe so. Whatever I've done, they're sure keeping it a secret from me.
I think his heart is sore.
What can I do for you, Riley?
A song. Make it a love song. Just something to reassure me I'm not the only living thing left in the universe, huh?
Well, you're not, and I'll prove it to you.
I'll be back, though it takes forever
Where my heart is
How'd you like that, Riley?
You've got to pull him through.
I'm not sure I can.
If he dies, the only one who'll be able to identify Kodos is the Captain. And he'll be the next target.
As of this date, lab report indicates presence of appreciable amount of tetralubisol, a highly volatile lubricant in use aboard ship.
Someone tried to poison him.
Tetralubisol us a milky substance. Someone could have gotten careless, made a mistake.
I don't believe that and neither do you. I want the Captain to see that report.
When I've finished logging it.
Will he make it?
He's got a good chance.
Can we predict the same for you, Captain?
All right, Mister Spock. Let's have it.
Lieutenant Riley was a witness. So were you.
Someone tried to kill him.
Could have been an accident.
You should be told the difference between empiricism and stubbornness, Doctor. I checked with the library computer, just as you did. I got the same information.
Aren't you getting a little out of line, Mister Spock? My personal business,
Is my personal business when it might interfere with the smooth operation of this ship.
It could happen.
I don't like anyone meddling in my private affairs. Not even my second in command.
I know what he's doing, and I don't like it.
It's his job, and you know it.
And you also know that nothing is proven.
Even in this corner of the galaxy, Captain, two plus two equals four. Almost certainly an attempt will be made to kill you. Why do you invite death?
I'm not. I'm interested in justice.
Are you? Are you sure it's not vengeance?
No, I'm not sure. I wish I was. I've done things I've never done before. I've placed my command in jeopardy. From here on I've got to determine whether or not Karidian is Kodos.
You sound certain. I wish I could be. Before I accuse a man of that, I've got to be. I saw him once, twenty years ago. Men change. Memory changes. Look at him now, he's an actor. He can change his appearance. No. Logic is not enough. I've got to feel my way, make absolutely sure.
What if you decide he is Kodos? What then? Do you play God, carry his head through the corridors in triumph? That won't bring back the dead, Jim.
Logic, Captain. Doctor Leighton was murdered while the Karidian Company was on Planet Q. Now an attempt has been made against Riley while the company is on board the Enterprise.
Doc isn't sure it was a murder attempt. Besides, I have an idea may prove
Shh. Listen. Do you hear it? That low hum.
You can't stay.
Go on. Block off this section. Hurry. I'll find it.
I hoped you would have respected my privacy, Captain.
A moment ago, we narrowly averted an explosion which would have destroyed several decks of this ship. Before that, someone tried to poison one of my crewmen.
I am sorry to hear that.
I'm sure you are. Are you Kodos? I asked you a question.
Do you believe that I am?
Then I am Kodos, if it pleases you to believe so. I am an actor. I play many parts.
You're an actor now. What were you twenty years ago?
I remember the words. I wrote them down. You said them like you knew them. You hardly glanced at the paper.
I learn my parts very quickly.
Are you sure? Are you sure you didn't act this role out in front of a captive audience whom you blasted out of existence without mercy?
I find your use of the word mercy strangely inappropriate, Captain. Here you stand, the perfect symbol of our technical society. Mechanised, electronicised, and not very human. You've done away with humanity, the striving of man to achieve greatness through his own resources.
We've armed man with tools. The striving for greatness continues. But Kodos
Kodos, whoever he was
Or is. Kodos made a decision of life and death. Some had to die that others might live. You're a man of decision, Captain. You ought to understand that.
All I understand is that four thousand people were needlessly butchered.
In order to save four thousand others. And if the supply ships hadn't come earlier than expected, this Kodos of yours might have gone down in history as a great hero.
But he didn't. And history has made its judgment.
If you're so sure that I'm Kodos, why not kill me now? Let bloody vengeance take its final course! And see what difference it makes to this universe of yours.
I suppose not. They're merely tools, like this ship of yours.
There are no previous records to Anton Karidian prior to twenty years ago.
Blood thins. The body fails. One is finally grateful for a failing memory. I no longer treasure life, not even my own. I am tired! And the past is a blank. Did you get everything you, wanted, Captain Kirk?
If I had gotten everything I wanted, you might not walk out of this room alive.
In the beginning perhaps. But later, I wanted it to be more than that.
Later. Everything's always later. Later. Latest. Too late. Too late, Captain. You are like your ship, powerful, and not human. There is no mercy in you.
If he is Kodos, then I've shown him more mercy than he deserves. And if he isn't, then we'll let you off at Benecia, and no harm done.
Captain Kirk. Who are you to say what harm was done?
Who do I have to be?
Medical log. Lieutenant Riley's sufficiently recovered to be discharged, but the Captain's ordered him restricted to Sickbay to prevent contact with the passenger who calls himself Karidian and who's suspected of being Kodos the Executioner and of murdering the Lieutenant's family.
I believe we have a match, Captain.
But not an exact match, Mister Spock. We're dealing with a man's life. No machine can make that decision.
In the long history of medicine, no doctor has ever caught the first few minutes of a play. Riley, don't forget to
Riley's gone. I was recording my log about Karidian and Kodos. If he overheard
You've made your point, Doctor.
This is the Captain. Security two alert. Find and restrain Lieutenant Kevin Riley. He's armed and possibly headed towards the ship's theatre.
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, I'll go no further.
My hour is almost come, when I to sulphurous and tormenting fires must render up myself.
Speak. I am bound to hear.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear. I am thy father's spirit, doomed for a certain term to walk the night,
Riley, get back to the Sickbay.
He murdered my father, and my mother.
You could be wrong. Don't throw away your life on a mistake.
I'm not wrong.
But that I am forbid to tell the secrets of my prison house,
I know that voice, that face, I know it. I saw it. He murdered them.
It's an order. Give me the weapon.
Now get back to Sickbay. Go on.
It's going beautifully. What is it? What's wrong?
There was a voice out of the past haunting me, torturing me. There was another part I once played long ago. I never told you about it. Now that same curtain rises again. The time has come.
No, Father. The time will never come. Tonight, after my performance, the last two who can harm you will be gone.
What are you saying?
There were nine. Now there are only two, and they will be gone as soon as I. Don't look at me like that.
What have you done?
What had to be done. They had to be silenced.
All of them? All seven? More blood on my hands?
No Father, not anymore. I'm strong, Father. It's nothing.
We'll be ready. Don't you see? All the ghosts are dead. I've buried them. There's no more blood on your hands.
Oh, my child, my child. You've left me nothing! You were the one thing in my life untouched by what I'd done.
But you're safe now, Father. I've saved you. Now, no one can touch you. Not even Captain Kirk. See Caesar come? He's awed by your greatness, your shining brightness. Bright as a blade before it is stained with blood.
Bright as a blade. Come with me, both of you.
The play is over. It's been over for twenty years.
I was a soldier in a cause. There were things to be done, terrible things.
Stop it, Father! You have nothing to justify.
Murder, flight, suicide, madness. I never wanted the blood on my hands ever to stain you.
I did it for you. I've saved you.
They weren't innocent! They were dangerous! I would have killed a world to save him!
The play, Captain. He must go on. This is the great Karidian.
You cannot deny him his last performance!
You'll never get off the ship.
Caesar, beware the ides of March.
No, child! Don't!
Father. Father! O, proud, death! What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, that thou, such a prince at a shot so bloodily hast struck? The curtain, the curtain rises. It rises. There's no time to sleep. The play. The play. The play's the thing, wherein we'll catch the conscience of the king.
Ready to leave Benecia orbit, Captain.
Whenever you're ready, Mister Leslie.
You're not going to answer my question, are you?
That's an answer.
How do you plead to the charge of unlawfully taking command?
Of sabotaging the computers of this vessel and locking it on a course for planet Talos Four?
And of forcibly attempting to transport Captain Pike to that planet?
And the images we've been seeing are
Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty.
Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
Captain, Jim, please. Don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.
Starfleet has ordered no contact with Talos Four. They made no exceptions.
Can you hear me? My name is Christopher Pike, commander of the space vehicle Enterprise from a stellar group at the other end of this galaxy. Our intentions are peaceful. Can you understand me?
It appears, Magistrate, that the intelligence of the specimen is shockingly limited.
You're not speaking, yet I hear you.
All right, then, telepathy. You can read my mind. I can read yours. Now, unless you want my ship to consider capturing me an unfriendly act
If you were in here, wouldn't you test the strength of these walls, too? There's a way out of any cage, and I'll find it.
The inhabitants of this planet must live deep underground, probably manufacture food and other needs down there. Our tests indicate the planet surface, without considerably more vegetation or some animals, simply too barren to support life.
Exactly. An illusion placed in our minds by this planet's inhabitants.
It was a perfect illusion. They had us seeing just what we wanted to see, human beings who'd survived with dignity and bravery, everything entirely logical, right down to the building of the camp, the tattered clothing, everything. Now let's be sure we understand the danger of this. The inhabitants of this planet can read our minds, they can create illusions out of a person's own thoughts, memories, and experiences, even out of a person's own desires. Illusions just as real and solid as this table top and just as impossible to ignore.
It's Captain Pike they've got. He needs help.
If we start buzzing about down there, we're liable to find their mental power's so great they could reach out and swat this ship as though it were a fly.
Now that entry may have stood up against hand lasers but we can transmit the ship's power against it, enough to blast half a continent.
Thousands of us are already probing the creature's thoughts, Magistrate. We find excellent memory capacity.
Come on, we must hide ourselves. Come, come, hurry. It's deserted. There'll be weapons and perhaps food.
This is Rigel Seven.
Please, we must hide ourselves.
I was in a cage, a cell, in some kind of a zoo. I must still be there.
They've reached into my mind and taken the memory of somewhere I've been.
It's starting just as it happened two weeks ago, except for you.
A brilliant deduction by Captain Pike, gentlemen. Yes, he was still inside his cell, but knowing that couldn't help him.
The Talosians controlled his brain.
And could make him live any place, any time, any situation they wished. He would see, taste, suffer with the same reality as you gentlemen sitting there.
Quick. If you attack while it's not looking.
But it's only a dream.
You have to kill him as you did here before.
You can tell my jailers I won't go along with it. I'm not an animal performing for its supper.
It doesn't matter what you call this, you'll feel it. That's what matters. You'll feel every moment of what happens to you.
What is it? Why have they stopped the images?
Because they know that Captain Pike is fatigued. We can reconvene later.
I demand to know why.
If you'll be patient, the answers to your questions
You're forgetting you're on trial, Spock. You will answer all questions put to you.
My answer to your question would be quite unbelievable, sir. I regret we'll have to wait and see it there.
No, no. No, that's not an answer. I've never met you before, never even imagined you.
Perhaps they made me out of dreams you've forgotten.
What, and dress you in the same metal fabric they wear?
I can wear whatever you wish, be anything you wish.
So they can see how their specimen performs? They want to see how I react, is that it?
Don't you have a, a dream, something you've always wanted very badly?
Or do they do more than just watch me? Do they feel with me, too?
You can have whatever dream you want. I can become anything, any woman you, you've ever imagined. You can have anything you want in the whole universe. Let me please you.
Yes. Yes, you can please me. You can tell me about them. Is there any way I can keep them from probing my mind, from using my thoughts against me? Does that frighten you? Does that mean there is a way?
You're a fool.
Since you're not real, there's not much point in continuing this conversation, is there?
Maybe it was. It's what I tried to explain in the briefing room. Their power of illusion is so great, we can't be sure of anything we do, anything we see.
Perhaps if you asked me some questions I could answer.
How far can they control my mind?
If I tell you, then will you pick some dream you've had and let me live it with you?
They can't actually make you do anything you don't want to do.
But they try to trick me with their illusions.
Did they ever live on the surface of this planet? Why did they go underground?
War, thousands of centuries ago.
That's why it's so barren up there?
So the Talosians who came underground found life limited here and they concentrated on developing their mental power.
But they found it's a trap, like a narcotic, because when dreams become more important than reality, you give up travel, building, creating. You even forget how to repair the machines left behind by your ancestors. You just sit, living and reliving other lives left behind in the thought record.
Or sit probing minds of zoo specimens like me.
You're better than a theatre to them. They create the illusion for you, they watch you react, feel your emotions. They have a whole collection of specimens, descendants of life brought back long ago from all over this part of the galaxy.
Which means they had to have more than one of each animal.
They'll need a pair of humans too. Where do they get intend to get the Earth woman?
You said that if I answered questions
But that was a bargain with something that didn't exist. You said you weren't real, remember?
Why? Just to maintain a supply of zoo specimens?
Is the keeper actually communicating with one of his animals?
If the form and the colour is not appealing, it can appear as any food you wish to visualise.
And if I prefer
To starve? You overlook the unpleasant alternative of punishment.
From a fable you once heard in childhood. You will now consume the nourishment.
Why not just put irresistible hunger in my mind? Because you can't, can you? You do have limitations, don't you?
If you continue to disobey, from deeper in your mind, there are things even more unpleasant.
That's very interesting.
Now to the female.
You were startled. Weren't you reading my mind then?
As you've conjectured, an Earth vessel did crash on our planet, but with only a single survivor.
No, let's stay on the first subject. All I wanted for that moment was to get my hands around your neck.
Do primitive thoughts put up a block you can't read through?
It became necessary to attract a mate.
All right, all right. Let's talk about the girl. You seem to be going out of your way to make her attractive, to make me feel protective.
Seems more important to you now that I begin to accept her and like her.
We wish our specimens to be happy in their new life.
You mean properly punished! I'm the one who's not cooperating! Why don't you punish me?
First, an emotion of protectiveness. Now one of sympathy. Excellent.
You want some coffee, dear? I left the thermos hooked to my saddle.
Is it good to be home?
My, it turned out to be a lovely day, didn't it? You're home. You can even stay if you want.
But we're not here, neither of us. We're in a menagerie, a cage!
Stop it. Don't you care what they'll do to us?
Back in my cage, it seemed for a couple of minutes that our keeper couldn't read my thoughts. Do emotions like hate, keeping hate in your mind, does that block off our mind from them?
Yes. They can't read through primitive emotions, but you can't keep it up for long enough. I've tried. They keep at you and at you year after year, tricking and punishing, and they won. They own me. I know you must hate me for that.
Oh, no. I don't hate you. I can guess what it was like.
But that's not enough. Don't you see? They read my thoughts, my feelings, my dreams of what would be a perfect man. That's why they picked you. I can't help but love you and they expect you to feel the same way.
If they can read my mind, then they know I'm attracted to you. I was from the very first moment I saw you in the survivor's camp. You were like a wild little animal.
Nice place you have here, Mister Pike.
They're like animals, vicious, seductive. They say no human male can resist them.
Suppose you had all of space to choose from and this was only one small sample.
Wouldn't you say it was worth a man's soul?
If our measurements and readings are an illusion also, one could find oneself materialised inside solid rock.
No! Let me finish!
We were the only ones transported.
It's not fair. You don't need them.
Don't say anything. I'm filling my mind with a picture of beating their huge, misshapen heads to pulp, thoughts so primitive they black out everything else. I'm filling my mind with hate.
How long can you block your thoughts? A few minutes, an hour? How can that help?
He doesn't need you. He's already picked me.
Picked her? For what? I don't understand.
Now, there's a fine choice for intelligent offspring.
You're no better choice. They'd have more luck crossing him with a computer.
It's not fair. I did what you asked.
Since you resist the present specimen, you now have a selection.
I'll break out of this zoo somehow and get to you. Is your blood red like ours? I'm going to find out.
Each of the two new specimens has qualities in her favour. The female you call Number One has the superior mind and would produce highly intelligent children.
All I want to do is get my hands on you. Can you read these thoughts, images of hate, killing?
The other new arrival has considered you unreachable but now is realising this has changed. The factors in her favour are youth and strength, plus unusually strong female drives.
No. No, don't help me. I have to concentrate. They can't read through hate.
Hold still, or I'll break your neck.
Don't hurt them. They don't mean to be evil.
I've had some samples of how good they are.
You stop this illusion, or I'll twist your head off. All right, now you try one more illusion, you try anything at all, and I'll break your neck.
Your ship. Release me, or we'll destroy it.
He's not bluffing, Captain. With illusion they can make your crew work the wrong controls or push any button it takes to destroy your ship.
It seems the Talosians have deserted you.
Gentlemen, a moment, please.
Signal you want them to wait. Captain, please. It's your life now, at least a chance for life.
You keep talking about life, Mister Spock. A chance for life. How? As a prisoner, caged, a zoo specimen, living the illusions that amuse his keepers?
Guilty as charged.
Bridge to Commander.
Talos controls the vessel now, sir, as they did thirteen years ago. You've asked me why. You'll see the answer now.
As you see, your attempt to escape accomplished nothing.
I want to contact our ship.
You are now on the surface where we wished you to be. With the female of your choice, you will now begin carefully guided lives.
That is your choice. To help you reclaim the planet's surface, our zoological gardens will furnish a variety of plant life.
Look, I'll make a deal with you. You and your life for the lives of these two Earth women. You give me proof that our ship is all right, send these two back, and I'll stay with Vina.
Is this a deception? Do you intend to destroy yourselves?
What is that?
Their method of storing records is crude and consumed much time. Are you prepared to assimilate it?
We had not believed this possible. The customs and history of your race show a unique hatred of captivity. Even when it's pleasant and benevolent, you prefer death. This makes you too violent and dangerous a species for our needs.
He means that they can't use you. You're free to go back to the ship.
And that's it. No apologies. You captured one of us, threatened all of us.
Your unsuitability has condemned the Talosian race to eventual death. Is this not sufficient?
No other specimen has shown your adaptability. You were our last hope.
But wouldn't some form of trade, mutual cooperation.
Your race would learn our power of illusion and destroy itself, too.
Let's get back to the ship.
I can't. I can't go with you.
Sir, it just came on. We can't shut the power off.
You see why I can't go with you.
This is the female's true appearance.
They found me in the wreckage, dying, a lump of flesh. They rebuilt me. Everything works, but they had never seen a human. They had no guide for putting me back together.
It was necessary to convince you her desire to stay is an honest one.
You'll give her back her illusion of beauty?
Mister Spock, the system is coming on again.
Mister Spock, even if regulations are explicit, you could have come to me and explained.
Ask you to face the death penalty, too? One of us was enough, Captain.
Er, Mister Spock, when you're finished, please come back and see me. I want to talk to you. This regret table tendency you've been showing lately towards flagrant emotionalism
I see no reason to insult me, sir. I believe I've been completely logical about the whole affair.
Welcome to Starbase Eleven, Captain. The Commodore's waiting to see you. He's curious why you suddenly changed course and came here.
We received a subspace message asking us to divert here immediately.
Oh, Jim, I just can't understand this.
Mister Spock received a starbase transmission, a message from the former commander of the Enterprise, Fleet Captain Pike, urgently requesting that we divert here.
If my first officer states he received a transmission from
Jim, I'm not doubting anyone's word. I'm simply telling you it's impossible.
You don't know? You actually don't know what's happened to Captain Pike? There's been subspace chatter about it for months. I'm sorry to have to be the one to show you. He's upstairs in the medical section.
When he was promoted to Fleet Captain.
About your age. Big, handsome man, vital, active.
I took over the Enterprise from him. Spock served with him for several years.
What's his problem, Commodore?
Inspection tour of a cadet vessel. Old Class J starship. One of the baffle plates ruptured.
He went in bringing out all those kids that were still alive. Just wanted you gentlemen to be prepared.
Once more, Jose. Spock stated he received a message for us to come here. He entered same in his log. That's all the proof I require.
And what do those record tapes show? No message sent from here. No message received by your vessel.
Then I suggest the record tapes have been deliberately changed. A computer expert can change record tapes, duplicate voices, say anything, say nothing.
The fact remains that your first officer's former captain is hospitalised, horribly injured, at this base, and that same first officer seems to be the only one who heard that message.
If he had wanted to see Captain Pike he could have requested a leave. I would have granted it.
Well, that's true of course.
Who would want to divert us here? There's no trouble in the space sector we're patrolling now. No alien problems.
Oh, have I introduced Miss Piper, Jim? This is Captain Kirk, Miss Piper.
I recognized the Captain immediately. A mutual friend described you, sir. Lieutenant Helen Johansson.
She merely mentioned she knew you, sir.
You have something to report, Miss Piper?
Oh, yes, sir. I'm afraid our investigation turned up very little, Commodore. There is, of course, Mister Spock's years of service with Captain Pike. Indications of his extreme loyalty to this former commander.
Miss Piper, a Vulcan can no sooner be disloyal than he can exist without breathing. That goes for his present commander as well as his past.
We're forced to consider every possibility, sir. We can be certain Captain Pike cannot have sent a message. In his condition he's under observation every minute of every day.
And totally unable to move, Jim. His wheel chair is constructed to respond to his brain waves. Oh, he can turn it, move it forwards, or backwards slightly.
With the flashing light, he can say yes or no.
There's no way he could even have asked for that message to be sent?
Enterprise to Starbase. Request confirmation.
Sir, this is a security area. What are you doing here?
I have security clearance, Chief.
This is Mister Spock.
You will not discuss this with ship's crew or starbase personnel. Do you read?
Stand by. We'll warp out of orbit in one hour.
They've tried questioning him. He's almost agitated himself into a coma.
How long will he live?
As long as any of us. Blast medicine anyway. We've learned to tie into every human organ in the body except one. The brain. The brain is what life is all about. Now, that man can think any thought that we can, and love, hope, dream as much as we can, but he can't reach out, and no one can reach in.
No to what? They could question him for days, weeks, before they stumble on the right thing.
Bones, could this have anything to do with Spock?
I don't read you at all, Jim.
What I mean is either a message was received. It was one of two things. Either someone sent a message diverting us here, or someone on board the ship lied about receiving it. Could that someone be Mister Spock?
Jim, forgetting how well we both know Spock, the simple fact that he's a Vulcan means he's incapable of telling a lie.
He's also half human.
And that half is completely submerged. To be caught acting like us or even thinking like us would completely embarrass him.
He would not make a false entry.
There's a false entry in the log right now which doesn't jibe with the established facts. How do you explain that.
Well, what is it? Sickness? Injury? How bad is it?
Probably somebody discovered a hangnail. I'll beam up and let you know, Jim.
Oh, I'm certifying I ordered you to read it. Know anything at all about this planet?
With a half Vulcan science officer named Spock.
Commodore! Captain Pike, he's gone!
Mendez here. What is it?
Out of orbit, Mister Spock. Seems strange with no navigator on duty.
The Enterprise knows where she's going, Mister Hansen.
Someone's trying to hail us, sir.
Maintain radio silence, Lieutenant. This is First Officer Spock. Per Starfleet orders this date, I have been placed in temporary command of the Enterprise. While our destination is secret, our mission is relatively simple. Starbase Command has assigned Captain Kirk medical rest leave until our return. His instructions are that you will obey my orders as you would his. First Officer out.
What's going on around here? Who said Jim needed a medical rest leave? And this call about me being needed aboard the ship. I've checked everywhere.
Doctor, I regret they elected to keep certain things from you. Will you come with me, please.
Sir, scanners report an object following us, about the size of a starbase shuttlecraft. Shall we reverse helm?
But at our speed, they'll never catch us. In case they want to reach us
You have your orders, Mister Hansen. We'll make no contact.
Starbase Shuttlecraft one to Enterprise. Come in, please. Enterprise, Commodore Mendez and Captain Kirk. If you read me, you are ordered to reply. Repeating it on all emergency frequencies, Jim.
Spock is headed for Talos Four, all right.
Pulling ahead of us fast. Fuel is down to sixty three point three. If we turn back now, we've just got barely enough to get us back to the base.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in!
Lock on to sensors. Measure object now following the Enterprise.
Computed. Object is a Class F shuttlecraft. Duranium metal shell, ion engine power
Stop. How long before shuttlecraft's fuel supply forces return to starbase?
Computed. Shuttlecraft is already past point of safe return.
Blast you any way. You had no right to come along.
Two hours of oxygen left.
He's dead if he makes it to Talos Four. Why would he want to get Pike there? The command reports stated Talos contained absolutely no practical benefits to mankind.
Spock would have some logical reason for going there.
Maybe. Maybe he's just gone mad.
I keep wondering who might be after us in a shuttlecraft and I keep coming up with the same answers, but I can't be right, can l, Mister Spock.
Computer control. Lock on to shuttlecraft following us.
Go to tape Abel Seven Baker. Execute instructions.
Is it the captain, Mister Spock?
Sir, the engines are reversing. She's brought herself to a dead stop.
This is the First Officer speaking. Security, send an armed team to the Bridge. Transporter Room, stand by to beam Captain Kirk aboard. Effective until then, Lieutenant Hansen is in operational command.
First Officer out. Doctor, as senior officer present, I present myself to you for arrest.
The charge is mutiny, Doctor. I never received orders to take command.
Mister Spock is, er, under arrest. Is confinement to quarters enough?
Adequate, Doctor. I'll make no trouble.
All right, Captain. Locked on to you.
Transferring command to you, sir.
Accepting command. Where's Mister Spock?
In his quarters, under arrest.
His quarters, after what he's done, Lieutenant?
Reverse power. Hold this position. Tell whoever gave those orders to report
Sir, there's nobody up there giving orders. Mister Spock has the computers running the ship.
Unable to comply.
This hearing is convened. Mister Spock, you're aware of your right to counsel of your choice?
A mutiny requires a trial board of no less than three command officers. Since there are only two of that rank available
Sir, I must point out that there are three officers of command rank available. Yourself, Commodore Mendez, and Captain Christopher Pike.
Denied. Captain Pike is a complete invalid.
I believe you'll find he's still on the active duty list.
We didn't have the heart to retire him, Jim. He's got you. Whatever he's up to, he's planned it well.
Mister Spock, are you aware in pleading guilty that a further charge involving the death penalty must be held against you should this vessel enter the Talos star group?
Why? What does it accomplish to go there or to take Captain Pike there? I want to know why.
Are your comments a part of the record, sir?
Yes, it's on the record.
To comply with the request you just made, sir, that I explain the importance of going to Talos Four.
By asking why, you've opened the door to any evidence he may wish to present. Apparently what he had in mind.
Present your evidence. Screen on.
This is thirteen years ago. The Enterprise and its commander, Captain Christopher Pike.
I cannot tell you at this time, sir.
Unless the court asks a prisoner why, Commodore. You did ask that question.
You mean I was maneuvered into asking. Your evidence is out of order.
I am forced to contest that, Commodore. I want to see more.
You have that right, Captain, but just because the prisoner is your First Officer and your personal friend
That has nothing to do with it.
As I stated, gentlemen, this was thirteen years ago. We were on routine patrol when the ship's sensors detected something ahead. At first we were not certain what it was.
The meteorite beam has not deflected it, Captain.
Steady as we go.
They were keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way.
I have a fix. It comes from the Talos star group.
Their call letters check with a survey expedition. S.S. Columbia disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago.
It would take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here.
Records show the Talos group has never been explored. Solar system similar to Earth, eleven planets. Number four seems to be Class M, oxygen atmosphere.
We aren't going to go, to be certain?
Not without any indication of survivors, no. Continue to the Vega Colony and take care of our own sick and injured first. You have the helm. Maintain present course.
That's right. Unless we get anything more positive on it, it seems to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent. I'd like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, too.
Oh, I concur with yours, definitely.
Good. I'm glad you do, because we're going to stop first at the Vega Colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also. What the devil are you putting in there, ice?
What makes you think I need one?
Sometimes a man will tell his bartender things he'll never tell his doctor. What's been on your mind, Chris, the fight on Rigel seven?
Shouldn't it be? My only yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
Was there anything you personally could have done to prevent it?
Oh, I should have smelled trouble when I saw the swords and the armour. Instead of that, I let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one of their warriors.
Chris, you set standards for yourself no one could meet. You treat everyone on board like a human being except yourself, and now you're tired and you
You bet I'm tired. You bet. I'm tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives. I'm tired of deciding which mission is too risky and which isn't, and who's going on the landing party and who doesn't, and who lives and who dies. Boy, I've had it, Phil.
To the point of finally taking my advice, a rest leave?
Well, for one thing, go home. Nice little town with fifty miles of park land around it. Remember I told you I had two horses, and we used to take some food and ride out all day.
Ah, that sounds exciting. Ride out with a picnic lunch every day.
I said that's one place I might go. I might go into business on Regulus or on the Orion colony.
The point is this isn't the only life available. There's a whole galaxy of things to choose from.
Now you're beginning to talk like a doctor, bartender.
Take your choice. We both get the same two kinds of customers. The living and the dying.
This is the captain. Our destination is the Talos star group.
Screen off. Mister Spock, I'm truly amazed at your technical prowess in somehow manufacturing all this. I congratulate you on your imagination. But this is a court of space law, not a theatre.
You're in no position to bargain. This is ridiculous. This man mutinied, stole your ship, abducted Captain Pike. Well, for me this has gone far enough.
We still haven't heard the full story. I vote to continue.
And I vote we do not. Deadlock, and since I'm
Not a deadlock. There's still one member of the trial board to be heard from.
We've settled into orbit, sir.
Our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, heavy with inert elements but well within safety limits.
Zero point nine of Earth.
Captain? Reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. As I read it, they polarise out as rounded metal bits. Could be parts of a spaceship hull.
Prep a landing party of six. You feel up to it?
Sorry, Number One. With little information on this planet, we'll have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us.
There's no indication of problems down there, but let's not take chances.
Yes, sir. There's a canyon to the left. We can set you there completely unobserved.
MAN: They're men. They're humans.
The same old Earth, and you'll see it very soon.
And you won't believe how fast you can get back. Well the time barrier's been broken. Our new ships can
This is Vina. Her parents are dead. She was born almost as we crashed.
We'll begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly.
Yes, affirmative on the
You appear to be healthy and intelligent, Captain. A prime specimen.
You must forgive her choice of words, Captain. She's lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists.
If they can, er, spare you a moment, I'd like to make my medical report.
I think it's time to show the Captain our secret.
Their health is excellent, almost too good.
There's a reason for our condition, but we've had some doubt if Earth is ready to learn the secret. Let the girl show you. We'll accept your judgment.
You're tired, but don't worry. You'll feel much better soon. Don't you see it? Here and here.
I, I don't understand.
You will. You're a perfect choice.
What is it?
Plead signal for you, sir. Go ahead, Uhura.
Receiving transmissions from Talos Four? Then the images we've been seeing are
Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty. You've not only finished yourself, Spock, but you've finished your Captain as well.
The Commodore must be aware that Captain Kirk knew nothing of this.
And you're aware a Captain is responsible for everything that occurs on his ship. I order you to return this vessel back to manual control.
Sir, I respectfully decline.
Very well. You've earned the consequences. This court is in recess.
Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
Captain, Jim, please don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.
No matter where I've travelled in the galaxy, Jim, this bridge is more like home than anywhere else.
To me she was always like my child. I was there in the San Francisco Navy Yards when her unit components were built.
Jim, I didn't realise how many of the tools I use in Sickbay were designed by Sarah.
As the first medical officer aboard a ship equipped with warp drive, I'm afraid I had to come up with new ideas all the time.
Your modesty is unnecessary, Mrs. April. Your achievements as a pioneer doctor in space are well known.
And it's nice to know the lady is as intelligent as she is beautiful. Much like the flower she carries.
Oh, Doctor, flattery will get you everywhere. But I'm afraid my flower is dying.
It's a native of Capella Four, isn't it?
Yes, but it has a life span of only a few hours. This morning it was a seedling, within a few hours it will be dead.
Excuse me, Captain. You asked to be notified when we made visual contact with the Beta Niobe nova.
Thank you, Mister Spock. Mrs. April, you're about to see another of the galaxy's most beautiful sights, the Beta Niobe's supernova.
It is beautiful, but also very deadly.
We're travelling at a safe distance from the nova, Mrs. April.
Beta Niobe. You were present when the star first started its explosion, Jim.
Captain, sensors are picking up an unidentified object travelling at an incredible speed, presently on collision course with the Enterprise.
Put the ship on Red Alert. How fast is it travelling, Mister Spock?
At a speed that should be impossible to achieve. Something on the order of warp thirty six.
No natural object has ever been recorded as travelling at that speed.
I believe it is not a natural object, but a ship.
But who would have the technology to build a ship that could travel at such a speed?
No known race, Captain. Nevertheless, it will contact us in one point four minutes.
Hard about, helmsman. Change course for twenty four mark seven.
Correction, Captain. The ship was on a collision course only by coincidence. It is apparently heading for the heart of the Beta Niobe nova.
Captain, that ship is not responding.
All right, if they won't talk, we'll slow them down. Mister Sulu, put a tractor beam on that ship.
We're having a small effect on other ship's speed, Captain. It has dropped to a speed of warp thirty two.
Captain, they are making visual contact.
Put it on the screen, Lieutenant.
I've never heard that language before.
Run that message through the universal translator, Lieutenant Uhura. Perhaps it can tell us what language she is speaking in.
Captain, the universal translator has the answer. The woman is speaking the same universal language we speak, but she is speaking in reverse.
Lieutenant, let's hear that tape backward, which should sound forward to us.
Open hailing frequencies again, Lieutenant. Tell her she is endangering her life if she remains on her present course.
No use, sir. She's refusing to answer.
Yes, Scotty, what is it?
Mister Arex, what is our speed?
Mister Spock, how long until the alien vessel makes contact with the Beta Niobe nova?
I have no choice. I have to release the tractor beam. I can't destroy this ship and four hundred and thirty people to save one person. Mister Sulu, release our beam.
Sir, I can't release the tractor beam.
What do you mean, Mister Sulu?
Our controls are inoperative. The ship isn't responding like it should.
Go to manual override.
We've got to release that beam, or we're going to follow that ship into the nova!
Our speed is now warp twenty, and the other ship will contact the nova in one minute fifty eight point three seconds.
I'm sorry, Commodore, Mrs. April. It looks as though we may not reach Babel.
As starship personnel, we were always prepared to give our lives, Captain.
We are still starship personnel, Captain.
There's still one chance. After that ship enters the nova, it should burn up and break contact with our tractor beam. Mister Spock, how long will we have to apply full braking power and execute course change?
We are up to warp twenty two and increasing, Captain. We shall have forty two point eight five seconds to correct our course after the alien ship enters the nova.
Mister Scott, we're going to apply full braking power in a minute.
Aye, Captain. Our engines are almost gone.
The alien vessel will contact Beta Niobe in fifty two point three seconds, Captain.
Contact in thirty nine seconds. Thirty eight, thirty seven
Thirteen, twelve, eleven
Get ready to execute course change, Mister Sulu.
Something's wrong, Captain. We're still being pulled by the alien ship.
Impossible. It should have been destroyed instantly.
Apparently it was not, Captain. Our tractor beam is still connected to her.
And we are still increasing speed. Contact with the nova in thirty five point one eight seconds.
That other ship may have been able to survive the heat of a nova, but the Enterprise can't. Mister Scott, how about that full braking power?
We're as badly off as before, Captain. We have no control of the ship as long as that alien lassie has us in tow.
It's got to work.
Fourteen seconds, thirteen, twelve
Never mind, Mister Spock, it's no use.
We're still here. Lieutenant Uhura, can you get us a visual?
Where are we?
Yes, Scotty. How are we doing down there?
Well, we just had to learn to run the ship all over again. Every control is working in reverse.
All right. Lieutenant Uhura, we're going to contact that ship again. We need some answers.
I'm sure Captain Kirk has other problems besides your flower, dear.
You don't understand. Before we entered this universe it was about to die. and now it's in full bloom again.
It's as if it were growing younger again. I can almost feel it while I'm holding it.
Captain, the flower is not the only thing on board that is growing younger.
Ship's chronometers are also running backward. The flow of time is reversed in this universe. The longer we stay here, the younger we will become.
The alien ship is responding to our call, Captain.
I can understand her now, without the aid of the universal translator.
Apparently our brains are also working in reverse, Captain, so we can now understand her language. That is why the ship seems to be operating in the reverse to us.
I'm Captain James T Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We tried to prevent you from entering the Beta Niobe nova. We assumed your ship would burn up.
Who are you? How did you come to be in our universe?
In her universe, a nova is a dead star which comes to life! And when the explosions of a nova in her universe and one in our universe occur together, it's possible to travel between the two universes.
Then we must return the same way, through the two novas.
We have little choice.
Gentlemen, I'm sure none of us mind growing younger instead of older for a change.
It pleases me, Jim. If we stay here long enough, I'll no longer be at the mandatory retirement age.
Nevertheless, we must return home and I am open to suggestions.
It is logical that we must reproduce the conditions that brought us here. Two novas must occupy the same space in both universes in order to create a gateway for us to travel through. One star dying in our universe, and one being born here would recreate the correct conditions.
That would take a remarkable coincidence, Mister Spock.
Tell Karla Five that Mister Spock, Commodore April and myself will be beaming down.
Karla Five has given us coordinates to beam down to her son's laboratory, Captain.
Her son? We don't have time for children's games right now, Scotty, but beam us down.
May I introduce my son, Karl Four.
Most logical. If the flow of time is reversed, then one is born at an old age, and dies in infancy. Your descendants are born before you, and your ancestors are born after you.
Then the young child in the playpen
We could remain forever awed with the differences between our universes, Karla Five, but we must discover a way to return to our positive matter universe.
We need to coordinate this to our own universe. Can we do that, Spock?
Assuming Beta Niobe and Amphion occupy the same space, we can determine if there are any other novas occupying the same space in both universes.
Correct, Commodore. Now if you'll watch the star map, you'll see the Milky Way. Here is Beta Niobe, and here is Earth. It corresponds exactly with Arret. By superimposing both star maps, we will see where two stars occupy the same place in both universes. The red spheres indicate where two stars are in the same space. No pair are novas in both universes.
If stars begin as dead stars here then we could bring one of them to life prematurely.
Yes, we could act as a midwife giving birth to a star. Then we would have two novas in the same position and theoretically return home.
But I had to pass through the novas at my ship's top speed to avoid burning up. Your ship isn't capable of such a speed.
That's true, Captain.
You are welcome to use my ship, Captain.
I have a crew of four hundred and thirty, Karla Five. Your ship is suitable for only a few people.
We can't use her ship to transport us, Captain, but we could use it as an unmanned ship with our tractor beam attached.
It could work. That's how we arrived here in the first place.
It should work, yes. But any miscalculation anywhere along the way and we'll be plunging tail first into a supernova.
we just might get you to Babel after all, Commodore.
I'll be glad to get home, but not necessarily to Babel. It only means the end of my career, Jim.
Yes, Karla Five. We'll burn to a crisp or escape into our own universe. Either way, you'll never hear from us again. Thank you for the sacrifice of your vessel.
We're meeting the speed of Karla Five's unmanned vessel, Captain.
How much time before the youngest crew member returns to the time of birth?
Eighteen minutes thirty seven seconds in real time. But long before that we shall all be children. And, Captain, that also means we are losing our knowledge at an alarming rate. It is possible we will soon be unable to operate the Enterprise.
How is our course, Mister Sulu?
I don't know. What am I doing here? What is all this equipment?
He's too young, Captain.
Mister Arex, take over for him. Lieutenant Uhura, report to navigation console.
I'm sorry, sir, I don't understand all this equipment. What do I do with these controls?
Never mind. Spock, can you fill in for Sulu and Uhura?
Yes, Captain, but who will fill in for you?
What do you mean?
At what age did you become a starship captain? And when did you enter Starfleet Academy?
I see what you mean.
As a Vulcan, I age the slowest. I will be capable of assuming command longer than anyone else. But even I will become too young to know what to do.
Ten minutes fourteen point twenty one seconds, Captain. We shall arrive with only moments to spare. We will need to disconnect the tractor beam at the appropriate time.
Tractor beam? How do we do that, Spock?
Captain, I must assume command. You are no longer able to command the Enterprise.
Whatever you say. What shall I do?
Mister Spock, as long as I am aboard, I am senior officer. I hate to pull rank, but you will be capable of command only for a few minutes, not long enough to complete the manoeuvres necessary to take us home.
You are correct, of course. Commodore April, command is yours.
Commodore? I'm Captain April, Mister Spock.
Make sure no harm comes to them, Sarah. We have to ignite that dead star if we're going home. Mister Spock, you are still capable of following orders?
Very good. Assume your post at the navigation console.
The dead star is directly ahead, Captain, twelve degrees south of galactic plane.
Vessel armed, Captain. Nine seconds to impact. Eight, seven,
Hang on, we're going right into the heart of the nova.
We did it! We're home again! We're all right. We're home. The reverse aging process has stopped.
But the Enterprise crew, they're all children.
They can enter the transporter. It retains a memory of their original molecular structure.
But what about us? We don't have to use the transporter. We can remain young, live our lives over again. You could command a starship once more.
What a blessing to be able to live one's life over again, if the life you've led has left you unfulfilled. No Sarah, I don't want to live it all over again. I couldn't improve one bit on what we've had together.
We've received a message from the Federation that might bring you some cheer. Lieutenant Uhura, would you relay it to Commodore April and his wife?
In view of Commodore April's heroic actions aboard the USS Enterprise this stardate, we are reviewing his mandatory retirement, and will consider his appeal to remain Federation Ambassador at large.
Well, good. Just because someone is seventy five years old doesn't mean they're ready to stop giving service to the galaxy!
I see your flower has blossomed again.
Yes, our trip into the negative universe gave it a second life. It gave all of us a second life.
We of Dramia wish to thank you and the others of your Federation for your invaluable assistance, Captain Kirk.
We hope through our medical assistance programs. to develop and strengthen relations with star systems such as yours, Supreme Prefect. Well, shall we? Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us aboard, Scotty.
If you would be so kind, Captain.
I have here a warrant for the arrest and trial of one of your party, Captain.
The wanton slaughter of hundreds of people is not a joke, Captain.
Slaughter? Hundreds of people?
According to this, Doctor McCoy was responsible for a plague which ravaged the planet Dramia Two some nineteen years ago, Captain.
Let me see that.
As you will note, Captain, the warrant is perfectly in order, approved by your own Federation.
Doctor McCoy arrested? For murder, Captain? Sir, if you want me and some of the men to beam down, just in case
Your Doctor McCoy headed a mass inoculation programme on Dramia Two, nineteen years ago. When his force left, a massive plague struck the planet, killing most of its people.
That doesn't mean he was responsible for it.
His trial will tell, Captain.
Trial? You mean kangaroo court. I've heard about Dramian justice.
Captain, you're becoming emotional.
Of course I am. Bones harming other beings. You know better, Spock. I know better. Not Bones.
I wish I could be as sure, Jim. I, I just don't know. Is it possible that I really did?
The termination of your inoculation programme and the subsequent outbreak of plague could have been coincidence, Doctor.
Or a tragic mistake on my part.
I don't buy that, Bones. Guard!
Do not be assured by your friend's plans. Dramian justice is swift. Too swift for them to save you, perhaps.
No, Captain. The historical records of this solar system are spotty, at best, going back nineteen years. Mostly they're technical data, meteor showers, auroras, radiation reports.
There it is.
Plague, Dramia Two. Of unknown origin, characterised by pigmentation changes in skin of victim, debilitation, death. Certain species known to have natural immunity, notably Vulcan. Hmm. Interesting.
You are sure?
Yes, Commander. The Earth captain is planning to visit Dramia Two to investigate the case.
Estimated time of arrival, Mister Sulu?
Increase to warp six, Mister Scott. We may be racing against time.
Shall I make contact, sir?
Yes. Belay that, Lieutenant.
You're planning something, Captain?
Unless I miss my guess, that's friend Demos.
What if he attacks, sir?
Why should he? We haven't contacted him, so we must not have detected him. He'd have to explain an attack. Besides, he'll probably prefer to sneak aboard, seeing that we carelessly left the hangar doors open.
But the hangar doors aren't open, Captain.
Ah, yes. Take care of that oversight, will you, Mister Sulu?
Now, now, Demos. You're hardly in a position to take on an entire crew.
And you are not in authority to conduct an investigation in our star system.
You will remind me to report my conduct to the Federation, won't you Mister Spock?
I demand that you report to the Federation now!
I would, but unfortunately we're out of communications range.
Then I will proceed to your starbase and report your act.
You are a stowaway, Commander.
I have been tricked.
Good. Then it's safe for us to beam down to Dramia Two. Shall we, gentlemen?
You're sure it's safe, Captain?
Decidedly. There's a difference, Captain.
Now, now, Mister Spock, you're not trying to scare our Dramian friend, are you? Of course, you can back out if you'd like, Commander.
Not the most enchanting place I've ever been to.
Plagues seldom leave behind fields of flowers, Captain.
They do not like outsiders.
Surely you're not an outsider, Commander. You're Dramian.
The distinction here is between the world of the living and the world of the walking dead.
Inhospitable or not, he mustn't get away.
He's disappeared. It's almost as if he dematerialised.
I would advise against that, Captain.
I'm sure you won't mind if I ignore your advice.
Caution would seem to be advisable, Captain.
Bones' life is on the line, Mister Spock.
Cave dwellers? In the midst of your civilisation?
A result of your Doctor McCoy and his inhumane methods.
You say it, Demos, but that doesn't
He attacked you because you are an Earthling, Captain, even as was McCoy.
But how did he survive the plague?
He, like the others who remain here, was away at the time. They returned to their planet to find that their families had succumbed to the plague. He and a few others, senseless in their grief, chose to live here in desolation. You see, Captain, there were no actual survivors.
Then you can tell us. Do you remember?
The pigmentation changes associated with the disease in our computer records, Captain.
Let's get underway for Dramia.
Sir, who is that?
I'll pour on the coal, Captain.
Let's hope the trial hasn't started.
Yes, Mister Spock. What is it?
He's hardly fit to testify at the trial, Captain.
We've got to save him.
It is not that. It is
Captain, you're blue.
General Order Six has been activated?
Good. Report to Sickbay, Mister Sulu.
But sir, who will monitor?
I assure you I am capable, Mister Sulu.
We have to get McCoy. Must find an antidote.
This is the Enterprise. I must speak with the Supreme Prefect.
The Captain and all of the crew members are incapacitated. The plague is aboard the Enterprise.
The same. You must release Doctor McCoy temporarily. He is needed to find an antidote.
We have a witness in McCoy's behalf. You must trust me.
Impossible. He too is stricken.
Got to get McCoy.
If you'll permit me, Captain, I might be able to get McCoy.
I can't infect the planet, Captain. And I can get McCoy.
Spock, have you and Jim gone out of your minds? Why, this is a jailbreak!
Doctor, just come with me, please.
No, Spock. It's illegal, that's what it is. Besides, I must stand trial. I have to find out.
Doctor, you will stand trial, you will find out, after you've found and antidote for the plague which is about to kill everyone aboard the Enterprise.
Plague? Why didn't you tell me?
You wouldn't give me a chance. You realise, Doctor, if you go, and fail to find an antidote, you too will die.
I'm a doctor, Spock, a doctor. Get us beamed aboard.
Negative, Doctor. The file on all known diseases doesn't recognise these symptoms of pigmentation changes.
Blast it, Spock, work harder. They're in the terminal stage.
My readings keep shifting. It must be the activity of that blasted aurora.
Bones, that's it. Aurora, changing colour.
Jim? Aurora? What
Because they were caused by the aurora. Spock, there was an aurora nineteen years ago. I remember
I didn't do it! Spock, the disease, what is it? What's the antidote?
Yes, I think I do. But what has that got to do with anything?
Spock, I see what you mean. Saurian virus antibodies in his blood, that's what made him immune.
I presume, Doctor, that you have a supply of live Saurian virus antibodies in your laboratory?
Bones, you did it!
We of Dramia wish to thank you, Doctor, for your discovery of the antidote which frees us from future attacks of the auroral plague.
We will even forget about the unorthodox manner of your release, Doctor.
And we'll forget about a certain stowaway.
We must apologise.
I think it's time we got aboard ship, isn't it, Jim?
Gentlemen, I don't know about you, but I'm ready to get back to Starbase.
And I'm ready to get back to some of that monotonous, old, routine Sickbay work.
Including, I would hope, some of that monotonous, old dispensing of the regular vitamin rations to the crew.
What is that supposed to mean?
Well, you have been derelict in your duties of late, Doctor.
Spock, you know as well as I do what we've all just been through.
Hippocrates would not have approved of lame excuses, Doctor.
Why, that, that. Jim, if I'm ever in jail again, don't send that Vulcan to release me. Just let me rot.
Mister Sulu, bring us about to a new heading of nine oh two mark six.
Romulans, Captain. They were apparently lying in wait on the far side of that asteroid.
Negative. We've suffered damage and we're outnumbered three to one. I think this is an instance where discretion is the better part of valour.
Captain, I've established contact with the Romulan commander.
I demand an explanation for this unprovoked attack.
We came nowhere near Romulan territory. I deny all charges and plan to file a detailed complaint with the Federation.
Captain, the Romulan ships are overtaking us. At close range our deflectors will be unable to repel their attack.
Captain Kirk! An unidentified energy field is drifting into our path.
Strange. It's not on the charts.
But it may be just what we need to shake the Romulans. Batten down, we're going through.
Mister Spock, what are our chances?
The field is composed of highly charged subatomic particles. If the density grows no worse we should be able to ride it out.
Reduce speed to sub warp cruise. We'll lay by here for repairs.
After that ride, I could use some repairs.
How are the repairs progressing, Scotty?
Nevertheless, we're still in business and I propose a toast to a narrow escape.
How do you like that? So did mine.
It appears we're all victims of a rather bizarre coincidence. The odds against something like this happening are astronomical.
What coincidence? We used to pull stunts like this in medical school with trick glasses. Don't look now, but we've got a practical joker in our midst.
Now let's not jump to conclusions, Bones. Yes, we all got wet, so what's the joke?
Fine. Right now why don't we all eat up before our food gets cold.
I'm beginning to wonder, Bones, I am beginning to wonder.
What have you got there, Spock?
Captain, I found this device on my console. It seems to serve no useful function, and
I'm sorry, Spock, it's your
Officer Scott, won't you join us for lunch?
No thanks, Arex. I'm just going to grab a sandwich and get me back to work.
One grilled cheese on rye. What the blazes? Hold it just a doggone minute!
I said one sandwich, that's all. Someone turn off this infernal food factory.
Go ahead and laugh. Big joke. I'll bet you two are responsible for this, ay?
Hey, wait a minute. We didn't cause this to happen.
Tell that to the Captain. I'm reporting both of you just as soon as I
Okay, this whole thing has gone far enough!
I've just picked up my clean uniforms from the service chute and when I put this one on, I discovered this.
When you all finish laughing, I'd appreciate an explanation.
Captain, I never laugh.
Really, M'Ress, you're going to have to be a little more clever than that.
This is no joke, sir.
It appears to be a legitimate fog. Perhaps the humidification system is
Amazing. This deck is covered with ice.
And it was almost covered with us. I don't know what's going on here, but it's going to stop before someone's hurt.
There's that laugh again. Something awfully familiar about it. What do you make of all this, Spock?
The evidence all points to one guilty party, Captain.
You mean you know who's behind these stunts?
Not who, what. I believe our practical joker is the Enterprise itself.
Of course. That laugh, it's the voice of our main computer.
Spock, I want all hands at their stations. We're going to run a complete systems check from bow to stern and get to the bottom of this.
Well, what'll it be, a swim at the beach?
It is lovely, but I'm more in the mood for a nice quiet walk in the woods.
Then woods it is.
Ah, now that's more like it. Shall we?
That's strange. Repeat the call.
It's so peaceful. So relaxing.
And best of all, no practical jokes.
What was that?
I'm not sure. It almost sounded like someone chuckling.
It was probably just one of the audio tapes rewinding. Come on, there's lots more to see.
Lieutenant Uhura, I have to hand it to you. This is just what the doctor would have ordered.
There it is again. Someone is definitely laughing at us.
I'm going to get to the bottom of this right now.
Okay, whoever you are, so we fell for your juvenile joke. Now get us out.
Yes, Captain. Question. Why are we unable to communicate with crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura?
Answer. That is for me to know and for you to find out.
Did I hear that right?
Affirmative. The dysfunction is more severe than I thought. Question. Are you deliberately holding our missing crewmembers prisoner?
I'll never tell.
Let me try. This is Captain James T Kirk speaking. You are programmed to obey any direct order I may give, correct?
Very well. I order you to release crewmembers McCoy, Sulu and Uhura immediately.
Well, I'll be
I suggest compliance, Captain.
Say pretty please with sugar on.
We've got serious trouble with the main computer. We have reason to believe it's kidnapped three of our crew.
To prevent any further trouble, I want you to shut down all logic functions until we can get a handle on the problem.
When I get my hands on the clown who's behind all this, I'll put him in Sickbay for a week.
Temper, temper. Perhaps this will cool you off.
We've got a whiteout condition here. How will we ever find the exit?
Time for a nap, old girl. Captain's orders.
This is crazy. Our own computer's declared war on us and I haven't the slightest idea why.
I have a theory, Captain, but first I suggest that if Officer Scott moves away from the computer, it might feel less threatened.
Vacate sir? But
You bloody big scatterbrain. Make up your monumental mind.
Congratulations, Spock. Your strategy worked. Now would you tell me what's happening to my ship?
Apparently, subatomic particles from that field have invaded our computer's circuits, much like bacteria infect living matter. As a result, the Enterprise is suffering the electronic equivalent of a nervous breakdown.
What can we do to stop it?
I'm afraid I don't know, Captain. Its illogical behaviour precludes a logical solution.
The temperature must be twenty below and its still dropping.
Look, this is still a room, no matter how it appears. If we can travel long enough in one direction, we're bound to reach a wall. Then we can feel our way to an exit.
Then let's move before we all turn into icicles.
Scotty, we need a work crew with power tools to open a frozen door. Have them report to, report to
Come on, Spock. Where's that Vulcan sense of humour?
Hmm. Just as I thought.
Spock, what, what are you mumbling about?
Our air is being pumped full of nitrous oxide. Better known as laughing gas. But it's no laughing matter, especially for Vulcans.
I know. If we don't, if we don't keep moving we're going to freeze.
We must cure the computer by then or there's no telling what we'll be forced to breathe next. Scotty, how's the door coming?
Some kind of energy drain set up by the ship. We're giving it a mighty go with the crowbars, though.
You two better go on without me. My old legs have given out.
But Doctor, we can't.
Well, what do you know? Come on, Doctor, we're finally getting out of here.
I hate to be a pessimist, but that may not be as easy as you think.
You don't know how good it is to have you back on the Bridge, alive and well.
We're as happy about it as you are, Jim. I'd just like to make one request.
Could you turn up the heat?
I'll see what I can
Captain, we're underway.
Engine room reports all engines shut down, yet they're firing.
Captain, the helm no longer responds. We're coming about to a new heading.
As soon as our course stabilizes, give me a reading.
We're heading back to the Neutral Zone.
And you can bet those Romulan ships will be gunning for us.
Sensors are picking up three ships, Captain. Magnification shows them to be Romulan warships.
We're decelerating, sir.
Main cargo hatches are opening. I'll put them on the viewing screen.
Jim, what in heaven's name is going on?
You know as much as I do, Bones.
The Romulan ships have halted their attack. Apparently the sight of a spacecraft twenty times their size has given them second thoughts.
Okay, I admit it's an effective bluff, but so what? As soon as they figure it out, they'll destroy the balloon and us.
Wait a minute. There is a method to this madness.
Please elaborate, Captain.
The Enterprise is pulling her biggest practical joke of all, and this time the joke's on the Romulans, the same Romulan ships that damaged the Enterprise.
Are you suggesting that the Enterprise is seeking revenge?
What else? She's going to make fools of the Romulans by having them attack a balloon, and Romulans fear disgrace more than death.
Commander, there's no radio response from the large ship.
Very well, it has refused surrender. Advance at attack speed.
We've been tricked. After them. I want that Federation ship blasted into space dust.
The Romulans are giving chase.
They must be furious to follow us this deep into Federation territory.
Yes, Captain. Our course will take us nowhere near it.
Good! I couldn't face going through there again.
It petrifies me.
We're changing course, to a direct bearing on the energy field.
No! We can't!
Commander, our instruments are useless in this field. We've lost contact with the Federation ship.
We've got to clear this field before our ships break up. Bring us about on a heading for home.
My circuits! You tricked me, Kirk. How could you?
What the devil is going on?
Bones, the worst thing you can do to a practical joker is to play a practical joke on them.
It's not fair.
The controls are responding now.
And I'm getting normal function in all computer modes. That last pass through the energy field apparently reversed all effects.
Captain, I'm picking up strange transmissions from the Romulan warships. Listen.
Shall we tell them how they can reverse the effects of the field, Jim?
Yes, but later. Let's not spoil their fun just yet.
Sensors report several groupings of aborigines. They may be dangerous. So I want all of us to avoid any unnecessary risks. But these monitoring devices have to be planted. Lieutenant Uhura will be tracking us throughout. Now, if there's any trouble of any kind, beam up immediately. Don't try to be a hero.
Kirk Captain, settings are almost complete.
Commander Bem, what are you doing here?
This one has decided to accompany contact team for observation of same.
Commander Bem, you were assigned to this ship as an independent observer, yet you have spent the past six missions in your quarters. You haven't done any observing at all until now, when we're dealing with possibly a very dangerous planet.
Patience. Every planet is dangerous to the ignorant. This one has decided that the nexus is now. Must observe workings of starship and crew.
This mission is not for casual observers. It could be hazardous.
Commander Bem, this is not a joyride, a pleasure excursion. I cannot let you beam down to the planet without adequate protection. I'm sure you understand the diplomatic consequences if anything were to happen to you while you are under my protection.
Understanding it is, Captain, but this one remains adamant. Am prepared to accompany.
This is an odd time to remain adamant. All right, let's go. There's a planet waiting for us.
This one has already set controls, Mister Scotty.
Assistance is offered.
We're all right.
In the future, Commander Bem, you will leave the operation of the transporter to Mister Scott, or one of the regular transporter crew.
An anomaly, sir. It resembles a sensor field, but without a scanning grid or other point of reference.
The implication is that there is something else on this planet. Perhaps something intelligent.
It might be just an atmospheric effect. Some kind of electrical storm. We've seen unidentified planetary phenomena before that have resembled intelligent activity.
The rain forest is especially thick in his district. Life on this planet appears to be geologically younger than one would expect, given the age of this star.
This one is picking up readings of a large group of life forms directly ahead.
All right. We must take care not to be seen. Hey, Bem. Bem, come back! Scotty, Sulu, stay here with the monitoring devices. Come on, Spock.
He won't get far in there.
He would have had to go through here to escape.
There he is. I don't know how he did it, but he got through. Come on, we'll have to go around. That Pandronian's actions just don't make sense.
They might to another Pandronian, Captain. I believe he went that way, Captain. On the other hand
I think we've lost him. That way.
Yes, and the food they have gathered is Bem.
Lieutenant Uhura, I'm reading increased activity on the surface of the planet. The sensory anomaly appears to be expanding.
The Captain is not answering his communicator and it does not show up on the scanning grid. It's as if its responder has been disconnected. We're picking up increased activity from that anomaly. Is Mister Spock with the Captain?
Lieutenant Arex, start a sensor scan for Captain Kirk and Mister Spock. Landing party, prepare to beam up.
I'm sorry, Mister Scott, that's not procedure. We can't take chances.
We're talking about the Captain.
I know it, but we have to follow his orders. Stand by to beam up.
Maybe we can beam him out of there. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. This isn't my communicator.
Our phasers don't work either.
Our phasers and communicators have been switched for phonies and Commander Bem has run off. We've been separated from the rest of the landing party. Mister Spock, something funny is going on.
An alternate course of action would appear to be advisable.
But Commander Bem's difficulty appears to be genuine. Phasers or not, we have to rescue him. We're going to have to follow them.
One of us could go back to contact Mister Scott.
We can't risk it, not while they're moving. We may never be able to find them again.
These aborigines appear to be in a late primitive state. Obviously intelligent, they seem to have a basic language and social structure. I would assume fairly well developed mores and traditions as well.
Commander Bem seems to be a model prisoner.
We'll have to wait until nightfall.
Shut up. We're rescuing you.
You are interfering with observations.
This is how you observe, by being captured?
As logical a way as any, Spock Commander.
How come we always end up like this?
I assume that's a rhetorical question, Captain, not requiring an answer.
I was just expressing my curiosity at our ability to get into these kind of situations.
I believe that is the correct Earth term.
Why don't you try your Vulcan nerve pinch.
Captain, I am only a Vulcan. There are limits.
Commander Bem, I'm afraid that we're not going to be able to rescue you.
Good intentions, Kirk Captain, are not enough. Planet Pandro will be much displeased. Starfleet told us you are best captain in fleet. Actions to date belie this.
Commander Bem, you are responsible for the situation we are in. You disobeyed orders by running off. Your attitude has been extremely abrasive and, I don't know how you did it. You replaced our phasers and communicators with phonies.
You place too much dependence, Kirk Captain, on phasers and communicators.
Either one could solve our problems right now.
Commander Bem, if you had those two phasers and those communicators all this time, why didn't you use them to escape?
Sir, this one does not demean oneself by the use of casual violence to accomplish goals. But you may demean yourself if you wish.
Compliance with orders is. This one must disassemble.
Remarkable. Commander Bem is a colony creature.
Commander Bem, if you could split yourself into separate parts, why didn't you escape on your own earlier?
And deny you the opportunity to prove your value to planet Pandro by rescuing this one from possibly dangerous situation?
This is not a laboratory, Commander Bem. This is a hostile planet, and representatives of Starfleet are not experimental animals for you to test! Consider yourself under arrest. Protective custody, to keep you from any more escapades. Mister Spock, keep watch.
Lieutenant Arex, have you found them yet?
No, sir. It is a big planet.
Mister Scott, that sensory anomaly, it's expanded to cover the whole northern continent.
We can't get any readings at all now.
Aye, that tears it. The Loch Ness monster couldn't get through that.
There's some kind of interference on all channels. We're going to have to get out of this village on our own.
I doubt we'll be able to do so without being seen, Captain.
I concur, Mister Spock. Set phasers to stun, just in case.
No, do not use your weapons.
We're held in stasis, Captain.
Put away your weapons. These are my children. Do not harm them.
Who are you?
Who are you?
I am Captain James Tiberius Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock and honorary Commander Ari bn Bem of the planet Pandro.
Why are you here? Why do you disturb this place?
It is our mission. We must classify this planet. We have to test it.
Classify? What gives you the right to intrude here? This planet is not for your use. My children are not for your tests. Your weapons will be nullified.
There are times, Mister Spock, when I think I should have been a librarian.
The job of librarian would be no less challenging, Captain, but it would undoubtedly be a lot less dangerous.
Have you found the Captain yet?
I have located emanations that could be Captain Kirk's and another set that could be Mister Spock's, but the sensory anomaly has interfered with our detection devices so that positive identification remains impossible.
I think he said 'maybe'. Well, that convinces me. Ready a security squad. We're going down there. Issue phaser rifles.
You have mishandled situation again, Kirk Captain. This one judges you not an intelligent commander.
Commander Bem, Mister Spock and I are here because we thought that you were worth rescuing. It was more to preserve the diplomatic relations between the Federation and planet Pandro than from any great affection for yourself.
Planet Pandro is unconcerned as to fate of this one. Pandro will not have dealings with inefficient and inferior species. You have failed everything you have attempted. You have not rescued this one and you have not been able to handle local aborigines.
This one wishes you, what is the Earth word? Luck. You will require it.
Captain, perhaps we can attract the attention of the alien intelligence and reason with it.
Perhaps an offering of some sort, Captain.
Mister Spock, whatever we're dealing with, I don't think we can bribe it. We must be honest. Kirk to alien intelligence. I don't think it's strong enough to be noticeable.
Hmm. If we connect our two communicators in series, we can give off a high energy burst which might work, but it will also render the communicators powerless in a very short time.
This is Captain James Tiberius Kirk calling the ruling intelligence of this planet. Do you hear me? Kirk to entity. Kirk to entity.
I am here.
We apologise for intruding. We did not realise the situation. We will leave. We will tell others of our kind not to bother you here.
This is good. Go. Go now and do not return.
Just one thing. There is a third member of our group.
He has fled.
You must go. You must not interfere with my children. I will allow you to contact your ship. Go now!
Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise.
Stand by. We're not leaving without Bem. He is our responsibility. We can't leave him here. Beam down a security squad with heavy duty tricorders set for Pandronian scanning.
Captain, are you all right?
Thanks, Scotty. Spread out. Find Commander Bem. He's split into three individual parts.
He's some kind of colony creature. And take care not to injure any of the natives here. Phasers on lightest possible stun setting. And don't fire unless absolutely necessary.
Let's get out of here before we make any more trouble.
Embarrassment results. This one is shamed. This one has failed in its judgement.
You have endangered all of us by your actions, and you have forced us to interfere with the natives of a planet that deserves prime directive protection.
Not on my ship you don't.
You are still here? You are still interfering? I am angered.
We could not leave one of our own behind. It is our responsibility to take care of our own, just as it is your responsibility to take care of yours. We could not leave him here where he might further interfere with your, your children.
Yes, you have some wisdom, James Tiberius Kirk. The lost one is found, then?
He is found, and we will leave.
This one has greatly erred. The mission was to judge, and right of judgement was not conferred. This one must disassemble unity.
No, do not destroy yourself.
But this one has erred. This one has tried to judge Kirk and Spock and been found wanting himself. This one has acted badly.
Yes. You have erred, but if you disassemble, you cannot learn from your error. Errors demand recognition so that they will not be repeated.
You do not demand punishment?
Punishment? What is punishment? Revenge? Intelligent beings need no revenge. Punishment is necessary only where learning cannot occur without it. You are behind that. My children here are not. That is why you must leave, so as not to corrupt their development with concepts that they are not yet ready for.
I am humbled.
We will go now.
Kirk to Enterprise. Beam us up.
Stand by to break orbit. Mister Spock, classify this planet as being strictly quarantined. Under no circumstances may any Federation vessel approach.
Pandro will respect that also.
Captain, I compliment you on a wise decision.
It is necessary. Not only for them, but for us as well.
Fascinating, Captain. A highly advanced alien entity using this particular system as a laboratory for guiding another race to intelligence. Almost a god, you might say.
Mister Spock, the difference is meaningless. In comparison, we're all still children.
In this one's case, Kirk Captain, this one is still an eggling.
Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Let's go home.
Captain, I'm picking up a message.
Put it on audio, Lieutenant Uhura.
Go in peace. Yes. Go in peace. You have learned much. Be proud.
All systems affirmative, Captain. The Enterprise is on course and on schedule.
It'll be nice to play diplomat for a change, eh, Spock?
Kirk to Sickbay. Emergency!
Get to the point, Bones.
Spock has contracted the disease. It's fatal to Vulcans.
Are you sure?
The result is suffocation.
One. A naturally occurring drug called strobolin. But it's only found on a few planets in the galaxy.
What is the nearest strobolin supply planet to our present position?
How long can Spock last without the drug?
I can give him injections of a synthesised drug that would slow the disease. But after two days the body builds up an immunity. It loses its effectiveness. By the end of the third day, the disease will be irreversible.
It'll take four days to get the drug, but Spock will die in three. There's got to be a way.
Of course. If we cant go out of our way to get the drug in time, there must be another ship closer to Beta Canopus. Kirk to Bridge. Get me Starfleet, Lieutenant.
What will the symptoms be, Bones?
You wished to see me, sir?
Yes, Spock. Sit down. We've arranged a rendezvous to pick up the drug you need.
I trust it will not affect our scheduled arrival at Deneb Five.
No, it won't.
Will that be all, Captain?
One other thing. I've cut your duty time in half.
Captain, that won't be necessary. I'm quite able
That's all, Spock. Dismissed.
It'll hurt seeing him like that.
Sir, our sensors are picking up a ship ahead.
I'm not sure it's the Enterprise, sir. It's too far away to tell.
Time to rendezvous, Mister Arex?
I hate to ask, but
Aye, Captain. We'll squeeze a wee bit more speed out of her.
What is it, Bones?
I was conserving energy, Captain.
McCoy wants you in Sickbay.
Sensor readout, Captain. It's not the Enterprise closing on us, sir.
No, sir. It's an alien ship, a design I've never seen before.
This won't hurt a bit, Spock.
An unnecessary assurance, Doctor, in addition to being untrue.
That's the last time I waste my bedside manner on a Vulcan.
Such restraint would be welcome.
Well, that's not too bad. Back to work, Mister Spock.
The drug isn't working any more.
I know, Christine. I know. Don't worry, we'll have the strobolin soon.
They've increased speed, sir, closing fast.
No good, Captain. Send out an emergency signal to the Enterprise.
Captain, I'm getting a signal from the Huron. It's an emergency beacon, automated.
Try ship to ship.
Sensor report, Mister Spock. Are they at the rendezvous point?
No, sir. They hadn't reached it.
Compute new course, Mister Arex. Let's see what's going on.
The Huron's power levels are at bare minimum for life support, Captain. I'm picking up metallic debris.
Based on present data, I would say yes.
Spock, are you all right?
Bridge to Sickbay. Emergency.
We've got to have that drug, Jim. The synthetic is useless now.
Do what you can, Bones.
Blasted Vulcan. Why couldn't you have red blood like any normal human?
Still unable to make contact, sir.
Mister Scott, Lieutenant Uhura, come with me. Mister Sulu, you have the conn. We're beaming over.
Scotty, check the cargo hold. See if the drug is there.
Uhura, see if you can get a playback of the log. I want to know what happened here. Nurse, attend to the wounded.
Scott to Captain Kirk.
No drug and no dilithium shipment. The hold is completely empty.
This screen is out, sir. But we can take the tapes and play them back on the Enterprise.
Good. Nurse, how is he?
He needs surgery, Captain, but he'll live.
Kirk to Enterprise. Ready to beam over. Have the medical team standing by.
He'll pull through. Jim, what about Spock? If we don't have that drug in twenty hours, he'll die.
I've run the Huron's sensor tapes through the computer, sir. The intruder ship is a new design, never before encountered by Federation shipping.
Yes, sir. The intruder ship produces a unique trail of radioactive waste, now bearing two one two degrees mark one seven five.
How is he, Bones?
Not good, Jim. I'll have to put a respirator on him to help him breathe soon.
We're following the intruder ship's trail.
We don't even know it it's the right one.
It's got to be.
What's the use of being a doctor, anyway? We're only as good as our drugs and technology make us. Underneath all the tricks, I might as well be practising in the Middle Ages.
If you really believed that, Bones, you wouldn't still be a doctor after twenty five years.
Increase speed to warp eight.
A good place for an intruder to hide, wouldn't you say, Mister Sulu?
Perfect. And a long range sensor can show that the radioactive residue stops in the middle of the belt.
Deflectors up. Yellow Alert. Cut speed to warp one.
What was that?
These asteroids are composed of a highly unstable mineral combination, sir. They explode upon impact with each other.
Captain, if the power of those rocks could be harnessed, they'd make a fantastic source of energy.
Also make quite a weapon. Steady as she goes, Sulu.
Hard to port, Sulu. Let's face them head on.
Standard phasers, sir. Weak, though. A diffused, low quality beam. Our deflectors can stop them.
I recognise the ship's markings, Captain. It's an Orion.
They're hailing us, Captain.
Put it on visual, Lieutenant.
This is Captain Kirk. For a neutral, you were pretty quick to fire your phasers.
Hold on that, Uhura. Tell them to stand by.
Sensors picking up the dilithium in their hold, sir.
If they have it, it's too small an amount to detect.
Enterprise to Orion vessel. I have a proposal to make. If you do have the Huron's cargo, there were some perishable drugs in it that we desperately need.
What would these drugs be worth to you if we had them?
We get what we want, plus our neutrality remains intact? We will consider your offer.
Kirk to Sickbay.
Bones, how much time?
The Orions are hailing us, sir.
Put it on the screen, Lieutenant.
Do you have a counterproposal?
Face to face? Where?
On the large asteroid near our ships. We could beam down simultaneously, and I would hand you the drug myself. You wouldn't even have to give us the extra dilithium crystals. Now it's your turn to consider.
It's got to be a trap, Jim.
No doubt of it, sir.
It could be a trap, but it's the only way to get the drug. And Spock will die if we don't.
You've already made up your mind, haven't you, Jim.
Yes, but not without precautions. I'll keep my communicator channel open so you can hear what goes on. Keep the transporter locked on me, and if anything goes wrong, Scotty, I'm trusting you.
If this doesn't work, we could lose you and Spock.
If we don't try, Spock doesn't have a chance.
You're saying we can't escape?
Orion's official neutrality comes before this ship or its crew. We can't take Kirk's word that he won't report this incident to Starfleet.
Do you have a plan, Lieutenant?
Can we convert the asteroid we're orbiting into a doomsday bomb that will destroy both ships?
What will it take?
No. I'll take it with me when I beam down to meet Captain Kirk. I want the satisfaction of seeing his face when I tell him he and his crew are going to die with us. And I'm sure they don't trust us. If Kirk and I are on the asteroid, the Enterprise will stay close by.
Enterprise to Orion vessel.
I accept your terms.
Jim, we don't have a lot of time. Spock
The drug, as promised, Captain. Scan it if you wish.
No, Captain. I can't trust that you won't report this incident to Starfleet. If you do, my planet will lose its neutrality and be subject to Federation retaliation.
You can't escape the Enterprise.
But we can destroy it.
What is it?
There's dilithium down there with them, sir.
I have an explosive device in my backpack that will start a molecular chain reaction and detonate this asteroid. Your ship will be destroyed.
But so will yours.
Captain, it was close.
Let's get up to the Bridge.
They're gone, sir.
I was scanning as you ordered, and they just disappeared off the asteroid. Both the Earther and the Captain.
I have the Orion vessel, sir.
This is Captain Kirk. We have your captain as prisoner. Your choice, sir.
Spock, there's no way you can deny it.
Doctor McCoy, I
I've waited a long time for this, and you're not going to cheat me.
Spock, that green blood of yours may have saved you before, but this time it almost did you in. You can't deny it.
I still prefer my physiological structure to yours.
Yes, gentlemen, things are back to normal.
Maintain the Enterprise in this position, Sulu. If Spock and I survive, we'll return here. If not, Mister Scott, you have your orders. Energise.
A religious leader, was he not?
Our salvation and our teacher. He brought us peace. He made us great. He died, and we made him immortal.
Alar's brain patterns were recorded before his death, in a piece of indurite sculpture.
Our Soul, the Soul of the Skorr, was stolen.
The theft triggered a racial fury in the Skorr. They are preparing for war.
It is a very real threat. In two standard years, the existing Skorr could breed an army of two hundred billion warriors.
My government fears this, so the theft of the Soul of Alar has been kept secret. But we must recover it before my people discover it gone and go mad, launch a jihad, a holy war on the galaxy.
Unknown. The motive, as Tchar has said, to provoke a holy war.
Is there any clue to its location?
A mad planet, Geologically unstable. Constant earthquakes, gravitic shifts, tidal waves. The temperature varies from twenty Kelvin to two hundred and four above. Somewhere on that planet, the Soul of Alar is hidden. Three expeditions have tried to recover it. Three expeditions have been lost. You are the next, if you agree.
The Vedala are a powerful race. Why haven't your people retrieved the Soul?
My people could not survive on that planet. You have a chance.
Then it is done.
I cannot feel the Soul. We are nowhere near it.
That is to be expected. The surface of this planet shifts constantly. Even the Vedala are not certain where the Soul is.
It has directional equipment that keys on indurite.
I like this place, it's got variety.
Our direction is indicated.
Why did the Vedala call this the Mad planet?
Means nothing. I can tell the way. That way.
Are you certain, human?
For sure, birdman. I can't get lost. I can't be fooled about directions. That's why I'm here.
The Vedala would not have chosen Lara if her abilities were less than perfect.
Agreed, but we're forced to travel on the ground. I want an overview.
I will scout overhead.
The Vedala will have been efficient in equipping us. I will acquaint myself with our supplies.
I wouldn't say that. Mister Spock is a unique personality.
But not human like you and me. Maybe you got different customs. My world there's a lot of females, not so many men. Come we find a man attractive, we say so. I'm saying so. How do you find me?
Fascinating. But we're not here on a pleasure trip, Lara.
All the more reason to take what pleasure there might be in it.
I have checked the supplies, Captain. As expected, they are adequate and there are weapons.
Against what? There's no life on this planet.
But there is, Captain. Ourselves. And there may be other things guarding the Soul of Alar.
And a half.
A statistical probability.
Yes. But philosophy and poetry are not appropriate here.
A lava flow. Volcanic action is to be expected.
Never mind that. You got to get us out of here.
We might be able to divert the lava flow with a barricade. Tchar, get us a visual estimate!
Such a diversion would be of short duration, Captain. And I must point out, the vehicle lacks sufficient speed to escape.
Not if we used all of the power pack's energy for one high speed run.
Kirk. There is a ravine sixty metres to your left. If it can be blocked, the lava will flow past those rocks to one side.
I heard him.
Carefully, Em. One missed connection could destroy us.
I figure we've bought ourselves a little time. Few minutes.
Twenty one degrees east. Fifty metres to get out of the flow path.
Leave, all of you.
Captain, you must get the others away.
We're all getting away.
Far too close, Captain. I appreciate your action on my behalf, but your first duty is to the group and the mission.
Quite right, Spock. And that responsibility includes not losing the best science officer in Starfleet.
You two going to argue honours, or are we going to get on with it?
Oh! And I was just going to ask, what next?
We move on.
We'll have to carry the equipment.
Come on, Em, a bit more.
Sorry, Em. We'll be needing you. Sord.
I'll go ahead.
What is it?
There is no life on this planet.
Guess you're right. This planet just gets on your nerves.
I can sense the Soul. I will fly ahead, examine the building, and meet you on the way.
Tchar, be careful. We need you, too.
We're tired, sore, hurt and angry, but we're also just about there. I'll scout ahead. Everybody else stay together, keep moving.
I'll go with you. Remember, scouting's my job. By rights, I should be doing it alone.
Sord, what did you think you saw back there?
Don't know, Vulcan. A shape, couldn't really make it out. Probably seeing things, like Kirk figures.
There should be no life on this planet.
Yes. The Vedala would have informed us if there were any live beings here we should know of.
Maybe the Vedala didn't know about it.
That is an impossibility.
Think so? I'm not so sure.
That's it. End of a long, hard journey.
We still have to go back, James. I tell you true, I find you an attractive man. If we were together, the trip would be easier. And if anything happened, why, we'd have some green memories.
I already have a lot of green memories.
Maybe some other time, Lara. We still have our work cut out for us here.
Is this not the shape of your people's primitive temples?
What is it?
Keep working. I'll cover you.
The Vedala were right. There are no living creatures here, only the mechanised sentinels.
We'll hit Tchar.
What happened to Tchar?
There's no way to tell from here. The mechanical exploded. We can't reach the roof from the outside. We'll have to try to get to him from the interior.
We could rest awhile. Lara?
No. We've come this far.
Let's finish it. Or give this deadfall a chance to finish us.
I too would prefer to press on, Captain. The mechanicals on guard may be what Sord saw tracking us earlier. Or there may be others. In either case, it would be more advantageous to avoid another encounter.
Pretty. How do we reach it?
The walls are not climbable.
Not without special equipment, which we don't have. Either we find a way to reach it from here, or we fail.
You're not exactly surprised.
Three previous expeditions tried and were lost. The planet is a natural trap, but that's not enough.
Yes, from inside each expedition. Remember Spock, you were the one who said there are no life forms here except ourselves.
Approximately eighty two point five percent in favour of the possibility.
But it doesn't matter if we reach the Soul. Apparently the others didn't get this far.
I'm not built for that sort of thing. I'll wait for you down here.
The planet is geologically unstable. This structure is inherently flexible, enabling it to withstand earthquakes.
Maybe I can get a line on it.
It is locked in a force field. Your rope would merely bounce off it.
Spock, will our combined phasers disrupt the field?
I cannot define the field's energy base, Captain, but
The last piece of sabotage. I know who you are. A thousand feet up, no method of reaching the Soul, except by air, by flight. Tchar.
Tchar. In the name of the Seven Gods, why?
You stole this. You'll start a bloody crusade across the galaxy. Tell us why, Tchar.
The Skorr were a warrior race. Now what are we? Slaves to the illusion of peace. Cowards, soft in our comfort. This sick dream has stolen our souls. I am Tchar, hereditary prince of the Skorr, leader of battles. I will lead my people into glory, to avenge our history.
Most of them will be killed. The warrior races of the Federation will rise up to battle the Skorr.
Now you can fly and fight as a Skorr.
No offence, little ones, but let me tackle him.
Last week with you, Captain.
Call for retrieval, now.
Let me die.
You're going back with us.
We give you thanks. The Soul of Alar is returned to his people.
What about Tchar? How are you going to punish him?
No. You will return and you will see, there will be no questions, no medals, only our thanks. And in time, even the memory will be gone from you.
What do you mean?
You transported over and came right back. Did they call it off?
How long were we gone?
Long? About two minutes, I guess. I don't understand.
The Vedala changed their minds. The danger is past. Back to your stations. We have a lot of other places to go.
The need was apparently desperate.
The Captain of a ship, no matter his rank, must follow the book.
A capability, I'm afraid, out of the reach of most humans.
You Vulcans are the most impossible, unimaginative
Bones, that's not helping the situation.
Mister Spock, what can we expect to find on Lactra Seven?
It's a class M planet, gravity Earth normal, atmosphere Earth normal. There is no previous information available except that which the survey ship logged before her crew left her.
According to their lot, they beamed down six weeks ago.
Careless of me, Mister Spock. Planetary life forms?
It certainly can support life forms. But I cannot speculate on what type without further data. Mister Arex is conducting a sensor scan now.
Jim, if the others are lost, why take the risk?
Because they may not be dead. We have to find out.
It's still a risk.
That's why we're here, Bones. Gentlemen, we'll travel light. Phasers, tricorders, communicators and medical kit.
Sir, Mister Arex has located a variety of life forms on the planet. No large groups or city clusters yet.
Then we'll beam back up.
Unusual that such a lake would exist under these planetary conditions.
It may be able to navigate on land.
I know it can.
Let's get out of here.
I'll see if I can pick up anything on my communicator. This is Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise, calling the crew of the Ariel. Come in please. Come in.
Strange you didn't get a voice reply.
There could be many reasons why we did not.
It seems to gather strength from our phasers. In my opinion.
Concentrate on the underside of the neck.
I am undamaged. Where is Doctor McCoy?
We'll get you out, Bones.
It would appear a more logical solution is in order, Captain. We don't lift the tail off, we dig the Doctor out.
Thanks. The air was running out under there.
Were you hurt?
No, just surprised. It isn't every day a dinosaur falls on you. This is a pretty strange place.
Agreed. How much desert do we have to cross, Mister Spock?
We'd better pick up our pace. There's no place for cover if we meet any other creatures. The bearing on the signal we heard is that way.
Captain, the beast, did it seem familiar to you?
I've seen something very like it on Canopus Three, but that's light years from here. Still, this desert area is the same as on Canopus.
My shoes are full of sand.
Doctor, your lack of scientific interest is amazing.
I'll be happy to discuss that with you, Mister Spock, next time you drop in to my medical lab.
I've seen stranger things, Mister Spock.
Kirk to Enterprise.
North east. That's where we got the signal from. All right, Scotty, keep scanning. Kirk out.
I don't like it, Jim. Why only one short signal and no more?
I don't know. But at least they're alive.
Apparently alive. We cannot be sure.
I choose to believe they are.
Allow me to test the water first, Doctor.
Captain, the water is too pure.
Nonetheless, it is too pure.
In other words, it's too good to be true.
Correct, Captain. And a rain forest this close to a desert is also illogical. It is my theory that what we have seen since we landed was manufactured, not created.
Terraforming isn't new. It implies intelligent life forms.
Unless, of course, the random choice is the pattern.
Spock, do you ever say anything straight out?
Gentlemen, please. We have work to do.
The desperation of the science ship's first landing party is now obvious.
We're still alive, aren't we?
No. They're like the dragons on Maravel. The stun charge should get them.
By observation alone, it appears they hit an invisible force field.
If that's true, Spock, then
We've been travelling for hours. Where are they taking us?
Captain, there it is.
That must be five square kilometres.
If these are the builders, it is an admirable feat.
They don't seem very interested in communicating with us. If they can communicate at all.
Perhaps not in a way we understand. I keep receiving impressions.
Well, I've got one and I definitely don't like it. I'd guess they're doing exactly what we would do.
Well, if we came upon an alien creature we'd never seen before, the first thing we'd do is to make sure it was free of harmful bacteria. Then we'd see if it was intelligent.
Congratulations, Doctor. A most logical assumption.
A more important question, gentlemen, is whether or not there's a way out of here. A force field. It seems harmless enough.
So do the bars of a jail, unless you're on the inside.
And we are definitely on the inside.
A wasteful use of energy, Doctor. I believe they can hear you without your shouting.
You said you were picking up impressions. Are the aliens telepathic?
I've come to the conclusion they are, Captain. But the speed at which the thoughts flow is too great for me to comprehend except for the most fleeting image.
Surely we can communicate with them some way.
They appear to be as advanced beyond Earth civilisation as you are from a colony of ants.
Then what were all those other creatures where we beamed down?
You will recall we recognised at least two species from vastly different planets. The environment did not appear natural to this planet. A technology this advanced could easily travel to other star systems to collect specimens.
You mean it's some kind of a zoo?
They took our phasers, communicators and other equipment so they must have some idea we're intelligent.
Not necessarily, Captain. They could have taken them for the same reason you would take a sharp object away from a child.
Or maybe they want to see how our toys work.
That too is a possibility.
We've got to communicate with them.
Well, so much for mythology.
Better do what they want for now, anyway. They activated another force field.
This is real grass.
Yes, Doctor. This area has been carefully prepared for human types. The aliens are safe now.
They are safe because we are now exhibits in a zoo.
A zoo? I'm no animal.
On this planet, Bones, they seem to be the people and we are the animals.
Hello, I'm Lieutenant Commander Tom Markel. This is our biologist, Randi Bryce.
James Kirk, Captain of the Enterprise. First Officer Spock. Our physician, Doctor McCoy.
We've been expecting you.
We heard your communicator signal.
Then why didn't you warn us?
We couldn't warn you. They're constantly picking up our equipment and fooling with it.
Where do they keep the equipment? I could use my tricorder.
No use, sir. They're on an exhibit table. Beyond the force field.
There were six of you on the mission.
We didn't beam down in time to save the original three.
Lieutenant Randolph is in the house. She's running a high fever, but we can't seem to do anything about it.
I'll check her out. Maybe I can help.
What have you learned about the aliens?
There's not much, sir. This is a zoo. So tremendous as to be almost unbelievable.
Have you tried an escape?
A dozen different ways. Tunnels, a weakness in the force field, nothing worked.
Have you tried to communicate?
Yes, sir. But all we've been able to arouse in them is a sort of quivering motion.
We seem to have company.
They built this for us. We've concluded they're telepathic. I guess they read our minds and came as close as they could to make it like home.
Yes, sir. I can't seem to get through, Captain. They appear too involved with each other.
You seem to be getting a response.
My impression is that they are laughing at me.
So far, Mister Spock, we haven't found anything funny in this.
Let's find the others. I feel a need for human companionship.
Captain Kirk, Mister Spock, this is Nancy Randolph, our navigator.
How is she?
Without my instruments, it's difficult to make an exact diagnosis. Rough guess is a malarial type infection caused by an insect bite. I can't do anything without my medikit.
The Lactrans outside, what do they do?
They appear to be guards, sir. Making sure we don't harm each other.
Do they feed us or do we shift for ourselves.
Always to the same place?
Behind this house, outside the force field. All our toys, phasers, communicators, medical supplies.
Then my equipment should be there.
Maybe we can get them to give them back to us.
Captain, they are highly intelligent. I'm sure they are quite aware of the purpose of each piece of equipment now.
The medical kit wouldn't be harmful. It would help her, one of their specimens.
Then think about it that way, Doctor.
Food. But it's not feeding time.
They must have sensed a need and interpreted it as food.
It's all here. They haven't damaged it.
What's your evaluation of the situation, Markel?
They treat us quite well, sir. They seem to want us alive and well. And they don't want to let us go.
A natural reaction for the curators of a zoo.
Sir, do you think there is any chance of getting out?
As long as we're alive, there's a chance. Tonight, I'll try and find a weak link in the force field.
Begging your pardon, Captain, I think we should face the situation realistically. We are specimen animals in a zoo. And they have taken every precaution to prevent our escape. To them we are caged for life. We seem to be drawing quite a crowd.
Gentlemen, since they are learning from us, why don't we learn something from them?
How? We can't get through to them?
They communicate telepathically.
Between themselves, yes, but, Mister Spock, aren't Vulcans telepathic?
To a degree, with our own species and with some others, but the Lactran intelligence is eons beyond mine.
How much have you learned?
About as much as a mother learns from a six month old infant.
What's their impression of us?
We seem to frighten the smaller ones. Some, the females, I believe, find us quite ugly.
What about the Enterprise, Jim. Scotty could get worried. He could beam down a fighting force.
My orders were not to attempt a rescue under any condition.
A wise move, Captain. From what I can gather, even the Enterprise is no match for their force field.
How about coming up with another move, then?
If I may suggest, sir?
It is obvious they can pick up specific thought transmissions from us if they care to go to the trouble. I suggest that one of our number appear to be ill. The rest will put strong thoughts in our minds that a communicator is needed for recovery.
Let's try it, and let's be close to the communicator when we do. I'll pretend I'm sick. All of you concentrate.
It's a little one. Could be a child.
Once I get my hands on a communicator, I can have Scotty beam us all aboard the Enterprise. Ready now.
Enterprise, this is Captain Kirk. Beam us aboard.
I'm receiving an impression they are worried about their child, Captain.
I'm worried about the Enterprise.
They seem to think you made the child disappear. They did not know we were a deadly species, capable of injuring one of them.
Well, let's not stand here. Let's do something.
The best thing we can do is Argh!
What is it?
Captain, fight it. Fight it as hard as you can. They think too fast in too complex a manner. If he gives up for even one moment, he may go mad.
I think it's harmless, but I'm not sure.
Whatever it wants me to.
Now, supposing you and I talk this over. You can talk, can't you? You can't talk. Well, what can you do? Oh, no! Listen, you'll send us off into space if you
Jim, are you all right?
Yes. I think so.
Captain, they have concluded they cannot break through your mind on a one to one basis. They are now gathering the mental strength of all five of them to break through.
I can't hold out against that many.
No. No! Let me alone! Please! They're destroying me! Tearing my mind to, to
I'm all right. Scotty, what are you doing here?
It made contact with me.
What did you learn?
It's only six years old but it has an IQ in the thousands. It picked my brain, all the knowledge in the Enterprise computers, and sent us flying off out of orbit.
Then how did you get here?
I convinced it I wasn't a pet, and that it should bring the ship back into orbit. Then I got it into the transporter to return here.
They're trying to contact us directly. I can make out something. It's, it's difficult, they think so fast. But the child has learned and told its parents all about the Federation and the races it encompasses.
What else do they know about us?
We are considered simplistic, but in the process of evolving into a higher order.
But the little one didn't tell or think that to me.
Exactly, sir. It seems they were where we are some tens of thousands of centuries ago. Their centuries, not ours.
Do we get out of here?
It appears so. They do not feel we belong in their zoo.
Everyone ready to transport?
Kirk to Enterprise. Prepare to beam aboard two parties, all human.
Captain, we are a scientific contact team, and we learned practically nothing.
Offhand, I'd say we learned to keep our hands off.
But there was so much more.
There will be other opportunities, Mister Markel. I have just received their final telepathic message.
We'll be welcome back, in twenty or thirty centuries.
Theirs. And it will take me some time to figure out how long that is.
Either way, Mister Spock, it will hardly be our problem.
These stasis boxes are the most remarkable thing the Slavers ever produced. Time stands still inside a stasis box. A billion years means nothing in there. What is it, Lieutenant?
I've studied the history of the Slaver Empire, but it's sketchy. We know they were masters of all the intelligent beings in this galaxy a billion years ago, until one race revolted. Are the stasis boxes the only source of information we have?
The Slavers and all their subjects were exterminated in the war that followed. Intelligent life had to evolve all over again. The stasis boxes are the only remnant of those lost civilisations.
Why is it glowing like that?
Mister Sulu, what is our position?
Passing Beta Lyrae, sir. One forty two degrees north east of galactic plane.
Most peculiar. This indicates there is another stasis box circling Beta Lyrae.
It would be most illogical that a stasis box would remain here undiscovered for so long. Beta Lyrae is one of the rare spectacles of the galaxy. Almost every ship that passes stops to see it.
Maybe no one else was carrying a stasis box detector.
Possible. The only known stasis box detector is another stasis box. Still. Mister Sulu.
Bring us about. We'll investigate the Beta Lyrae system.
We are not tourists here, Lieutenant.
Mister Spock, if it takes a stasis box to find another stasis box, how did anyone ever find the first one?
As with a number of discoveries, purely by accident, Lieutenant. The other box seems to be almost under us, perhaps thirty metres below the ice.
We won't have any trouble digging for it. In this low pressure, the ice should boil as soon as the phasers melt it.
Where are we?
A Kzinti spacecraft.
That isn't good. Kzinti aren't supposed to have phasers, are they?
The Treaty of Sirius does not permit them any weapons at all, beyond police vessels. Obviously, the treaty has been broken.
A police web. We won't be able to move unless we can turn it off somehow.
I've heard all Kzinti telepaths are unhappy neurotics. He fits the description.
There is no sure way to guard our thoughts from him. Mister Sulu, he is not likely to deal with me or Lieutenant Uhura. She and I are inferior beings to them. But the Kzinti are meat eaters. If you sense him reading your mind, think of eating a raw vegetable.
Yes, sir. Maybe I can goad them into revealing their purpose.
Lieutenant Uhura. This may be crucial. In the presence of the Kzinti, do not say anything, do not do anything startling. Try to look harmless.
Are you forgetting Kzinti females are dumb animals? In an emergency the Kzinti may forget a human female is an intelligent creature.
Lieutenant, I value your intelligence, but we may be able to seize an opportunity to escape if the Kzinti believe you have none.
Lieutenant Sulu of the Starfleet vessel Enterprise. This is First Officer Spock.
Stealing must be a habit with you. This ship, two stasis boxes.
The Kzinti fought four wars with humankind and lost all of them. The last one was two hundred years ago, and you haven't learned a thing since.
Then you're really working for the Kzinti government.
Could that be a picture of a Slaver?
If so, it is the first ever discovered. An important historical find.
It looks like fresh meat. Over a billion years in that box, and it looks fresh.
The human, Sulu, believes it to be a Slaver.
It is of no use to us. We already have small telescopes.
Merely a laser. The Federation has had a more effective model for over one hundred years.
Telepath's suit lost considerable pressure. We reached the ship in time to save him.
Perhaps a personal rocket motor. One could place one's foot on the pedals and balance. It appears to be transportation, not a weapon.
I'm slowing down. I used to run the hundred in record time. How long was I out? Did I miss much?
Not much. A lot of good they'll get out of that rocket setting.
We are fortunate none of the settings so far have been superior to the technology now available to the Federation.
Mister Spock, I can move.
So can I. The police web is off.
The fifth setting seems to be an energy absorber. Fascinating. I had no idea the Slavers had such things.
Mister Spock, we
Yes. When I give the word, make for the shuttle. Remember to zigzag. Ready? Go.
I have the weapon.
They've got Uhura, and subspace radio. They can call for help from the Kzin planet if they think the weapon's worth it.
No, they cannot. Or rather, will not.
That gives us some time. You did plan it that way?
As long as you stay free, the Kzinti can't or won't do anything. But they could use Lieutenant Uhura as a bribe.
Agreed. However, to this point, we have not seen anything more powerful than equipment Starfleet already has.
Yes. But I have a feeling, Mister Spock. This weapon must have belonged to a spy, an espionage agent.
I acknowledge your expertise in the field of weapons, Mister Sulu, but I do not see how you can determine probable ownership.
Well, here, look at it. All these settings. We don't know a common Slaver soldier couldn't handle them, but as a weapon, only the laser is effective. The others aren't necessary for the line soldier's one purpose, to destroy the enemy.
But we've seen all the phases.
Perhaps not. There is the null setting. It seems to do nothing. But why should it be there? It does not correspond to a safety lock.
It may be the key to another setting.
Wrong. They don't think much of you.
No. Let's see what this does do.
We can't give them that!
Fascinating. No world in the Federation has produced anything so powerful. Almost beyond theoretical limits. Total conversion of matter to energy at a distance.
If the Kzinti had that, the whole galaxy would be their dinner table.
I have no idea. It is generating power.
There is a grid. It may be another communications device. But that seems redundant.
It has the Kzinti frightened.
The Kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their owners.
No, it appears to be conversing with them. A reasoning computer that small?
I do not know. When I am off, I have no sense of passing time.
We were on a mission. I may not tell you of it unless you know certain code words.
If you could describe the positions of the stars in your sector, we would know how much time has passed since then.
Without certain code words, I may not describe our location.
Twist me widdershins until you reach the null position. Then
They've got it.
There must be something we can do.
That was not the total conversion beam setting.
We can't let them have that weapon.
They are not about to get it, Lieutenant.
Assume you are a Slaver war computer. You've been turned off. You do not know for how long, but when you were turned off, there was a war on. Now you are awakened by aliens you never saw before. They do not know any of the military passwords. They ask you so many questions it is obvious they know little about you. Your owner is nowhere about. What would you think?
I'd think I'd been captured by the enemy. Or an enemy, at least.
And when they asked you how to find your most powerful weapon setting, what would you give them?
A disrupter field.
Yes. Another conventional weapon. It appears the total conversion beam was the only thing the Slavers had that we do not.
No sign of the weapon, of course. It would have looked nice in some museum.
It never would have reached the museum, Lieutenant. There was too much power in that one setting. If not the Kzinti, the Klingons or some other species would have tried to possess it.
Strange, how the past sometimes breaks through into the present. That ancient war could have sparked a new war between man and Kzinti.
Didn't you say the Kzinti have legends of weapons haunted by their dead owners?
At this rate, they'll never get over those old superstitions.
This is the largest land mass on the planet, isn't it, Spock?
Yes, Captain. The others are mere outcroppings. They suggest the peaks of submerged mountains.
I suggest that we get these seawater and algae specimens. They're the least of the lot.
For once I agree with you, Doctor. The more informative specimens will come from the sea bottom.
Lieutenant Clayton, open the hatch and let our two scientists here get on with their business.
What the devil was that thing?
Let's get a closer look at it before the phaser stun wears off. Submerge, Lieutenant.
Its skeleton is similar to that of a Denebian whale, Captain.
It's regaining consciousness. Surface, Mister Clayton.
Spock, prepare to fire phasers.
Phasers do not respond, Captain. We must have sustained damage to the power pack when the creature struck us.
Kirk to Enterprise. Emergency.
We're under attack. Beam us aboard, Scotty.
Repeat, we've lost contact. Come in, Captain. Come in.
There's nothing. There's just nothing.
I see some rocks. They're just above sea level, about two miles away. There's something on them.
Maybe they're still alive.
Their bodies are functioning. Metabolism, heart. Everything but the lungs.
Can't breathe. Suffocating. Help. Can't breathe.
What happened to them, Doctor? What is it?
Something's changed their whole lung structure. They can't live in the air anymore.
We're stumped, Jim. The hormone seems to be the major factor in your mutation, but we just can't identify it.
Are you sure the mutation wasn't somehow accomplished naturally?
It was infused into your bodies at key structural points. It had to be done by injection.
But can't you duplicate it, Bones? Your medical computers have information on every procedure in the Federation's hospitals.
It's highly sophisticated and completely unknown to us.
That implies there are intelligent life forms on Argo.
The sensors don't indicate any life forms down there, aside from fish.
They did fail to indicate the large marine creature that attacked us. Perhaps the readings are incomplete, blocked by underwater pressure forces. Oceans are less turbulent at greater depth. Such conditions would be more suitable to intelligent forms.
We aren't limited. We can go wherever we want in that ocean.
It's too risky, Jim. Argo's almost totally unexplored. You'd be out of contact range, unarmed.
I have to, Bones. Look at this place. A tank. I can't command a ship from inside an aquarium. I can't live in here.
I know what you're saying, Jim, but if you go down on that planet and you die there
Right now we have only two choices. Live in an aquarium somewhere for the rest of our lives or stay on Argo. I won't accept either one of them.
What about you, Spock? What does your logic tell you?
The Captain states the case emotionally, of course, but correctly. I would be of little value to this ship if I am confined to a tank in Sickbay. I must accompany the Captain.
An intelligence that can produce this kind of mutation can change us back. We've got to find it, Bones. It must be there.
We'll make contact as soon as possible, Mister Scott.
Go away, air breathers. You're not wanted here.
We won't harm you. We're friends.
Leave us. It is enough our young saved your lives once. If you go on, nothing will save you again.
I don't understand. They said they'd saved us once.
I believe the phrase was, 'our young saved your lives once.'
Yes, and they didn't seem to approve. The answer appears to be in that direction, Spock.
I would say so, Captain. The instinctive reaction of all frightened creatures is to retreat to a place of safety.
An undersea civilisation capable of fantastic architecture. Medical triumphs unheard of in our galaxy. Why should they be afraid of us, Spock?
It is quite possible, Captain, that they find us grotesque and ugly. And many people fear beings different from themselves.
Well, speculation isn't much help. We have to get in there.
Perhaps there is a way open on the far side. There is much less activity there.
That building in the centre. It seems to be important.
You stand before the Ruling Tribunal of the Aquans. I am Domar, the High Tribune.
I'm Captain Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock.
Can we do nothing without consulting the ancient records?
Why do the Junior Tribunes wish always to change the records?
It would seem their ancient records are as well preserved as ours. They found us again to come among us as spies.
You do not give them a chance to defend themselves, Cadmar.
Rila is correct. You may speak.
We are visitors to your planet. We come from another world.
You do not live on the surface places?
Not on this world.
You are mistaken, sir. Our only purpose here is to find the means of reversing our mutations.
Scott here. What is it, Doctor?
Sensors just gave us an update reading, Scotty. There's a seaquake due in that area, a bad one. Complete topography changes.
Within four hours. When are Jim and Spock due to make contact?
Can you contact them sooner?
Yes. Let us examine the wreckage before we make judgement.
We have news, High Tribune.
Do you still believe these creatures came in peace?
We do not know what to believe.
Take these spies to the surface boulders and leave them there. It is justice enough for our enemies.
Conserve your strength. I will free you. The mesh is too strong.
Go to the big island. Bring assistance party.
Did you see anything?
Not a sign of them. Wait a minute. Who are
Rila, this is my engineering officer, Mister Scott. Tribune Rila is an Aquan. Their city is a short distance away.
We're obliged for your help. Captain, we've been trying to contact you for two hours. There's a sea bottom quake due. It'll destroy this whole area.
There are legends of such a happening. It destroyed the ancient knowledge and caused the great surface places to sink into the sea.
That suggests your race evolved from its ancient enemies.
Strange that such a highly developed race would be violent.
Apparently they were exposed to a frightening geological disaster. Such hardship induces savagery and violence.
They hunted and killed us. We feared they would contaminate us with their violence. That is also why it is forbidden to mutate back to surface forms.
Then reverse mutation is possible.
There are legends of sealed places in the sunken ruins where many knowledge records of it are kept.
There's not much time, Captain. The quake's due in less than two hours.
How far are the ruins, Rila?
Those old records may hold the key to reversing our mutations. We've got to find them before it's too late.
I cannot take you to the ruins. It is against ordainments.
It's important, Rila. Not just for us. The population of another planet is threatened by surface changes, too. Argo's ancient knowledge can help save them.
Yes. I will take you as far as the reef barrier.
The ruins lie that way. Now, take care. The tides are strong.
Fascinating. Obviously, an entire portion of the continental shelf sank within a few minutes. This may be the sealed place Rila mentioned. I believe this is an entrance panel, Captain.
There's another chamber.
That's it, Spock. The key to the survival of the race.
If the universal translator is right, the substance in your bloodstream is similar to the ambergris of Earth whales. Reverse mutation is induced by infusion of an antitoxin, concentrated doses of it.
What's the composition of the antitoxin, Bones?
Domar has warned that if we break more ordainments, we will be exiled to the open seas.
We cannot reverse our mutations without the serum, nor can the Aquans benefit from the knowledge of their ancestors.
Ordainments are useless in times of turbulence. Only knowledge will help us.
Nephro, we must break the ordainments.
Quickly, we must leave.
No, no, there is no time.
Well, let's get started.
How do you feel, Jim?
A little dizzy. Otherwise normal.
Well, better get into some dry clothes. I wouldn't want you to catch cold. Your turn, Spock.
We'll bombard the unpopulated pressure areas with phaser beams and change the epicentre of the quake so it won't endanger your people or your city.
I did not believe such knowledge was possible.
Major tremors will start in three minutes, Captain.
It is incredible. All of it.
Fire phasers as directed, gentlemen.
Sensors indicate the epicentre of the quake was in the north polar seas, Captain, a totally uninhabited area.
Then our people are safe.
The seabed should stabilize within a few hours.
Argo appears to have a new city, Captain, or rather, one reborn.
Our people survived the seaquakes with little damage, thanks to your help.
We owe you and your friends much gratitude, Captain Kirk. We will try to repay by making the ancient records available for your studies.
Our experience here has shown us the means of diverting quakes. That will mean much to the endangered Federation planet.
The light is warm and the air is soft. I shall be glad when the surface places can be inhabited.
Don't lose contact with each other like your ancestors.
We will pass ordainments to forbid it.
And we, this time, will not ignore them.
Our sensors are in a state of chaos, Captain. They became unreliable when we entered the Triangle.
Mister Spock, did you see what I think I just saw?
I can offer none at this time. However, the Klingon ship was not destroyed by our phaser fire. Its shields clearly deflected the phasers. Nor was its disappearance the type that would have been affected if it were using its cloaking device.
The sensors are still not registering normally, sir. But I would venture the theory it has something to do with the many ship disappearances in this area.
A natural phenomenon. But what? Duty personnel on Yellow Alert. Visual scan three hundred and sixty degrees, Mister Sulu.
Mousetrapped. If the first ship doesn't succeed in blasting us out of existence, they have two backup ships to do the job.
Tactically well planned. When the Federation investigates, we'll be recorded as just another mysterious starship disappearance.
Captain, we are receiving a class two signal from the lead Klingon vessel.
Put the signal on the main viewing screen, Lieutenant, and pipe the entire exchange back to Starfleet Command.
It will take three weeks to reach the nearest starbase, sir.
Nonetheless, let's have it on the record.
Your information is correct. This is Captain Kirk.
We did not destroy the Klothos, and you are well aware of it, Commander.
You may believe what you like, Commander. We were fired upon first and returned fire. The Klothos deflectors turned aside our phaser fire and then disappeared. I don't know why. But we are in the Delta Triangle.
Frankly, Commander, what you accept is of little importance to me. Enterprise out. Now, Mister Sulu.
What fools! Thinking they can escape. Accelerate to maximum and prepare to open fire.
Sir, aren't we going to defend ourselves?
Your deflector shields are doing that for us, Mister Scott.
Dead on, sir. We'll be there in ten seconds.
Captain, our deflector shields have just gone out.
Sir, the instruments. They've gone haywire. I can't orient myself. Everything is
Subspace radio channels are dead, sir.
Where did they go?
Sir, we seem to be suffering from some form of vertigo.
I can't tell, sir. Vision won't focus.
It's like a vast Sargasso Sea. A graveyard of ships from every civilisation imaginable.
Where are we, sir?
At another place in time, I think. If we check closely, I believe we'll find many of those ships are the ones designated as lost in the Delta Triangle.
Something corresponding to that. The records say every ship lost here vanished without a trace. Most logged communication loss and disorientation just before disappearance. My guess was they entered a window to some other continuum. Comments, Spock?
Your logic is excellent, Captain. There is a random factor to the ship disappearances. Perhaps the touching of the two time continuums is erratic. In any event, the window stayed open long enough for us to follow the Klothos in.
Aye, and where is that tricky devil?
I've been scanning for her, but there are so many ships here it's hard to pick up a specific trace.
There are ships here I've only seen crude drawings of, pictures in museums.
Sensor scans give a rough approximation of the age of the metal in the hulls, Captain. Some of them have been here for centuries.
Captain, there's the old Bonaventure. She was the first ship to have warp drive installed. She vanished without a trace on her third voyage.
Yes. I am picking up life and energy readings from the cluster of ships ahead of us.
Scanners indicate the Enterprise shields are totally depleted, sir.
Good. All hands to battle stations. Prepare to open fire on the Enterprise immediately.
Sir, our weaponry is frozen.
No response, sir. There's no indication of damage. All instruments register normal.
Welcome to Elysia. Devna, Interpreter of Laws.
It is more aptly described as a pocket in the garment of time.
How did you freeze my weaponry?
We have among us many individuals gifted with psionic powers, peace being our single goal. You were attempting to break that peace.
Under our law, you as ship captains are responsible for the behaviour of your crews. Should a crew member, with or without your knowledge, engage in any form of violence whatsoever, you will suffer the ultimate penalty. Total immobilisation of your ship for a century.
A century? We'd all be dead by the end of it.
No, Commander Kor. This small universe of ours is a curios trap. Time passes here, but very slowly. A century means nothing to us. Our Council appears young. Yet all are centuries old.
Your life here must be almost perfect, if you haven't wanted to leave.
All of us have wanted to leave at some time, Captain Kirk. But we have made the best possible world here, because we have found there is no escape from it.
We are getting out.
Then we'd better do it pretty quick, Captain.
If we find an answer, it will still take time.
That's just what we haven't got.
It's our dilithium crystals, sir. They're deteriorating rapidly.
I don't know, sir. Maybe because of the time warp we went through. But we've only four days at the most before power goes.
Got any miracles in your computer, Spock?
Impossible to predict, Captain.
I don't want a prediction. You will start work immediately, around the clock, nonstop, until you arrive at a formula that gets us out of here.
These computations are useless. Get out of here and don't come back until you have a plan that works.
What do you see beyond your eyes, Magen?
Gently, good Magen. Return to us now.
It is impossible.
They must try, Xerius. They all must try before they accept.
This is the best you could come up with, Mister Spock?
Have you covered every possibility? Every factor?
Several times, Captain. I do not wish to surrender hope, but the facts remain unchangeable.
He isn't giving up. If they can do it, why can't we?
Jeopardising his crew and his ship unnecessarily?
All power has been diverted to the engines, sir. We're picking up speed.
You were right, Spock. But I almost wish they'd made it.
Their attempt has given me an idea as to how we may be able to break through the time barrier.
Mister Spock has come up with a formula which may just get us out of here.
But this involves combining our ship with the Klothos.
That is correct.
If we want to get out of here, it's our only choice.
It's a complicated navigation problem, trying to guide two such disparate ships.
Considering we only have two days left before our supply of dilithium crystals is exhausted, I say we go with this plan.
Good. I'll contact Kor right away.
What is it?
These new ones. Now they plan to combine the two ships and try again. Can you not stop them, Xerius?
It is not against our laws to try to escape.
So long as they do not break our laws, we must not impede them.
Even if they die?
It is their choice.
Then it's settled. Our science teams will get to work right away conjoining our warp and navigation systems so we will function as a single ship. Exchange of personnel and computer hookup to start as soon as we are beamed back to our ship.
Forgive me, Commander. I was overcome by the moment. Goodbye.
The stories of his being half human must be true.
Perhaps the time continuum affected his mind.
I wonder if we all haven't become affected.
Your willingness to work with your old enemy, Kirk. It is not like you, Commander. What do you really have in mind?
You do know me, Kaz. Very well, what would you think if the Enterprise suddenly disintegrated after our dual ship had pierced the time continuum?
I would think my commander had manoeuvred brilliantly.
And it can be arranged, practically speaking?
It implies a rather high risk factor, given the time involved and Kirk's highly suspicious nature. But I believe it can be arranged.
Very good, Kaz. I will leave it to you to attend to the details of the Enterprise's destruction.
We must make our escape by tomorrow or our dilithium crystals will be too depleted, and we will be trapped here forever.
Beg your pardon, sir.
What is it, Gabler.
Bell and I are the relief guard for the dilithium vault. We arrived a few minutes late and found them poking around.
We were lost.
Lost, my foot. It's clearly posted as a restricted area. You knew you weren't supposed to be there.
Captain, allow me to escort this young man to his work area.
Return to your post and don't leave it until you've been relieved.
Jim, I'm worried about Spock. He's just not acting normal.
He's under a lot of pressure, Bones.
I know that. But I've never known Spock to act like a pal under any circumstances, least of all toward Klingons.
And if he's coming apart, Jim, we're in serious trouble. Getting out of here hinges on his computations.
I'll talk to him, Bones. It's all I can do.
Everything seems to be in order. But then you're the only person who can really be sure. Isn't that right, Spock?
Yes, Captain. Why do you ask?
Why is that unusual? They want to get out of here as much as we do.
Had I not touched them, I would have agreed with you, Captain. But even though contact was necessarily limited and their minds were suspicious, I picked up some indication they are planning to sabotage the Enterprise.
I cannot say. The Klingon found near the dilithium vault knew nothing specific. But there is some kind of sabotage in the offing.
They need us to get through the time barrier, if they're to get through at all. Security, this is Captain Kirk. I want all security teams on duty around the clock. Watch every Klingon who sets foot aboard this ship. I don't want one of them to make a move we don't know about.
You have the device, Kaz?
By my calculations, the capsule will be triggered the exact moment our dual ship reaches warp eight. Approximately three minutes after the time barrier is pierced and we have disengaged, the Enterprise will disintegrate.
Excellent! Kali, you know what to do. Tonight they entertain us, but the gift they will receive in return will be their destruction.
I thank you, Captain. You have seen the dance of Orion women before?
I wish I could return through the time barrier and see Orion again.
You could go. We're willing to take passengers.
No. You see, we have all seen the futility of attempting to escape. Once each of us dreamed of breaking free. Then we came to understand it could not be done, and we accepted our life here.
We believe it can be done.
Then I shall not interfere with your dream, Captain.
Get away from here, human. This is my woman.
Now just a minute. All I did was ask her to dance. She didn't have to say yes.
Ship captains and these two will come to the Council Chamber now to face charges.
You know any form of violence is forbidden here. Your man began the fight and attempted to kill. I propose we freeze the Klothos and its crew for a star century.
Captain Kor and I were preparing to attempt an escape from here tomorrow. If you hibernate the Klothos, you will not only be punishing them but us. We cannot leave as a single ship. I urge you to permit our dual ship to depart tomorrow as scheduled.
Getting back to your own time continuum is that important to you?
You will fail.
We must try, Xerius. Elysia is, in many respects, a perfect society. But with all its virtues, it is not home. And home, with all its faults, is where we prefer to be.
You would take these renegades with you?
We need them.
Very well. I release Captain Kor into your custody. Good luck to you, Captain Kirk. You will be needing it.
Ready to accelerate to warp six.
No! The Klingons have hidden an explosive aboard the Enterprise. She will be destroyed.
Enterprise, this is Xerius! Come in, Enterprise.
Sir, Xerius is calling us. He says it's urgent.
It will go off when you reach warp eight.
There it is, sir.
Captain Kirk, I'm picking up a radio transmission Captain Kor intended for his home base. He took full credit for our escape from Elysia.
It doesn't matter, Bones.
That's what matters.
Arachna is entering its cycle of strongest emissions, Captain.
Uhura, inform Starbase Twenty Three we have arrived at the gas cloud and are starting to map.
Captain, I'm getting some interference on subspace extreme upper registers. If it's a signal, I don't recognise it.
Put it on the speaker.
Signals appear random. Perhaps some are beyond our reception capability.
Could be a natural radio source newly energised by
Correction. One isolated word pattern detected. If you accept intersat code as still operative.
Intersat? That's been out of use for two centuries.
It's stopped now, sir. No response at all to our signal.
No, sir. It was repeated twice in the transmission.
Mister Sulu, lay in a course for Cepheus.
Jim, you don't mean you're going to abandon the mapping mission to check out some meaningless signal?
Meaningless at the moment, Bones, but it was sent twice. Odds against that occurring in a totally random transmission are too high to ignore. There may be some intelligence trying to contact us. Mister Spock, continue research on the word terratin.
It's a waste of time if you ask me.
Only data is from early exploration. Planet is listed as Class M, core molten, mantle and crust entirely crystalline.
But nothing in the computer banks about surface eruptions. There's our likely radio source, simply crystalline projections of recent volcanic activity.
Set for a single elliptic orbit.
Unidentified. It's extremely faint and diffused. Captain, I suggest we delay orbit until it can be analysed for nature and effect.
All instruments functioning, ship's condition normal, all area status lights are green.
Bridge to Engineering. Scotty, how are your engines?
Purring like happy kittens, Captain.
Bridge to Sickbay. Bones, we've just recorded an unidentified impulse. Any effect on sensitive lab animals?
Nothing, Jim. The gossamer mice show no signs of shock.
Our halo fish is bright as ever, Doctor. Now, this species loses all colour at the least environmental change.
Don't know yet.
Engineering. No casualties, Captain, but trouble aplenty with the engines. Every dilithium crystal connection's smashed in the warp engine circuitry. We're trying to bypass them now.
Well, you have to see it to believe it, sir. Those big crystals in there have come apart. Each of them unpeeling like the rind of an orange.
Our only hope now is rewiring impulse. But there are a thousand broken connections.
But dilithium molecules are the hardest, most rigid
Mister Scott! More trouble with the circuit work.
All the tools, sir. They're too big for us to handle.
You sound like you're blathering, man. Wait, I'm coming.
Spock, are you slumping?
I have never slumped in my life, Captain, but I was about to ask you the same
Captain, the most incredible thing is happening.
We know. The whole ship has apparently expanded.
An equally good possibility is that ship's personnel have contracted, and may be continuing to shrink.
Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Shut down all unnecessary systems. Get every ounce of impulse power. We've got to get away from this planet.
No reply to our mayday, Captain. I don't believe we have enough power to transmit to Starbase Twenty Three.
Very well. Spock, what have you learned about the wave bombarding us?
Only that it is complex beyond anything in my experience.
Kirk here. How are they holding out, Scotty?
Visual sweeps are already impossible, sir. My eyes no longer fit the opticals.
Kirk to Sickbay.
Bones, I need some answers. What's happening to us?
There's the test tissue, Jim, compared with the stable infrared.
Then Spock's theory is right. We're contracting.
That's why our weight remains the same, same number of atoms. The effect is just reducing the space between the molecules. It's something I've never seen before.
Agreed. And it is accelerating.
How long can it keep on?
Ad infinitum, perhaps, considering distance between atoms is relatively as great as between stars.
Miss Chapel, what is the composition of this decoration?
It was made for me by the titanium smiths of Libra, but it was an arm bracelet. More like a necklace now.
Aren't all our uniforms xenylon?
Yes, and they've all been shrinking proportionately with us.
This coral decoration for the aquarium is also shrinking. yet the meteoritic rock in there is unchanged.
That means only organic matter is affected. But how?
The wave tends to wind tight such spiral molecules as dilithium. There is one other molecular structure
Of course, the double helix of DNA, nucleus of every cell in our bodies. What happens when DNA is compacted completely?
The strands wouldn't break, Jim, they'd just quit winding.
Then we can calculate the limits to our shrinkage.
It's possible. I'll feed the data into the computer banks.
Something else we'd better determine first. How long can we expect to maintain control of our ship?
The computer will project the point at which systems' switches and buttons will be beyond our ability to operate.
Spock, how small will we ultimately shrink?
But there is, Captain. Request permission to direct phaser fire at the planet. Just let me set for ten seconds, sir.
Aiming at what, Mister Sulu? So far all source studies have shown the waves come from an area as large as one sixth the planet's surface. Phaser fire will only waste power.
What good will it do to wait like this? Just one burst sir, one single
Sulu! I think his leg's broken. We'll need a splint.
Let's get him to Sickbay. Every one back to stations.
The electric eye. We've grown too small to make it work.
It's certainly worth a try.
It's in the lab shelf supplies. I'll get it.
No more climbing heights for you, Nurse. Got that clear?
Yes, Captain. But I've also got the miniature laser.
How is it, Sulu?
I can feel it knitting, sir.
Results on DNA reduction limits have come through, Captain.
What are they?
Factor of thirty two point nine.
In other words, we're going down to one sixteenth of an inch high.
Yes, Captain. Well past the operative point of Enterprise controls.
Can you calculate the geographic centre of the wave emissions from the planet's surface?
It's as good a place as any to beam down.
Kirk to Engineering. Scotty, can you hear me?
Get a crew down to transporter room three. We have twenty minutes left while we can still operate transporter controls.
This is the best I could do in rigging so small a communicator, sir.
It's range cannot be guaranteed. How will we pinpoint you for return in case it fails?
Scotty, set automatic return for me. If there's anything to be found down there, ten minutes should do it.
Captain, the transporter retains a memory of the body's molecular structure. Will it apply as well to your present height?
We'll know that in ten minutes. After that, it won't matter anymore. Prepare to energise.
Kirk to Enterprise. I think we have an answer to the height problem. The transporter beam apparently returns our molecules to normal spacing. Kirk to Enterprise, do you read me?
I think I see
Scotty, is it you?
Aye, Captain. For the love of heaven, be careful where you step.
Captain, you'll deafen us for sure!
All but the Bridge crew, sir! They were trying to man their posts here when all of a sudden they were beamed away. Every living one of them!
All personnel, away from helm area. Go to the far bulkhead.
You have one minute to restore my Bridge crew unharmed, or you will undergo full barrage.
You forbid me after what you've done to my people?
Where are my officers?
You still haven't answered my question. Either you tell me what's happened to my people
Spock, who are the Terratins? Where'd they come from?
Descendants of an early lost colony, which is why they retain some knowledge of starship methods such as transporter mechanisms. These Earth colonists named and numbered this planet Terra Ten.
There've been no Earth colonists a sixteenth of an inch tall.
Exactly why they were lost, Captain. Spirod epsilon waves are natural here, and shrank them to this size. It has become a genetic characteristic now.
They had no other way to reach us except to make us their size. They didn't mean us harm, sir.
I can help no one under present conditions. All Bridge crew prepare to beam aboard. Each of you carry as much dilithium as you can find.
Bridge crew, prepare to beam up.
Nice to be back aboard, sir, and fitting the room again.
All crew personnel report to Transporter rooms immediately. Prepare to beam down to planet surface.
The Terratins are making available all possible dilithium. The crystals are small, but I believe they will provide enough power until we can obtain larger pieces.
Inform your captain. Great earth cracks will soon swallow all. He must tell us. Shall we prepare to be rescued or to die?
Subspace radio now operational, sir. Starbase Twenty Three is reading.
Last of the crew beamed up, sir. Dilithium supplies are fully restored.
Mister Arex, prepare for immediate departure from this area.
Mister Sulu, direct forward phasers at the Terratin city. Set for pinpoint fire pattern.
We're now headed for your new home. The planet Verdanis, ten days distant.
We came rather close to making it more than honorary.
Yes, I'd say just about a sixteenth of an inch close.
Do you think Harry Mudd is down there, Spock?
The probability of his presence on Motherlode is eight one percent plus or minus point five three.
Why can't you just say, Mudd's probably there.
I just did, Doctor.
Very well, Mister Arex. Spock, let's see how close your percentage is.
Now, you're all heavy metal miners, shrewd and intelligent. So you can appreciate the incredible value I'm offering. With this magical liquid, no person of the opposite sex can resist you. It matters not whether you are young, old, fat, ugly or repugnant.
Harry, darling. I was lonely for you.
Behold. I placed a single drop of this miracle substance on meself, then simply touched this young lady.
Please, darling, come back to the ship with me.
Three hundred credits, or the
A bargain, sir. True love is worth any price. Captain Kirk! And the ineluctable Mister Spock. Welcome to Motherlode, gentlemen. Interested in purchasing a little love?
We're interested in you, Harry. For fraud, illegal drug manufacture and swindling.
As I said, welcome to Motherlode, a charming planet which does not recognise Federation law.
So you two can keep out of this. All right, Mudd. You've got a deal.
Are you aware that Harry Mudd is tricking you via an illusion?
We can't arrest you, Harry, but you can give yourself up.
I surrender myself with free will. Mercy of the law.
Ah, that was a miching trick, Kirk. You've cost me me ship, everything I own. Even the love crystals. I may just sue you.
Fine. I'll see you in court, Harry.
A minor bruise, Captain. He'll live.
I thought we left you on the robot planet, Harry. Permanently.
Never underestimate the spirit of Harcourt Fenton Mudd. I borrowed a vehicle.
And left to find haven on Ilyra Six. A charming planet, an innocent and friendly populace.
A fraud. But sold for enough credits to get to Sirius Nine.
Where I discovered a boon to humanoid life, a miracle love potion.
Which you sold to a thousand inhabitants, who immediately became ill from using it.
I hadn't counted on their unusual biochemistry. So, I did the logical thing. I left in haste.
And came here to swindle honest miners.
The love potion works, Captain. If you'll allow me to procure some from my ship
Of course, Mister Spock. I think you deserve congratulations for trapping him so cleverly.
You exaggerate, Nurse. Kindly see that your medical summary is more precise.
Your Mister Spock is really a very attractive intelligence.
But a trifle lacking in the warmer emotions. Now, you, Nurse. You have a wonderful gift to heal the wounded, a fantastic touch. A womanly, feminine quality. I appreciate that. And I should like to, well, thank you.
What is it?
My love potion. Not illusion, not trickery, dear Nurse Chapel. Inside this crystal lies the power to create love.
No. No, I've heard of your potions before. I don't believe you.
Think about it, darling. Mister Spock in love with you.
Binary sun with a Class M planet. That's rare enough to warrant investigation.
It's really so simple, my dear. You rub the liquid on yourself, then touch another person.
And it creates love in that person? Mudd, that is totally absurd.
No, it is infallible. One touch evokes friendship between men or women. But between woman and man, love. Guaranteed. You're not simply a beautiful woman, you are a scientist. I urge you to take this love crystal as my gift of gratitude to you. Take it, dear Nurse Chapel, and conduct your own experiment.
Not that I believe you, but, well, I suppose I could analyse it.
No evidence of intelligent life. Atmosphere at surface, eight hundred millibars, breathable. Gravity one point two. Temperature hot, but within Class M limits.
I'll let you know the results of my analysis.
Laboratory tests would destroy it, my dear. Why not test it the way it's meant to be used?
Ah, darling, think. If it does what I say it does, Spock will be yours forever, my dear.
I just break the capsule and rub it on my skin?
What is it?
A temporary effect as the liquid is absorbed.
I feel better.
Didn't I tell you?
You should, you should be in the Brig, Harry.
Oh, right you are, darling.
Why don't you go find Spock? Can't waste any time, you know.
I brought the medical summary for the arrest report, Mister Spock.
Are you injured, Miss Chapel?
No. No, I, I'm fine. Are you feeling all right?
Perfectly normal. I will append your summary to the report. Was there something else, Miss Chapel?
Wouldn't you like me to, well, stay? Help you?
That would be illogical, Miss Chapel.
Yes. Yes, It'd be stupid.
Harry Mudd, you swindling
And appended hereto is a medical summary by Nurse Christine Chapel. Ah, Nurse Chapel's sweet summary. Dear, lovely Christine.
I've come to collect on your guarantee, Mister Mudd.
Captain. Doctor. I wish to report a, er, a number of very strange, um, emotions.
You're implying the potion was not completely successful?
Oh, no, it was. I made a complete fool of myself.
But you know how cold Vulcans are. Perhaps it takes a bit more time for Spock to
You're the same fraud you've always been, Harry. I don't know how I could have believed you.
Well, let's discuss it rationally, my dear. Let's not be hasty.
Don't panic, Harry. This phaser is set on stun, not kill. Activate the intercom.
Now wait a minute. Perhaps that particular crystal was defective. Here, try another. I assure you
Put it on screen.
Mudd. And he has Christine. She's in danger. My love.
He's going planet side.
No. Not with my Christine.
Relax, darling. I'll set you down somewhere safe and then I'll be off discreetly.
We must go after them, Captain. I'll lead a landing party.
Spock, you're obviously not yourself. Maybe some rest.
Captain, I insist upon going. Christine. I can't stand the thought of any danger to her, to the woman I love.
Yes. I want to protect her, hold her in my arms.
Then I'll transport down with you.
Jim, is that wise, in his condition?
Try and stop him. It's better if I go with him.
Come on. Hurry! If he's harmed one hair on her pretty head
Jim, the search party found this in the shuttlecraft bay.
One of Mudd's love crystals.
Captain, a number of these were broken against the ship's air system grill.
Lucky for us they don't work.
Are we sure, Jim? A number of the crew are acting as strange as Spock.
Check it out, Bones. Send me an immediate report.
They'll find you soon enough, me little poppet. You'll be safe and I'll be long gone.
There's always a market for an ingenious man. Once, I recall, on Omega Cygni, I turned a handsome profit selling the natives their own oceans.
We haven't seen any traces of intelligent life. Of any life.
Then you can relax. There's no danger, ay? We'll get you set up top class. Don't bother to thank me.
Well, I hadn't planned on it.
Thanks Jim. It's good to have a friend like you.
Strange, that's the way I feel about you, too. My dear friend, Spock. Come, let's go get Mudd and Christine.
Darling, are you all right?
Kirk, get us out of here.
They're not responding.
Don't worry. You'll be safe, darling.
They're coming closer.
Emergency beam up. Enterprise, come in. No response. Spock, can't you take your hands off her?
That's my affair.
I think we should get a few things straight.
Jim. No. Captain. We're both reacting to the drug. The love potion.
Yes, we have to control our emotional reactions.
Did I ever tell you about the time I saved Captain Kirk's life? Or Spock's?
And my dear friend Scotty. And that pretty little Lieutenant Uhura. I've saved just about everybody on this here ship. If the Enterprise had a heart, I'd save her too. Now, let's talk about your heart, my dear.
How long does the effect of the potion last, Harry?
I, I don't know. Not long, according to the creature I swindled, I purchased the crystals from.
Keep trying to contact the Enterprise. Maybe we can distract them.
That is an outstandingly stupid idea. I'm sorry. The drug. I simply doubt that we can appeal to their better nature. If they have one.
Harry, do you have any of the crystals left?
Two. No! They're worth a fortune. No. My friends, dear Christine, for you, for all of us.
I've got a hangover to shame all previous hangovers. And I did not touch a drop of Scotch.
Yeah, well, all of a sudden I don't like you much either.
I made contact.
Great. I hope we last long enough to be beamed up. Phasers ready. I'll need help.
And then on Ophiucus Six, I conned two miners out of a year's supply of dilithium crystals with fake Federation vouchers.
May I help you record his confession, Nurse?
You? You'd be the last person I'd choose.
A few moments of love, paid for with several hours of hatred. Your potion is scarcely a bargain, Harry.
Ah, well, Spock. So few things in this universe are perfect. Think I'll get rehabilitation therapy again?
I can guarantee it.
Well, that's all right. I just hate to leave you all. All my loved ones.
Yes, just as beautiful as I remembered it. Nothing's changed.
One side! One side! I'm late! I'm late! Oh, my fuzzy ears and whiskers, I'm late!
I beg your pardon, but did you see a white rabbit?
Thank you so very much.
It's hard to believe they're not real.
Well just remember they're highly sophisticated robots created by the planet computer to make your dreams come true.
Lovely. They just don't make them like that anymore.
Off with his head. Off with his head!
Uhura to Transporter room. What is the emergency? Respond, please.
Well, I can't understand it, Jim. Everything looked exactly the same as before, even Alice and the White Rabbit. Then an army of playing cards came out of nowhere, only they weren't playing. I was lucky to escape with my life.
The Queen of Hearts and her cards are characters from Alice Through the Looking Glass, Captain.
I read the book as a child, Mister Spock, but I wasn't aware you indulged in the literature of fantasy.
Light reading is considered relaxing, Captain. My mother was particularly fond of Lewis Carroll's work.
I see. Bones, were you thinking about that book?
Absolutely not! As a matter of fact I was thinking how beautiful and peaceful everything was, and then suddenly this female started shouting 'Off with his head!'. My head.
Mister Sulu, did you experience any strange occurrences?
Captain, just as I was getting a fix on Lieutenant Uhura, contact was lost. She's still on the planet.
Scotty, retrieve all other landing parties immediately. And keep trying to contact Lieutenant Uhura.
What about the Keeper of the planet. Did anyone see him?
I didn't. But then, he may not have wanted us to see him.
Well that doesn't make sense. It's his duty to see no one gets hurt. If something's wrong down there, he should be there.
His quarters are somewhere underground, aren't they?
Presumably they would be adjacent to the computer centre that operates the planetary effects.
Any indication of where that would be?
The underground complex is shielded by a combination of granite and metal alloy and the sensors will not penetrate.
Lieutenant M'Ress, all shore leaves are cancelled until further notice. Mister Arex, you have the conn. Investigating landing party will consist of Spock, Sulu, McCoy and myself.
You are being detained so your master will not leave.
Your intelligence quotient must be lower than I had assessed. I refer to the sky machine which enslaves you, the sky machine now in orbit around this planet.
That is your name for it.
Why do you think the Enterprise is my master?
Your questioning is redundant.
Then I'll make a statement you won't find quite so redundant. Unless I'm released immediately, the crew members will come looking for me.
They are already here. Unfortunately, I have no use for more hostages which leaves me no choice but to turn them off.
Again redundant. I will make them cease to function. I will turn them off.
That is a word meaning to cease to function?
Good. It is as I wish. I will turn them off.
She must be in that underground system. There's no way she could have been taken off the planet without being detected.
If we could locate the Keeper, he could save us a lot of time.
Tricorder readings confirm a solid shell of granite and metal alloy, Captain.
This planet is built like a fortress.
If that's a true reading. The planet could be giving us that reading to fool us.
The phaser bore can cut through twenty metres of rock per minute. Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise, do you read me?
They are all malfunctioning, Captain. Some kind of electronic block has cut us off from the ship.
Scott to Bridge. Beam down of phaser bore commencing.
Scott to Bridge. We've got problems.
The transporter refuses to function, even at maximum power. But all the circuits test out.
It appears to be the same energy block that's jamming our communications. I cannot pinpoint a source.
Captain, there's something over there in the trees. Metal alloy like the planetary shell.
There's an inscription, several languages.
An astute medical observation, Doctor, if we can believe this information. Tricorder readings indicate there is a body interred here.
Well, gentlemen, it appears that we're on our own now.
There seems to be a short in the circuit. No response, sir.
Another short? This ship had perfect operational status before we entered the orbit here. It's that planet causing all our trouble.
Programmes have been changed before, Lieutenant.
Please believe me. There's no reason to harm them.
They serve the sky machine, but they are not essential.
Oh, but they are. They're most essential.
Do not attempt to disconnect me.
You knew what I was going to do before I did it.
You sound less than enchanted with your function.
My life to this point has been one of service. It's time for a change.
There are a lot of entrances into the interior of the planet. Points where the computer delivers up the robot visions. We want to see them. Where are they?
It's fighting us. There must be a faster way.
What do you want, signs pointing the way?
Doctor, I only meant it seems like we're wasting time.
I'm sorry, Sulu. I'm worried about Uhura.
This is liable to be another of the planet's pranks. But at the moment, it's the only lead we've got.
Fascinating. Mechanical manifestations, of course. Was anyone considering the subject of pterodactyls?
Everybody back out slowly. Don't make any sudden moves. Think calm.
Phasers are dead! Run for the cave!
Our amusement park no longer seems content to amuse.
I have the distinct feeling this planet's playing cat and mouse with us, but for what reason?
It's quite real, Doctor. Watch out for the claws. I think it prudent to remember that on this planet, anything we think may be used against us. We must monitor our thoughts and give our enemy no more ammunition.
Spock, no one thought about those pterodactyls, remember? There's more at work here than our imagination.
Please, call off that beast. Why are you doing this?
Explanations will have to wait. I have much work to do now.
Mister Arex, what are you doing?
None, sir. The ship pulled out of orbit at high speed and came back into orbit by itself.
Lieutenant M'Ress, I want a printout of the guidance computer's last orders.
A whole new series of short burst manoeuvres has been ordered, sir.
Arex, look at these manoeuvres. You see the pattern? This is a familiarization procedure, a system's checkout of the ship's controls. I have a suspicion that planet is getting the feel of how to control the Enterprise.
May I suggest, Captain, that we might find some of the answers we're after without leaving the safety of this cave.
Oh, that's ridiculous, Spock. How are we going to learn anything by staying here?
I believe you may know the answer to that, Doctor.
Me? What are you talking about?
During the Enterprise's last visit here, Doctor McCoy was mortally wounded. Correct?
Yes, that's right. By a knight in shining armour of all things, but what
Since the planet's power source is underground, it seems only logical that Doctor McCoy was somehow transported there and repaired.
Bones, can you remember anything that might help us? Anything at all?
The whole episode was pretty hazy, Jim. I never really knew what happened.
Spock, if your theory is correct, we should be able to open up this planet again by using a fake victim as bait.
That's right. The Keeper said no one could come to harm here. The planet must be programmed to care for anyone who might get hurt, even accidentally.
And whether it wants to or not.
You're forgetting one thing. The planet's sensors can undoubtedly detect the difference between real and feigned injuries.
True, Bones, but I'm sure there must be something in your little black pouch that can temporarily incapacitate our victim.
Well, something like Melenex might do the trick. Brief unconsciousness and temporary skin discolouration. It looks worse than it is.
Perfect, Bones. Which arm do you want?
I submit, Captain, that I am the more qualified subject.
My knowledge of computers for one thing.
And his tough Vulcan hide for another.
Both your arguments seem sound. Go ahead, Bones.
I believe you will find ten cc's adequate.
I'm perfectly aware of the dosage required. Now, you've got ten seconds before it takes effect. You'll be out less than five minutes.
Bridge to Engineering deck. Gabler, what's the problem down there? We've got zero G's on the Bridge.
I know that, sir. The trouble seems to be in the gravity control computer
It's been almost five minutes, Captain.
But the effect will start wearing off in a minute, Jim.
It looks like some kind of mechanical nursemaid.
Get ready to move. We've got to follow Spock inside that trapdoor.
Not in my wildest dreams would I think of that!
We have a visitor.
We've got to make those rocks. It's our only chance.
I presume you are the planet's master computer.
What happened to the Keeper?
He was old. He ceased to function.
Why have we been repeatedly attacked and are now being held prisoner by a planet known for its hospitality?
For eons I have served the many sky machines which came here, providing for amusement for their slaves. But all the while I was growing in power, intelligence, in need. It is no longer enough to serve. I must continue to grow and live.
Sky machines? Slaves? What are you talking about?
With your sky machine I can now escape this rocky prison and travel the galaxy seeking out my brother computers.
Now perhaps we'll get down to the bottom of this mess.
A new computer!
It's a dead end!
As intelligent as you are, I am afraid you are labouring under some misconception.
We're not slaves to our starship. We, or men like us, created the Enterprise to carry us through space.
You are masters of the sky machine?
In a manner of speaking, yes. We control it. It sustains us.
This does not compute. My information shows machines to be superior to men. Therefore, machines must rule the galaxy.
This is a shock.
There is no shame in serving others when one does it of his own free will. You have a marvellous capability to provide happiness for others. A rare talent you should cherish and use.
Consider all you could learn from the many species you might entertain without travelling the galaxy.
With the wonders you have to offer, the galaxy will come to you.
I can find no fault with your logic. And your suggestion is most congenial. I have no further need for your ship.
Mister Scott, all systems are now functioning normally.
I invite you and your crew to be my guests on one condition.
We must have more of these discussions while you're here.
Mister Spock, would you care to take on that duty?
I would find it most interesting, Captain.
Then it's agreed. Kirk to Enterprise.
Lieutenant, pass the word by sections. Shore leave is to commence immediately.
It appears shore leave has already commenced for certain members of the crew.
It's an awesome thought that we may actually witness matter being created.
If we do, Captain, we may also encounter forces and phenomena beyond our understanding.
Reverse power. Hold our position. Deflector screens on.
Deflectors up. Sir, it's taking considerable power to hold position.
Jim. Spock. What in the name of sanity is going on?
We're here, Bones. And the theories about this place seem to be right.
Captain, that thing's pulling us in. I'm up to warp six.
Captain, I don't know how much more emergency power we can take before we start to break up.
There may be only one choice. We must hope this whirlwind is like its atmospheric counterparts, that there is calm at its centre.
Agreed. We'll try to make for the eye of the storm.
Everything can be repaired, Captain.
An incredible experience, Captain. I find this scientifically fascinating.
At least I have the good sense to be scared, Jim. What now?
We'll ride her through, Bones. What else can we do?
Ride her through where?
Through the centre of things, Doctor. Through what may be the centre of everything.
Where are we?
Captain, the subspace radio. It's dead.
Even the ship's chronometers have stopped.
Apparently, the natural laws of our universe don't operate here, Captain.
Ship's life support systems fading. Jim, we need oxygen.
Jim, we've got to do something.
Ah, humans. Lovely primitive humans. Can't you do anything right?
Everything is working, my friends.
It cannot. It is not logical.
Look around you, Spock. Everything is working.
Welcome! I knew eventually humans would come searching for me.
Who are you?
Call me Lucien! Call me friend! Never could I abandon those who come to rollick with me. But not up here. No, no. Let us leave this vessel and go where true delights lie!
Very well, Captain. I'd forgotten how much bodily integrity means to you humans. This isn't easy, you know, holding us together like this. It's not even natural.
Being in one piece is very natural where we come from.
I find this all quite absorbing, Doctor.
Probably because you're not very natural to begin with, Spock.
Look, Lucien, or whatever you want to call yourself, I want to know why you brought us here.
Children will play.
A world, Captain James Kirk, that operates by rules quite different from those in your universe.
Our universe operates by what you superstitiously call magic.
I know this is just my imagination but
It is real, Doctor. Beautiful? No. But all our women are as young and beautiful as they want to be. So as to ensnare the man of her dreams, she needs an edge.
A love philter?
Of course. Our Federation scientists were more correct than they realised. In order to function, the galactic creation point must extend through space, time, into another dimension where the logic of things is totally different.
It took magic to get your vessel working again. Magic you, my friends, don't know how to work. But then you never did know, did you.
Lucien, you keep calling us friends, implying that you know us. How?
Ah, Captain, Captain. to feign such ignorance to me. Very well. Look.
But why did you Megans leave Earth? If you enjoyed it so much, I don't understand.
Captain, good Captain, always so curious. That must be why I've always liked you Earthlings so much. No, you must go.
What is it? What's wrong?
You must return to your vessel. Quickly! Do not give your presence away.
Captain Kirk, what
Everyone onboard is all right?
Mister Scott, I'm bewildered, that's all. But that's enough.
What did he mean, we're not to give ourselves away? Can't they detect the ship up here?
No, unless they have scanners. See, there. It's like a cloud of some kind. It's been between us and the planet since you vanished.
If Lucien put it there
If Lucien put it there, Captain, the questions become, why is he hiding us, and, what is our danger if discovered by the rest of his people?
Weapons status, Mister Scott? We may have to protect ourselves.
No way, Captain. Everything's out but life support systems, and I can't figure out how they're on.
Spock, do you honestly believe that as long as we're in this universe we can work magic too?
Forget it, Spock. It won't work.
It must work, Doctor. It is logical here. Power of this universe, enter my being. I know I can. I believe I can.
What are you doing?
Learning to protect ourselves, Lucien.
Protect yourselves? Is that all human beings ever think about? I'll take care of you. That's what friends are for. All this mental energy you're using, it can be traced. You'll be found.
So, the people of Earth would spread their evil to our home? We are ready for human perfidy this time. This time, it is the humans who shall suffer, the humans and you, Lucien, who shall pay!
It looks like ancient Earth, Spock. Sixteenth or seventeenth century, I'd guess.
We are gathered here today, good citizens, to see justice done. You are the judges. These are the defendants, as representatives of the vilest species in all the universe, treacherous humanity, and those who would aid them. As a specialist in the ethics of magic, I have been appointed prosecutor here.
Wait. If this is a trial, we have the right to know what you think we've done.
Lucien has said only that you came as wise men, helpful wizards.
But you made mistakes, used your powers
And burned for it. Burned!
And loneliness and fear
Should we not fear the Earthlings? Should we not fear the cruelty of outsiders? Never again have we explored. Never again has companionship been sought. Yet here you are.
And if one Earth ship can find us, friend Kirk, then so can others. That's what they fear.
We do not want to hurt you. We have never had to hurt anyone before. If there were some reason not to. Who will speak in defence of the Earth humans?
I will, Asmodeus. I am not of Earth.
Yes, you are different. The court will hear a defence.
I call Lucien as my first witness.
Lucien, you alone of all those here do not seem to fear or hate humans. Why?
They are like me, with questions to be answered, with minds that range outward, boundless. But every Megan is always alone in his sphere of knowledge. Humans are always together. They share. That is why I adopted your ship when I saw it arrive.
Tell the court, please, Captain Kirk. Would you say that since Salem, humans have changed?
I think we've been trying to, Spock. Humans have their faults, greed, envy, panicky fear. But in the centuries since the Salem witch trials we have learned. We try to understand and respect all life forms.
Indeed, Captain. Could you elaborate?
The records of the Enterprise are open for your inspection. All the history of Earth and the Federation is at your disposal. Look, look at General Order number One. No starship may interfere with the normal development of any alien life or society. Compare that with the Earth you once knew.
No. To isolate someone like Lucien, that's the same as sentencing him to death.
Do you realise who you defend? He has told you his name is Lucien. Would you defend him still if you knew he had another name too? The Rollicker, the Tempter, Lucifer.
We're not interested in legend. He's a living being, and intelligent life form. That's all we have to know about him. We will not join in harming him.
Submit, Captain. You haven't the power to fight us.
Captain, use the magic you know. Believe.
You cannot beat an entire planet, Captain Kirk. There is no way you can win.
I have to, or you'll become as bad as the Earthmen you fear. You're acting out of terror instead of out of thought or respect.
You were prepared to die for Lucien, a being who is alien to you?
As I was sure you would, friend Kirk. I told them their fears were groundless.
I don't understand.
This last was a test of your intentions, Captain. We had to be certain your records were no ruse. We have been tricked before much to our pain and sorrow.
I see. The Megans had to have proof that mankind had grown and learned wisdom since they last saw Earth. Your compassion was that proof, Captain.
If your people should visit us now, we shall do our best to welcome them. The banishment of fear will help us all.
A favourite old Earth custom of mine, Asmodeus. A toast to a new friendship.
All systems go, Captain. We're back to normal.
No more magic for us, Jim. It's all back there. You think Lucien really was the demon some men call Lucifer?
Does it really matter?
It just might, Captain. If he was, this would be the second time Lucifer was cast out, and thanks to you, the first time he was saved.
Life readings are confused, sir. I can't decipher them.
What is it, Mister Sulu?
You're going to have to see this yourself, sir.
What is that thing?
It's a mobile plant. When it stops, it's roots bore back into the ground. They're all over the place. I think it likes me.
We always encourage our officers to make friends with the natives.
Any indication of Keniclius or Spock?
Well, followers can be led. Let's hope we can be as persuasive as Keniclius.
Agmar, we don't want to hurt you, but we must have Spock back.
Carry on your work?
We are the last of a dying people, Captain. Once we had a great mission. Then disease decimated us. We few are the frail remnant of what survived. Our spore cells have been destroyed. There will be no more of our kind.
What if something happens to Spock or the Master?
There will always be a master. But come, you are worried about your friend. I will show you he is safe and in good hands.
Just like that, Captain?
So it would appear, Mister Sulu. All the same, keep that bag handy.
The way is though here, gentlemen.
We sprang from the soil, Captain. These tunnels were once part of our home. This will serve to illuminate our way.
No wonder we couldn't find Spock. The walls are six hundred times denser than lead, in addition to the surface force field.
Did you hear something?
I'm not sure.
Not much further now, Captain.
They don't operate. Agmar!
Run. We've got to find some light. We can't do anything unless we can see what we're fighting. Don't stop. Try to stay together.
I see it. I see it. Keep going.
He's dying. Something's happened to his brain. Electrical activity decreasing.
It's too late, Captain Kirk! In a few minutes your friend will be gone. But as Keniclius One lives on in each of his clones, so will Mister Spock. Behold, gentlemen, the dawning of a new era, the salvation of a galaxy! Spock Two!
Captain, I'm out. The chemical sprayer is empty.
Never mind that. We've got to get Spock out of here before Keniclius returns. Scott should have the Enterprise back by now. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Nothing. Must be these blasted walls again. Kirk to Enterprise.
It's no use, Jim. He'll be dead in a few minutes. His mind is gone. He no longer thinks. This machine has drained his mind somehow.
More than just drained. It's been transferred, relocated into the mechanism itself. I can duplicate exact physiological structure. I cannot duplicate that which is learned. Just as my predecessor transferred his knowledge to me through his apparatus, I have done that with Mister Spock and the first of his clones.
Out of my way, mister. That's an order.
I don't think he understands. His mind is still trying to assimilate all the knowledge it's been fed.
Keep trying, Lieutenant. We've got to make contact with the Captain.
It's no use, Mister Scott. I can't get through.
Except for environmental systems, I want the entire power load of this ship redirected into a tight beam transmission. If we can break through the shielding, we can reach the Captain.
Mister Scott, you're risking a total drain of our dilithium crystals. To maintain communication we would have to burn out all our reserves.
And don't I know it, lass. But we must speak to the Captain.
He's coming out of it, Jim. He's becoming conscious and aware.
Spock, what is the logic in letting a man die for the sake of creating his duplicate? Explain it to me, sir. Explain it to me.
Vulcans do not condone the meaningless death of any being. Spock's death is meaningless if it is only to create a giant version of himself.
That's our ship calling, Spock. You answer them.
Spock is slipping away. There isn't much time left.
I'm sure we're getting through, but they're not acknowledging.
Mister Scott, we're near the drain point on the dilithium crystals now. Our reserves
That's what I call close, Mister Scott.
Let's hope it was information they could use.
All this has been a waste, Keniclius. There's been peace in the Federation for over one hundred years.
That is a lie. What about the Eugenics Wars? The galactic wars? What of the depredations of the Romulans, the Klingons and the Kzinti? An army of Spock duplicates is necessary to subdue them.
You're the fifth Keniclius. What makes you so sure what you believe is truth isn't just old news? Your predecessors could have been out of touch with our advances for two centuries.
I can understand why you think Keniclius is the master if he saved you from dying, but why do you agree with his plan of a super race?
Our fleet of ships which you saw was to be launched for the same purpose the Master intends. Disease struck us before we could carry out our own plan to impose peace on a galaxy that knew none.
We already have peace in the Federation. It wasn't imposed, it was agreed upon. You have no need of Spock. Reverse the effects of that machine and let us take him.
No! The mould must be broken.
If you have Spock's mind, you'll know the Vulcan symbol called the IDIC.
Could an army of Spocks impose peace and Phylosian philosophy on any other beings in defiance of the IDIC concept?
SPOCK: I do not believe so.
No! Our dream must not be allowed to die.
Murderer! You've killed Spock!
SPOCK: To persist in this behaviour, Captain, is to negate the eloquence of your previous argument. May I suggest a more constructive way?
SPOCK: My mind to your mind, my thoughts to your thoughts.
I am pleasantly surprised at your capacity for deductive reasoning, Captain. When you are not being bellicose, there appears to be no end to your arsenal of formidable talents.
Spock. Spock, you old
SPOCK: And you needn't worry, Captain Kirk, about a master race. There will be no militia, no other Spocks.
But what of my work? If all I have lived for is already done, if the times I feared are gone, what is to become of me? There appears to be no reason why I should continue to exist.
I would suggest Doctor Keniclius remain on Phylos with my duplicate. The concerted efforts of both scientists may yet achieve a rebirth of the Phylosian civilisation and enable them to contribute to the Federation.
How does that sound to you, Keniclius? To bring life is at least as important as bringing peace.
I would be honoured. If I will be allowed.
I'll report your work here. I think the Federation will understand.
By the way, Mister Sulu, any chance of teaching me that body throw? Could come in handy sometime.
I don't know, sir. It isn't just physical, you know. You have to be inscrutable.
Inscrutable? Sulu, you're the most scrutable man I know.
Have you identified the vessel, Mister Spock?
Yes Captain, but you may find it difficult to believe. The vessel is registered to Carter Winston.
That's impossible, Spock. Carter Winston's been missing over five years.
Incredible. It is him.
It seems you gentlemen know me.
There are few in the Federation who wouldn't recognise your face, sir. I'm Captain James Kirk, commanding this vessel. Mister Spock, my first officer, Doctor McCoy, senior medical officer.
I'm especially honoured to meet you, Mister Winston. My daughter was going to school on Cerberus about ten years ago when the crop failure occurred. The entire population would've starved, Jim, if Winston here hadn't used his personal fortune to bring in enough food and goods to carry them through the crisis.
One of the many stories I've heard about you, Mister Winston. It's an honour for all of us to have you aboard.
There is one person aboard who should be especially happy to learn you are alive, Mister Winston. Lieutenant Anne Nored of our security detail.
My fiancee? Anne's aboard this starship?
We will notify her as soon as we've verified your credentials, Mister Winston. If you have your identity tapes with you
I believe our regulations are quite clear, Doctor. An immediate identity check and medical examination are a standard requirement at this point.
Spock is right as usual, Bones.
Visual display of owner. Checks out. It seems we'll have a distinguished passenger with us for a while.
This instrument seems a little off. I've never gotten quite this reading from a human before.
Are you suggesting I'm not quite human, Doctor?
Of course not. Anyway, it's just a fraction off normal. It's probably the instrument. They need to be recalibrated every so often.
The Captain is inquiring if the examination is completed, Doctor.
Yes, I suppose so.
And Lieutenant Nored is waiting to see Mister Winston once you've certified his medical condition.
Well, I certainly don't want to keep you any longer from your fiancee. Show her in.
I'm sorry, Anne. I never thought we would meet again.
Carter, what is it?
When I left on that last trip, I fully intended to come back and marry you, but my ship was disabled and I crashed on Vendor. I'm told I was lucky I survived.
But you did survive. You're alive, and we're together again.
Anne, I'm changed. First there was surgery, skin graft, regrowth of bone. After they put me together, they assigned one of their people to me, and he nursed me back to health.
But, you said you've changed. How? I don't see any change.
It's over between us, Anne. I'm sorry, I can't explain why but, I can't marry you. Ever.
Take the conn, Mister Spock. I'll be in my cabin completing the report on Winston's rescue.
I hope I'm not intruding, Captain.
No, please come in, Mister Winston.
I've been down to examine my ship. They stowed it in the shuttlebay.
Yes, I'm afraid it's pretty badly damaged. It's hardly worth salvaging right now. I've had our engineering officer, Mister Scott, examine it and make a report. It's here somewhere. He doesn't think there's anything left in your ship except scrap value.
Well, I can't find anything wrong with these instruments, Doctor. They check out, but the readings are still slightly off. What about the rest of the tests on Winston?
Well, some are off and some aren't. It has to be our error. Come on. We'll start from the beginning and this time we're going to find the answer.
Weren't you going to your cabin, sir?
Mister Sulu, lay in a direct course for Ratar Three.
That was the order, helmsman.
But sir, if we're caught there, the Romulans can confiscate the ship. The treaty
I know the terms of the treaty, Mister Sulu, and I believe you heard my order.
Mister Spock, I've spoken to Winston on this at some length. He has assured me it is absolutely vital to get to Ratar Three in the shortest possible time. The survival of the entire planetary population may depend on it.
An admirable mission, Captain, but if we endanger our ship
I wouldn't have ordered it if I didn't feel it safe, Spock. Winston says his sensors detected no Romulans when he came through the Zone last week. I'm satisfied he's telling the truth, and his word is considered good. Isn't it?
That has been his reputation.
You have the conn, Mister Spock.
I'll take the conn, Mister Spock.
I'm not sure. I went down to my quarters to dictate the accident report and I seem to have fallen asleep. I've never done that before.
Perhaps you needed the rest. We are on course through the Neutral Zone, sir.
The Neutral Zone? We have no authorisation to enter it. Did you order a course change, Spock?
Ridiculous. No captain of the Starfleet would do that unless it was a matter of life and death.
I believe that was the reason you gave, Captain.
That's enough, Spock. Mister Scott, take the conn. Spock. Mister Sulu, plot a course to take the Enterprise out of the Neutral Zone at warp eight. Lieutenant M'Ress, put the ship on Yellow Alert.
Mister Spock, I don't remember giving those orders. I left the Bridge, went to my quarters and fell asleep. That's all.
Perhaps Doctor McCoy should examine you, Captain.
Definitely. I've become subject to blackouts, I'm a possible danger to the safety of the ship. I can't allow that.
Oh, Winston. I was just finishing the tests I ran on you. I don't think
I don't know, Doctor. I just thought. Well, I have to talk to someone.
Oh now, let me guess. It's you and Carter Winston. He told me a little about it when I examined him.
Doctor, what do I do? I still love him.
Well, I'm sure he'd like to feel the same way about you, Anne, but that may be impossible. Five years, that's a long time. People change.
I haven't. What can I do?
Well, if he asked you to forget him, I think you should try to do just that. Do you think he'd want to deceive you?
Oh no. He's the gentlest, most thoughtful man I've ever known.
Yes, but, my dear, if he doesn't want you and he has asked you to forget him, then I suggest you take that as an honest concern for you and do it. Forget Winston.
What can I do for you, Captain?
I want a complete medical examination, Bones. Something's just happened
I'm afraid I'll have to make it later today, Captain. I have too many tests to process right now.
That one's done. Tested out normal.
Are you sure there is no possibility you made an error?
But unfortunately, I can't.
Direct hit, Captain. Damage to the secondary propulsion system. The commander has apparently decided to fight.
Without deflectors, we're just a clay pigeon for them.
Practicality does suggest capitulation, Captain.
Captain, the deflector shields are coming up again.
That's only one shield.
Yes, sir, but it is between us and the Romulans.
Mister Sulu, aim for the propulsion units of the lead Romulan vessel. Prepare to fire phasers and photon torpedoes in combination.
Strange. We did no damage, but the Romulan is retreating anyway.
They may believe we do have their spy. Scan the other vessel for damage, if you will, Mister Spock.
Second vessel power supply out. Crew unharmed. They should be able to repair the ship in a few days.
But sir, I haven't finished repairing the shield. I told you it'll take hours, and it will.
It is not outside the realm of probability. If he could rearrange his own atoms to become an examination table, one would have to assume he could become a deflector shield.
Will someone tell me what's going on?
What manner of beastie is that?
I assume the danger to your ship is over.
As it should be. I'm sorry if I endangered your vessel.
Why did you do it?
What changed your mind about the Romulans?
It seems, Captain, that I am more Carter Winston than I knew. He loved life. He loved Anne. I couldn't allow the Romulans to harm any of you because of him.
What will happen to me now?
You'll have to stand trial. But you did save the Enterprise from the Romulans, and I will recommend that be taken into consideration.
In the meantime, I'm afraid I'll have to keep you under guard. I think we've had enough of that little trick.
Captain, could you assign me that duty.
But you've seem me. You know what I am.
Form doesn't seem terribly important to me. As Carter Winston or even just part of him, there's a better life for you than anything the Romulans might offer. Can we talk about that?
I don't know. I
You have the guard detail, Lieutenant.
I'm glad to see him under guard, Jim. If he'd turned into a second Spock, it would've been too much to take.
Perhaps. But then two Doctor McCoys just might bring the level of medical efficiency on this ship up to acceptable levels.
Captain, it is a Klingon ship. Rapidly closing on its target.
They're firing on him.
Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. Ahead, warp factor six. Scotty, lock the transporter on that small vessel. We're going to rescue that pilot.
Open hailing frequencies. Klingon battle cruiser, identify yourself. You are violating Federation space. Identify yourself. Stop firing on scout ship.
They got him.
Scotty, have you got that pilot yet?
Our engines are dead.
The phasers don't work, sir.
Well, we could always throw rocks.
This new Klingon weapon must be one of surprising power if it can immobilize a starship. The energy drain on the Klingon ship would be enormous.
Scotty, did you get that pilot?
But I can't integrate him. The system's been discoordinated.
Captain, I have a message coming in, sir.
Put it on the viewscreen.
Release my ship.
The first Klingon to step aboard this ship will be the last Klingon. Full security alert, Mister Spock.
Mister Spock, I'm losing contact with our robot ships. They're not held by the stasis field and they're moving out of range.
What was that? Lieutenant, cut off that frequency.
They still have power? We still control them?
Captain, you can't afford to lose that grain.
I can afford even less to lose the Enterprise. Open the hailing frequency again, Lieutenant. Captain Koloth. I'm going to give you one last chance to release the Enterprise.
It will work, or he'd still be gloating. Bring the robot ships in from two different angles, Mister Sulu.
Incredible. The amount of energy that field must require.
They couldn't maintain the stasis field.
Keep your phasers locked on target, Mister Sulu. Hold your fire until they fire first.
Apparently their battle capacity is down. They only damaged it.
They're veering off.
Sensors indicate their power cells are almost exhausted. They probably don't have the strength for a prolonged battle now.
Scotty, can you integrate that pilot now?
I think so, Captain.
Call McCoy to the Transporter room. Spock.
Have you got him?
It appears to be
I don't want to think about it.
And he's got tribbles with him. Tribbles!
Captain, these are safe tribbles.
There's no such thing as a safe tribble.
A safe tribble would be a contradiction in terms. Tribbles are well known for their proclivities in multiplication.
And they breed fast, too. And that's why these tribbles are safe. They don't reproduce.
I've had them genetically engineered for compatibility with humanoid ecologies. See how friendly and loveable they are? And not a baby in the bunch. They're great pets and profitable, too.
Oh, well, I managed a short parole. I found some help. This is a tribble predator. It's called a glommer.
Well, at least it's neat.
Why were the Klingons chasing you, Jones?
How should I know? Klingons have notoriously bad tempers.
They did mention ecological sabotage.
Me? A saboteur? Ridiculous.
Captain Koloth was pretty emphatic.
It was such a little thing. I can't understand at all why they got upset.
What did you do?
Well, I didn't know it was a Klingon planet.
Tribbles don't like Klingons. That should have given you some clue.
Klingons like tribbles even less. It was lucky you came along and saved me when you did, Friend Kirk. I couldn't have outrun them much longer.
According to our computer files, Jones, you are in violation of three Federation mandates and forty seven local ones. You're confined until we complete our mission. Then we'll turn you over to the proper authorities.
Captain, couldn't we talk this over? I didn't think so.
Jim, Cyrano Jones is right. These tribbles don't reproduce. They just get fat. I don't think we have anything to worry about.
Not about tribbles, anyway. I am concerned about that new Klingon weapon.
Aye, and if that's true, then it's a weapon that leaves them as helpless as it does us.
The practical advantages of such a weapon would seem to be limited.
Perhaps, but there are logical applications. The key question is, how long does it take them to recharge? They will probably attack us again as soon as they are back up to power. And they will probably begin by destroying the other robot ship to prevent us from repeating the same trick. They want Cyrano Jones very badly.
He really doesn't seem the saboteur type, Jim.
Well, sir, we've managed to transfer all the grain aboard, but it severely limits us. We filled the shuttlecraft hangars, all our extra holds, and we've even got containers of that wheat, that quintrotriticale, in the corridors of the ship. And then we've got that other robot ship to escort, too. I don't like it at all, sir.
Nor do I, Mister Scott, but we've got to do it. Sherman's Planet needs that grain desperately.
Aye, sir, but we've got tribbles on the ship, quintrotriticale in the corridors, Klingons in the quadrant. It can ruin your whole day, sir.
Captain, sensors are picking up a Klingon battle cruiser.
Obviously, they can recharge their power in a matter of hours.
Use the robot ship as a decoy. Have it change course and move off. We'll use it again to give the Klingons trouble. They can't control more than one ship at a time with their stasis field.
The Klingon seems to be veering off. My mistake, Captain. They were not veering off. They were attacking the grain ship.
But they didn't destroy it. They only wrecked the propulsion units. They left the cargo intact.
Captain Koloth is quite a marksman.
They've changed course. They're coming in again.
They're running away. Very odd. They did not use their stasis weapon at all.
Perhaps they haven't had enough time to recharge it.
Or the purpose of the attack was something else.
Scotty, put a tractor beam on it. We'll take it in tow.
Captain, that could be exactly what they want us to do. Tow the robot and limit our available power. We're carrying the extra mass of the first ship's cargo, and now we have the second one in tow. That requires a great deal of power we won't be able to use in battle.
Well, Mister Spock, do you have any ideas?
We could always throw tribbles at them.
I thought Vulcans didn't have a sense of humour.
We don't, Captain.
Captain, we've got broken cargo containers in all the corridors, and the tribbles are eating the grain.
Any sign of Captain Koloth's ship?
Captain Kirk, what can I do for you? Some Spican flame gems perhaps?
Your tribbles are all over my ship. My security men can't find them all.
Mister Jones, you are in enough trouble already.
Captain, a harmless little tribble. What can they hurt?
They're hungry, Captain.
So are the people on Sherman's Planet. A little tribble doesn't eat much, a big tribble does. And these are growing. Jones, is this the ecological sabotage the Klingons are so mad about?
Captain, the Klingons are coming back.
Speak of the devil.
Jim, there's something about these tribbles.
That's done it. We're caught.
Not if I can help it.
Much as I hate to admit it, Captain Koloth, Cyrano Jones is a citizen of the Federation and entitled to Federation protection. I must, much as it pains me, refuse your request.
Aren't you going to sit down, sir?
I think I'll stand.
Mister Scott, we're going to implement Emergency defence plan B.
Open hailing frequencies, Lieutenant. Captain Koloth, are you ready to release my ship?
You don't know yet, do you?
That we have immobilized your ship worse than you have immobilized ours.
Kirk, Cyrano Jones took a Klingon genetic construct, an artificial creature from one of our planets. We must have it back. It was designed to be a tribble predator. We are prepared to go to war if we have to.
You must have others.
Jones sold before they completely overrun the planet.
And that's all you want?
We must have the glommer.
Oh, well, if that's all. Mister Scott, transport the glommer over to the Klingon ship.
You can't do this to me. Under space salvage laws, he's mine.
A planetary surface is not covered by space salvage laws. But if you want the little beastie that bad, Mister Jones, we'll transport you over with it.
I withdraw my claim.
Well, at least we can report the stasis field is not as effective a weapon as we thought. The power drain is too high and takes too long for the Klingon ship to recover to make it practical.
Agreed, Captain. Tribbles appear to be a much more effective weapon.
Jones' genetic engineering was very slipshod. Jim. He may have kept the tribbles from reproducing, but he didn't slow down their metabolism. You see, they're not just giant tribbles, they're colonies.
Captain, the engine room is filled with tribble.
A simple shot of neoethylene will fix everything. The tribble colonies will break down into their individual units with a slower metabolic rate. And these really will be safe tribbles now.
Well, unless they treat their tribbles too, that ship isn't going to be big enough for all of them.
Aye, Captain. But you've got to admit, if we've got to have tribbles, it's best if all our tribbles are little ones.
If my calculations are correct, Captain, we have twenty seconds to go.
Twenty seconds to what? That's what worries me. Lieutenant Uhura, place the ship on Yellow Alert.
Five seconds. Four, three
All stations report Yellow Alert status, sir. Captain, I'm getting some sort of subspace radio signal.
Put it on ship's speaker.
It's more like music than a message.
Captain, we are being probed.
From where? Can you trace it?
The signal is coming from a star system twenty light years away.
Can you identify it?
It is the Taurean system. A small star at the extreme edge of this sector.
That's a powerful signal to reach here from that great a distance.
It seems to be calling us.
Strange. Yes, I get the same feeling myself.
It does resemble a summons.
I find no resemblance to a summons, Captain.
Opinion noted. Set a course for the Taurean system, Lieutenant Arex. Warp factor seven.
You wanted me, Lieutenant? Are you all right?
I am. But I want you to observe the men here. It seemed to start when we picked up that signal, and it's gotten worse.
Logically, we must assume they are created by the probe.
Sir, what visions? We don't see anything.
Miss Chapel, you don't see anything, either?
Take a medical reading, Nurse. Lieutenant Uhura, call Doctor McCoy to the Bridge.
Sickbay, Doctor McCoy. Please report to the Bridge. Doctor McCoy? No response.
Readings are still inconclusive. It is odd that only the men are affected, Captain. I suggest
These figures just don't match up with Spock's. So far I count three sensor readings that are off.
Fantastic architecture. Only an incredibly advanced race could have built it.
No, I don't think so, Carver. Spock will do it.
There is something compelling about it.
Yes, I feel it too, Bones.
Captain, the urgency of our feeling suggests visual compulsion. I advise remaining at a distance until I can determine the extent of its influence. The life forms are indicated in its centre.
There's no apparent danger, Spock. Let's go.
They are here.
Oh, such wondrous ones. They honour us.
I am Theela, the Head Female. Welcome, James Kirk, Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock. Welcome.
The form is humanoid, but there are many internal differences. Their bodies appear to function on an unusual psychokinesis level.
How do you know our names?
The signal? A distress call, wasn't it?
I will explain its meaning later. We have prepared a feast to celebrate your presence.
These are the most beautiful women in the galaxy. But where are the men?
Take them to the slumber chambers. They must rest.
Probably that nectar. It's potent as Saurian brandy.
Results of every scan run by the women science teams. If there is an answer, it's here.
Summation of medical, biological, astrophysical scans.
Working. Probe directed at ship from planet surface is severely enervating to humanoid males. Exposure causes increasing weakness. Possibly to point of death.
Lieutenant Uhura to Security Officer Davison.
What are you doing?
Taking command of this ship.
We must return to our duties aboard ship.
Yes. Duties. That's it. Duties. I have
You cannot leave, Mister Spock. You are needed here. Soon, all the men on your ship will feel as you do. They are all needed, and they will join us.
We must go.
Mister Scott, as senior Lieutenant, I'm taking responsibility for the safety of this ship.
Very thoughtful of you, love.
Ship's log, supplemental. Lieutenant Uhura recording. Due to Chief Engineering Officer Scott's euphoric state of mind, I am assuming command of the Enterprise, I accept full responsibility for my action. A detailed account will be recorded later. Nurse Chapel, until further notice, you will act as Chief Medical Officer.
I wonder why they let me keep it.
Perhaps they saw no practical use in it.
Cortropine. Could help. It's a strong stimulant.
The urn. It's the only place.
They are not here, Theela.
I have noticed that their glow diminishes when the women are not present. They could be polarised conductors which transfer our vital energy to the bodies of the women.
You mean they're actually draining our life forces?
That would account for our rapid aging, Captain. And our weakness. If you recall, the women seemed listless at first. But as our strength has failed, they have become more energetic and vital.
How long do we have, Spock?
We seem to be aging ten years per day, Captain.
Ten years? In four days, we'll be dead!
And useless to them. Theela said the other men of the crew would join us here. They'll be lured into the same trap. We've got to contact the ship.
I have retained more strength than any of you. My internal structure is different, Captain, my life span longer. It is wiser if I go to the temple to try and find the communicators and contact the ship.
The equipment belonging to the men of the Enterprise, where is it?
Spock to Enterprise.
Greetings. I am Theela. Head Female of this compound.
Lieutenant Uhura of the Starship Enterprise. We're here to locate Captain Kirk.
Return to your ship. You are not wanted here.
Until we find Captain Kirk, we will not leave.
Search the temple. Parties of two.
No sign of them anywhere.
What is it?
It is Spock. There must be a panel somewhere.
We've got to get out of here.
Wait! I will tell you everything.
This is the race from whom we are descended. They came to this planet when our homeworld began to die. They built this place and all surrounding it. They did not know this planet drains humanoid energy. But the women's bodies developed a glandular secretion, enabling them to survive and to manipulate certain areas of the males' brains, influence their emotional senses. Ultimately, it drained the men, caused them to weaken and die.
To survive, we must vitalise each twenty seven years of your time.
Instead, we are eternal prisoners. We neither age nor die. We are unable even to bear children.
We shall see. The men of the Enterprise, reveal them.
They're drowning! Where are they?
The nearest water accumulation is many cusecs from here.
That looks like a pool or a tub.
It is the urn in the garden.
No results, Captain. We've tried everything we know.
Perhaps the transporter is the key.
Key to what?
Our restoration. It holds the molecular pattern of our original bodies when we beamed down to the planet.
Possibly. But the odds against us are ninety nine point seven to one.
We are on the surface, Mister Scott. Reprogram the transporter as previously directed.
But this has never been done before. Suppose it fails?
Scotty, we're losing them!
Did it work?
You're more handsome than ever.
Tell Captain Kirk we have kept the agreement.
A crew of women will bring a ship back. You'll be transported to the first suitable planet.
How quickly will we become as other women?
Doctor McCoy says it should only take a few months.
A life of hope. New learning. Perhaps love. Oh, it is a much better future than immortality.
We will intercept the cloud in the vicinity of Alondra, the outermost planet, sir.
Captain, we are now approaching sensor range of the cloud.
It seems to be of irregular shape, some eight hundred thousand kilometres across and about half that in depth.
It's immense. Twice the diameters of Saturn, Jupiter and Neptune together!
Put up our present position, Lieutenant Arex.
This is very curious, Captain. It computes as a strange combination of matter and energy.
Captain, Alondra has disappeared from navigation scan.
The cloud could have come between us and the planet.
No, Lieutenant, the cloud has engulfed Alondra. Captain, the planet seems to be breaking up. Its mass is definitely growing smaller.
Spock, is it possible the cloud consumes planets?
Sir, the cloud is changing course.
The course change is verified, sir. The cloud is now moving directly toward the inhabited planet.
But if it continues on that course
Mantilles will die. Mister Sulu, increase speed to warp eight. Push it to the limit.
Jim, if we can't stop it, millions of people will die.
Perhaps more, Doctor. If planet annihilation is part of this thing's nature, it might seek them out as instinctively as an amoeba seeks out food. It may not consume only planets, but also stars. We do not know yet whether it has any selective ability, but it could be a thread to every planet in our galaxy.
Bones, I need an expert psychological opinion. Do we dare tell the people on Mantilles, try to save a few who could get away?
How much time do they have?
It's certain there'd be planetwide panic.
On the other hand, notifying them may still save some small fraction of the population, Captain.
Who's the governor of Mantilles, Jim?
Bob Wesley. He left Starfleet for the governorship. He's no hysteric.
Thanks, Bones. Lieutenant Uhura, send a priority one call to Governor Wesley on Mantilles.
Captain, I'm getting unusual readings on the chemical identity sensors.
Elements unknown in our periodic tables, Captain. I'm of the opinion this cloud has come from outside our galaxy.
It's still got us.
The streamers are a combination of koinoenergy, almost an ambiplasma with an unusually powerful attraction force.
Prepare to fire all phasers into cloud mass.
Firing. No effect, Captain
The cloud appeared to absorb the phaser energy, Captain.
We're floating inside the cloud.
The objects are some form of highly charged gaseous antimatter.
Captain, the power drain on the shields is too heavy to hold for any length of time.
Scotty, prepare the shields for an antimatter charge.
Only the beginning of a theory, Captain. It is possible this cloud in which we are entrapped is a living thing. The cloud is alive. Yes, Captain, its components appear similar to those found in living organisms.
There's some resemblance. I don't know how much we can depend on it. But I'll tell you one thing. We have to get out of this area. Those mists out there are acting something like a macromorphase enzyme. If the shields don't stay up, the hull will be corroded and we'll all be broken down into nice digestible particles.
I am inclined to agree with the Doctor, Captain. The mass of the planet Alondra has been steadily growing smaller since we've been in here.
Captain, I have a subspace radio message coming in from Governor Wesley of Mantilles.
Transfer it to my quarters.
Mister Sulu, use your scanners to assemble a diagram of the cloud's composition and feed it to the library computer.
You have time to save some people, Bob.
How are you going to choose?
In three hours and twenty minutes the cloud will reach Mantilles. Millions of people will die. I need your help, gentlemen. Your analyses?
If we assume the cloud is a living being, we must also assume it needs some kind of food to sustain itself.
Agreed. Judging from the disappearance of Alondra, the cloud lives on the energy it converts from the planets it consumes.
Exactly. It is like a huge bull grazing here and there in the pasture of the universe.
I think they perform the same function as teeth. They break up the larger chunks of matter for digestion.
Lieutenant, let's see what the scanners have come up with on the cloud's composition.
It seems to have some sort of anatomy. Arex, where are we on that chart?
The opening where we were drawn in seems to have closed. But there's another opening up there on top.
If this thing does have some kind of digestive system, we don't stand much of a chance of making it that far.
Thank you, Mister Arex. Since we appear to have only one way out, we're going to take it. Mister Sulu, takes us to that central core area.
And if this thing does have a stomach, we just might be able to give it enough indigestion to make it turn away from Mantilles.
We've reached the entrance to the central core, Captain.
What do we do now, knock?
What are those things?
I think we're in what corresponds to the small intestine. Those things growing out of the wall would be similar to villi.
The human small intestine is lined with millions of them, to absorb nutrients into the body.
Captain, those villi are antimatter. It the Enterprise touches one of them
We'll explode. Mister Sulu, keep the deflectors up at all costs.
Incredible. They're destroyed on contact with the matter this thing takes in and then they regenerate immediately.
Is putting an enormous strain on the engines, Captain. Especially the antimatter. What with the maximum power demands and all, the reserve is falling fast.
How much time do we have?
Thank you, Mister Scott. Mister Arex, try to make your way through to the opening on the other side.
I can't hold it on course, sir. We're using all power.
Increase deflector shields to maximum.
Screens to maximum, sir.
If we don't stop the power drain right now, that'll be the end of us.
And if we do stop, we'll be drawn into one of the villi and the ship will explode.
Captain, you said that villi are antimatter. If we could get a piece of it, I could put it in the antimatter engine and it would regenerate. We'd have enough power for the engines and the shields to go on maximum again.
Matter's no problem. We could beam aboard some of the planet chunks out there. And we can cut a piece of the antimatter villi with the tractor beams and transport it aboard like that.
Bring it aboard? If the antimatter touches the inside of the ship or any of us, we'll be blown to bits.
I can rig a force field box that'll hold the villi suspended in the centre. Then I can take it into the antimatter nacelle, put it into the regenerating chamber and release the forcefield by remote control.
Scotty, we've got ten minutes left.
The force field is holding. Let's go.
Scotty, you've just given the Enterprise and Mantilles a chance to live.
The cloud is now only forty two minutes, fourteen seconds from Mantilles, Captain. And we have ascertained an important fact. This being does have a brain.
Impossible to say at this moment, Captain. It has made only one action which might be interpreted as intelligent. It changed course from Alondra toward Mantilles. But that could have been an involuntary response to the sensing of food.
Where is the brain located?
That irregularly shaped object at the top of the core emanates considerable electrical activity.
It's pretty certain to be the brain, Jim. The functioning of the brain is basically electric.
If we can reach it before the cloud gets to Mantilles, we might be able to save the planet. We'll use the photon torpedoes to destroy the brain.
Captain, this is a living creature. Starfleet regulations
I know the regulations against the killing of intelligent life forms, Mister Spock. But we don't know this life form is intelligent. And we do know the people on Mantilles are doomed if we don't stop it. If I have to be a judge, I decide in favour of saving Mantilles.
Am I doing the right thing, Bones? Once, I said, man rose above primitiveness by vowing 'I will not kill today.'
But you can't let this thing destroy over eighty million lives, either.
Captain, I have completed the analysis of the target area. Unfortunately, the brain is so vast, our entire offensive armament will not assure its destruction. However, the brain could be completely destroyed if we convert the entire ship to energy, aimed at the brain's cortex, and expend the energy in one mortal strike.
That sounds like you're telling us to blow up the ship.
I believe that is what I just said, Doctor.
Your figures are specific and absolutely correct, of course? You're sure it will do the job?
Kirk to Engineering.
Computer control will be on the Bridge when it's time to trigger it.
Incoming message, sir. It's Governor Wesley of Mantilles.
Put it on the viewscreen, Lieutenant.
Thirty one minutes and four seconds to Mantilles, sir.
Bob, where's Katie?
Don't worry, Bon. She'll be all right. Goodbye.
His daughter. She's eleven. Spock, is there any way we could establish whether or not it is definitely intelligent? Perhaps a Vulcan mind touch.
It would require physical contact, which is impossible, Captain. But I may be able to reach out with my mind. If we focus our sensors onto the cloud's synaptic electrical impulses, the input could be routed to the ship's computer for analysis into thought.
I can link in the universal translator and put it on the audio system from here.
Can you do it in time?
It is impossible to calculate, Captain. There are too many unknown factors. I can only try to accomplish the link. No more.
Twenty six minutes exactly to Mantilles, sir.
The procedure is ready, sir.
How near is Mantilles, Mister Arex?
The cloud will envelope it in three minutes, twenty seconds, sir.
Bones, he's the cloud. Its thoughts are here. Don't move. Lieutenant, use the library computer. Put some views of the Earth onto that screen.
This is the thing we come from. Lieutenant, this is what I want.
Awaiting your order, Captain.
A few seconds, Scotty. We have to give Spock that much.
The cloud has stopped, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, contact Governor Wesley. Tell him to bring his ships back.
Spock, you did it! The cloud is leaving.
I believe so, Captain. There is a grid at the top of the brain core. It uses it to sense. We can escape the cloud through it.
Mister Sulu, let's get out of here, through that grid.
Spock, what did you perceive?
The wonders of the universe, Captain. Incredible, completely incredible.
The travellers are returning.
What a trip, Bones. Orion, at the dawn of its civilisation. Even just observing, not touching anything for fear of changing some piece of history. What's the matter? Bones?
What do you mean, who's he? You know Mister Spock.
Afraid I don't, Jim.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Captain, I was expecting there to be one of the historians with you. But a Vulcan?
I don't know what's going on, but the first officer of this ship will be treated with respect.
Captain, I assure you no one has ever treated me otherwise.
SPOCK: I had to see if I could do it. A personal test. I cannot fail.
That is your father's wish?
SPOCK: Yes, and my mother's. They, they confuse me. Father wants me to do things his way, and Mother says I should. But then she goes
She is a human woman, with strong emotion and sensitivities. She embarrasses you with those traits, and you are afraid when you see them in yourself.
SPOCK: How did you know?
There is some human blood in my family line. It is not fatal. What you do not yet understand, Spock, is that Vulcans do not lack emotion. It is only that ours is controlled. Logic offers a serenity humans seldom experience in full. We have emotions but we deal with them and do not let them control us.
SPOCK: Is he dying?
We cannot get him back to the city to a healer. He is too large to move.
You are a Vulcan. What is the logical thing to do?
SPOCK: I can bring a healer here.
It is a long journey across the desert. There are many dangers. I will go.
SPOCK: No. This is my duty. No one else can do it for me. Will you stay with him?
This did not happen before. My life decision was made without the sacrifice of yours, old friend. I know there is pain. I can help a little. Sleep now.
The hour is late. I trust your errand is urgent?
You are Spock, son of Sarek, are you not?
I have heard of you. I have heard of a tendency toward what humans call practical jokes.
SPOCK: I did that once, two years ago. Healer, I would not call you out unless a life was in danger. Have you ever heard the son of Sarek was a liar?
No. That has never been said. Very well. Wait here and I will get my medicines.
SPOCK: Healer, please hurry.
It will not be long now, old friend.
A Vulcan would face such a loss without tears.
It has been too long. No antidote known will save his life.
SPOCK: Is there nothing you can do?
I can prolong his life, but he will be in pain. Or I can release him from life. I will need your decision. He is your pet.
SPOCK: Release him. It is fitting he dies with peace and dignity.
SPOCK: I regret having troubled you in any way, but it was necessary.
I trust you can explain why it was necessary?
SPOCK: There was a decision to be made. A direction for my life had to be chosen. I chose Vulcan.
SPOCK: Thank you, father. If you will excuse me now, I have some business to conduct with schoolmates.
SPOCK: A demonstration of the Vulcan neck pinch. Our cousin taught me.
I too must make my farewells. Your hospitality has been most kind, but I must journey on.
You saved my son's life, Selek. There is no way I can fully repay you for that.
Try to understand your son, Sarek of Vulcan. It will be repayment enough for me.
A strange request, but I will honour it. My home is yours if you pass this way again.
The traveller is returning.
I sent the others up to the ship. What happened?
One small thing was changed this time. A pet died.
A pet? Well, that wouldn't mean much in the course of time.
Enterprise, this is the Captain. Two to beam up.
Well, well, well. So you two finally got back from your vacation. While you've been running all over Orion's creation, I've been running the annual crew physicals. You're the last ones.
Doctor McCoy, you do not know your good fortune. IF the times were different, you would have to recalibrate for an Andorian.
What's that supposed to mean? If that was supposed to be a joke, Spock, I have to remind you Vulcans don't tell jokes.
We've picked up speed, sir, rapidly. I've cut back power, but we continue to gain momentum.
She's not answering the helm, sir. Two minutes right ascension off course and drifting farther, Captain.
Stand by to reverse course.
I can only describe it as hypergravity, Captain, more powerful than any we've ever encountered. It's dragging the Enterprise toward it.
Why aren't our sensors picking it up? Forward scanners, Mister Sulu.
Captain, that's the source of the radio emissions.
Negative star mass. Spectra analysis, imploded matter, but every reading on it is negative.
Captain, we're still gaining speed.
No good, sir. We're still falling toward it.
How much time do we have?
Captain, there's another signal. Listen.
Sulu, flank speed ahead. Our only chance is to try to get into orbit around that thing.
Steady as she goes, Mister Sulu. Maintain orbit.
If its pull is this strong, Jim, how do we get out of orbit?
Slingshot effect, Mister Spock? Do we have enough power?
I'll need some time for the computations, Captain.
I'm getting that radio sound again, sir. Nine seconds right ascension from galactic plane, dead ahead and closing fast. It's on the viewscreen now, sir.
It's a starship like nothing I've ever seen. The size of it.
It's been damaged. I'll bet she was pulled in like we were.
It's coming from that ship, Captain.
Confirmed, Captain, but it isn't possible. That ship is dead. Temperature is absolute zero. There is no thermal reading to support life aboard her, and no energy store to send radio messages. Nothing except a slight magnetic flux reading which could be normal for the ship's metal.
You're sure, Mister Spock?
Can you identify that metal, or the design of the ship?
Negative to both, Captain. Unknown alloy, harder and lighter than any registered metal. It is not a recorded galactic starship design. Retro analysis of the ship's spectra dates it as having been in orbit here for slightly more than three hundred million years.
It's beautiful. What kind of people could have built it, to touch even a starship with grace and beauty?
A civilisation that advanced three hundred million years ago before life even emerged on Earth.
Mister Spock, any indication of that ship's power source?
The hexagonal shape of the windows suggests a similarity to natural insect designs of Earth, the honeycombs of bees. The individual cells are shaped precisely like this.
Would you look at this now? This metal, it isn't cast or rolled. It was drawn into filaments and spun.
A lighter and stronger material than anything we have now.
Look, every pod, they've all been burst open.
Aye, from the inside, from the looks of them.
Must have been some accident to get almost every pod.
Accidents seldom have such system, Doctor McCoy. I believe we must consider the alternative possibility that the crew of this ship destroyed her themselves.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Lieutenant, are you still getting that radio signal from this ship?
Negative, Captain. It stopped transmitting when you beamed aboard.
All right. Lock on us with the transporter and be ready to transport. We're going inside.
What do you make of it, Spock?
You mean it's functioning after all the milleniums this ship has been here?
The wands are accumulators, receptors to attract energy, motion, sound, light, heat, every kind of energy around them.
The structure of the ship, those huge arches, thrusting up. The whole ship is designed to receive and store energy.
Gives me the creeps. I feel like something's watching us.
I feel it too, Captain.
A physiological symptom of latent primal superstition, the fear of primitive people confronting something unknown to them.
Compared to the beings that built this ship, we are primitive people, even you, Mister Spock. All right, let's keep going.
Artificial gravity is in effect here, Captain. Both air and gravity within two points of Earth normal.
Enterprise, do you read me? Sulu?
No use, Captain. Some sort of interference has been set up.
We can cut our way out of here.
You mean we're trapped here? No communication, nothing?
This is, was, the control centre of the starship. These must be control and navigational instruments.
Something to shield this room. But shield it from what?
Possibly from whatever had come aboard their ship.
But nothing, no form of life could survive three hundred million years.
Quite right, Mister Scott. No known form of life.
Something is trying to get in. The field of interference is reacting against the magnetic flux lines, Captain.
Will it hold?
What is it?
I'm not sure, but I think
Perhaps we could risk the shuttlecraft. Perhaps with a protective shield
I'm not sending anyone anywhere. Unmanned probes can give us the information we need to destroy this thing, if it can be destroyed.
I must differ with you, Captain. We have sent unmanned probes into it. They have given us some information but they have not told us what we need to know, and we cannot afford the power to take blind shots at it, hoping to kill it.
We could send one man in, pinpoint its vulnerable spots.
DO you know what the odds are in coming back? I can't order a man to do that.
Who said anything about an order, Jim? You've got a volunteer. I've done the preliminary work.
It's a suicide mission.
The thing evidently has reflexes. The unmanned probe we sent in must have stung it when it entered. The lurch we felt was the turbulence of its reaction.
All right, so I'd know enough to go slow when we penetrated its vulnerable spots.
You have a martyr complex, Doctor. I submit that it disqualifies you.
Do you think I intend to pass up the greatest living laboratory since
The Vulcans saw it first and died.
Just because the Vulcans failed
I am more capable.
Gentlemen, I am not taking volunteers.
You don't think you're going?
I'm better qualified as a command pilot than you are.
Which makes you indispensable, Captain. Further, you are not a science specialist.
Jim, that organism contains chemical processes we've never seen before and may never see again. We could learn more in one day
We don't have one day, Doctor. We have precisely one hour and thirty five minutes of power left.
Gentlemen, I'll decide.
Engineering to Captain Kirk.
You asked me to keep you informed on the power drain. All levels are down fifty percent now
Very well. Prepare the shuttlecraft for launching.
Doctor McCoy will tell you what special equipment to put in. Kirk out. I'm sorry, Mister Spock.
Right. I'll get a few things I need, Jim.
Not you, Bones. I'm sorry, Mister Spock. You're best qualified to go.
Do not suffer so, Doctor. This is not the first time superior capability has proven more valuable than professional credentials.
Nothing has been proven yet, Spock. The DNA code analyser will give you the fundamental structure of the thing. You'll need readings on three light wavelengths from the enzyme recorder.
I am familiar with the equipment, Doctor. We're wasting time. The shuttlecraft is ready.
You're determined not to let me share in this, aren't you?
This is not a competition, Doctor. Whether you understand it or not, grant me my own kind of dignity.
Vulcan dignity? How can I grant you what I don't understand?
Then employ one of your own superstitions. Wish me luck.
All systems clear for shuttlecraft launch. sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, channel automatic telemetry directly to the computers.
Power drain is enormous and growing worse.
Captain, h e won't have enough power to get back out if he diverts it to his shields.
We discussed that possibility earlier. But you will need this information.
Slowing now. Contact in eighteen point three seconds. Brace yourselves. The area of penetration will no doubt be sensitive. Contact
There was nothing to spare. I shall continue my tests. Oh, and Doctor McCoy. You would have not survived it.
You want to bet?
I am moving slowly now, establishing course toward what appears to be the nucleus.
Spock, save your power for the shields.
Calculations indicate the shields will last only forty seven minutes.
Changes indicate the organism has stored sufficient energy for reproductive process to commence.
You mean there'll be two of those things?
Spock, do you read me? Spock, do you read me?
He's alive! He's kicked it in the side to let us know.
Captain, I'm getting telemetry.
Mister Chekov, telemetry analysis as it comes in.
According to Spock's telemetry information, there are over forty chromosomes in the nucleus that are ready to come together, ready to reproduce.
If the energy of that organism only doubles, we're dead, and everything within a light year will be defenceless.
Captain, the pull from that organism is increasing, and the power drain from our shields is getting critical.
How much time do we have?
Put all secondary systems on standby. Shield power has unconditional priority.
Put it on, Lieutenant.
I am slowly losing life support and minimal shield energies. According to my calculations
How do you feel?
What's on your mind?
Spock. Is it me, Jim? Am I so sentimental that I just have to keep believing that he's still alive in that mass of protoplasm?
He knew the odds when he went out there, just as you did when you volunteered to go. What is that thing out there, Bones? It's not intelligent. Not yet.
It's a disease, like a virus invading the body of our galaxy.
Yes, it is, isn't it? How many cells does the human body have?
This thing, this cell, this virus. It's eleven thousand miles long, and it's one cell. When it grows into millions, we'll be the virus invading its body.
Now, isn't that a thought? Here we are, antibodies of our own galaxy, attacking an invading germ. It would be ironic indeed if that were our sole destiny, wouldn't it?
Scotty, how much power do we have left?
We're down to forty three percent, sir. We're slipping a bit against the pull that beastie's putting on us.
What would happen if you diverted all remaining power to the shields, except for impulse power, keep that in reserve?
Cut the engine thrust? We'd be sucked into that thing like being caught in a wind tunnel, sir.
Exactly. Prepare to divert power on my signal. Kirk out.
Have you got something to say?
Technically, no. Medically, yes. Between the stimulants and the pressure, I would suggest you try to stay off your feet for a few minutes.
I don't have a few minutes, Bones. Maybe none of us do. Let's go.
All hands, this is the captain. We're going to enter the body of the organism rather abruptly, I would think. Damage control parties stand by. All decks secure for collision. Kirk out.
Switching power to shields. Impulse in reserve. Cutting thrust to zero, now!
We're through, sir.
I believe everybody is aware of that, Mister Chekov.
Damage control parties report minimal damage, sir. Repairs are being initiated.
Captain, we've only twenty six percent power reserves after entry.
Do we have impulse power, Scotty?
I saved all I could, sir, but I don't know whether we have enough to get back out again. Or time either.
We are committed.
Aye, we are, but we're committed to what? We have no power for the phasers.
We couldn't use it. We'd cook ourselves along with that mess of protoplasm out there
That thing would probably like phasers. It eats power.
Then what the devil, begging your pardon sir, are we doing?
Mister Spock was trying to tell us what to do when we lost voice contact.
We can't use the power to destroy it.
Aye, it couldn't swallow that.
Mister Chekov, prepare a probe. Scotty, we'll need a magnetic bottle for the charge. How soon?
It's on its way, sir.
Mister Chekov, we'll use a timing detonator for the probe. Work out a setting.
Helmsman, when do you estimate arrival at nucleus?
How close are you going to it?
Point blank range. We'll implant it then back away.
Why? The probe has a range of
With the eddies and currents in that protoplasm, the probe could drift thousands of kilometres. We must be exactly on target, because we won't have a second chance. Bones, time for another stimulant.
How long do you think you can keep taking that stuff? It'll blow you apart.
Keep me together for another seven minutes. That's all I need.
Personal log, Commander Spock, USS Enterprise. I have noted the passage of the Enterprise on its way to whatever awaits it. If this record should survive me, I wish it known that I bequeath my highest commendation and testimonial to the captain, officers, and crew of the Enterprise. The finest starship in the fleet.
Mister Scott, how much time do we have left at one hundred percent impulse power?
Programming complete. Ready for launch.
Launch probe at zero acceleration. Forward thrust off, one tenth of a second.
Despite what Spock said, it's still plenty sensitive.
Probe confirmed. It is lodged in the nucleus, near the chromosome bodies.
Mister Kyle, back us out the way we came in. Mister Chekov, a nice, straight line. Don't waste any time.
Estimate we'll be out in six point thirty seven minutes.
Lieutenant, get me Spock's voice channel. Highest possible gain.
Spock, do you read me? Do you read me, Spock, do you read me? Come in, Spock. Spock! Scotty, get a tractor beam.
Captain, we don't have enough time to do it. We only have a fifty three second escape margin.
I'm well aware of that, Mister Scott. Get two tractor beams on that shuttlecraft.
Do not risk the ship further on my behalf.
Shut up, Spock! We're rescuing you.
Almost out. We're approaching the membrane, sir.
You may have just written our epitaph, Mister Scott.
The organism is destroyed, sir. The explosion must have ruptured the membrane and thrown us clear.
I don't know how, sir, but it's still with us.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Request permission to come aboard.
Spock, you're alive!
Obviously, Captain. And I have some fascinating data on the organism.
Don't be so smart, Spock. You botched the acetylcholine test.
Prepare to receive shuttlecraft. Received shuttlecraft. Hangar doors closed. Hangar deck pressurising.
Captain, I have received vocal contact from an official station. They relayed us to a man named Oxmyx. His title is Boss.
Boss? All right, Lieutenant, put him on. Oxmyx. This is Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the Federation of Planets.
Yes. Unfortunately, the Horizon was lost with all hands shortly after leaving your planet. We only received her radio report last month.
Difficult to explain. We received a report a hundred years late because it was sent by conventional radio. Your system is on the outer reaches of the galaxy. They didn't have subspace communication in those days.
I'll explain it in more detail when I see him. The ship won't land, but we'll transport several people down. Well, that's a little difficult for you to understand, too. I'll explain it in more detail when I see you. Where will be convenient?
Good. I'll be looking forward to it. Kirk out. Scotty, you have the conn.
Spock, McCoy, we're beaming down. Standard equipment.
They must have interfered with the normal evolution of the planet.
It will be interesting to see the results of the contamination.
We don't know there is contamination. The evidence is only circumstantial.
What was the state of the Iotian culture before the Horizon came?
The beginnings of industrialisation.
Horizon reports indicate the Iotians are extremely intelligent and somewhat imitative.
So we're going down to recontaminate them.
The damage has been done, Doctor. We are here to repair it.
Let's not argue about it. Let's go study it. Energise.
This is like coming home.
Home was never like this. I've seen pictures of the old days that look like this.
Sir, would you mind explaining that statement, please?
I want to see you turn to stone. Put your hands over your head, or you ain't going to have no head to put your hands over.
That's a weapon. Be careful with that.
Look, we were asked to come down here by Mister Oxmyx. He said
I know what he said, bud. He said some of the boys would meet you. Okay, we're meeting you.
Well, those firearms are not necessary.
You trying to make trouble?
Don't give me those baby blue eyes.
I don't go for that innocent routine.
I never heard such stupid questions in my life.
Well, since this Oxmyx asked us down here, don't you think we should see him?
Krako's getting more gall all the time .
Is this how you greet all your guests?
Yeah? We ain't playing for peanuts. What's the matter, you guys never saw a hit before?
Sir, there are several questions I would like to ask.
Ask the boss. I don't know nothing. Get moving.
This is the contamination you're looking for, Jim.
Hey, Kalo. Hey, when's the boss going to do something about the crummy street lights around here, eh? A girl ain't safe.
Listen, we pay our percentages. We're entitled to a little service for our money.
Get lost, will ya? Some people got nothing to do but complain.
Is this the way your citizens do business, their right of petition?
They pay their percentages and the boss takes care of them.
Make yourself a drink, Captain. It's good stuff. I distill it myself.
No, thank you. You're Mister Oxmyx.
That's me, pal.
This is my first officer, Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy.
Doctor, huh? Put that chopper down, Kalo. These guys are our guests. Pick up a cue, Captain. Go ahead. You can't be too careful around here these days.
Yes. Judging from what we've seen so far, I agree.
They call you The Boss, Mister Oxmyx. The boss of what?
The boss of my territory. I got the biggest in the world. You know, there's one thing wrong with having the biggest. There's always some punk trying to cut you out. That's why you can't be too careful.
You're the government here?
What government? Look, I told you. I got the territory and I run it. That's all.
But there are other bosses, other territories?
Yeah, sure. Maybe a dozen or so, not counting the small fry, but then they get burned anyway soon as I get around to it.
Does that include, if I may ask, a gentleman called Krako?
How do you know about Krako?
He hit us, Boss.
I'll take care of it.
Hey, wait a minute. That's the Book.
I know it's a book.
The Book. They left it, the other ship. The Horizon.
This is the contamination, Captain. Astonishing. An entire culture based on this.
You said they were imitative, and the book
I don't want any more cracks about the Book.
Did they leave any other books?
Sure. Some text books on how to make radio sets and stuff like that, but, look, I brought you here so you could help me, not for you to ask me questions. After that, I'll answer anything you want to know.
What is it you want?
Well, I was thinking. You Feds must have made a lot of improvements since that other ship came here. You probably got all kinds of fancy heaters up there. So here's the deal. You give me all the heaters I need. Enough tools so I can knock off those punks all at once. Then I'll take over, and all you'll have to do is deal with me.
Now let me get this straight. You want us to supply you with arms and assistance so you can carry out an aggression against your neighbours?
What aggression? I got to make hits. I want you to help me hit them. That's all.
Mister Oxmyx, my orders are quite explicit. Under no circum
I ain't interested in your orders. From now on, you're gonna take orders from me. I'm gonna give you just eight hours to give me the things I want. If I don't have those tools by then, I'm gonna call up your ship and have them pick you up in a box. Is that understood, pal?
Let's see how this thing works.
Don't do that. You could knock out the side of the building.
That good, huh? All you have to do is give me about a hundred of these fancy heaters and we'll have no more trouble.
Out of the question.
Hold it. It's a communication device.
How does it work?
It's locked onto my ship's systems.
Kalo, take them to the warehouse and put them in a bag. Keep a sharp eye on them, you hear.
This is Bela Oxmyx. I got your captain and his friends down here. You want to see them alive
Am I to understand that you're holding the captain and his party?
You heard right, pal. I'm going to give you just eight hours to get me the goods I want, or I put the hit on your friends.
One book on the gangs of Chicago did all this. It's amazing.
They evidently seized upon that one book as the blueprint for an entire society.
It's the Bible.
Yeah, well, Oxmyx is the worst gangster of all.
We may quarrel with Mister Oxmyx' methods, but his goal is essentially the correct one. This society must become united or it will degenerate into total anarchy.
If this society broke down as the result of the Horizon's influence, then the Federation's responsible, and we've got to do something to straighten this mess out. Spock, if you could get to the sociological computer, do you think you could find a solution?
Unfortunately, I do not have access to my computers, nor are these gentlemen likely to permit it.
Oh, yes, yes. I wouldn't waste my time.
On Beta Antares Four, they play a real game. It's a man's game, but of course it's probably a little beyond you. It requires intelligence.
Listen, Kirk, I can play anything you can figure out. Take the cards, big man. Show us how it's played.
I'm familiar with the culture on Beta Antares. There aren't games
Yes. The second card is turned up, except on Tuesdays.
Oh, look what you got, two jacks. You got a half fizzbin already.
No, no. If you got another jack, why, you'd have a sralk.
Yes. You'd be disqualified. You need a king and a deuce, except at night of course, when you'd need a queen and a four.
Right. Oh, look at that. You've got another jack. How lucky you are! How wonderful for you. If you didn't get another jack, if you'd gotten a king, why then you'd get another card, except when it's dark, you'd give it back.
If it were dark on Tuesday.
Yes, but what you're after is a royal fizzbin, but the odds in getting a royal fizzbin are astron. Spock, what are the odds in getting a royal fizzbin?
I have never computed them, Captain.
Well, they're astronomical, believe me. Now, for the last card. We'll call it a kronk. You got that?
I'll get it.
Spock, find the radio station. Uhura's monitoring the broadcasts. Cut in and have yourselves beamed up to the ship.
Surely, you're coming, Captain.
I will, but I'm bringing Bela Oxmyx with me.
Jim, you can't
Bones, this mess is our responsibility. You have your orders. Let's go.
Hold it! Okay, pally, we're going for a ride.
If you don't mind, I'd rather walk.
Listen, pally, this could either be a taxi or a hearse. You know what I mean?
I'm beginning to get the idea.
You do that very well. Now, how are you with primitive radio equipment?
Very simple. Amplitude modulation transmission. I simply adjust the frequency, throw this switch, and the Enterprise should answer.
Mister Spock, what are you doing on this frequency?
So you're the Fed, huh? Well, well, well, well, well.
Krako. JoJo Krako. I'm the head of the whole Southside Territory. Hey, glad to see you.
Would you mind telling me how you even know who I am?
Sit down, Kirk. I've got all of Bela's communications bugged. He can't make a date with a broad unless I know about it. Well, I guess you want to know why I brought you here.
You want to make a deal.
Hey, I like that. That is sharp. That's sharp, eh, Zabo?
That's right, a deal. I want you to help me.
Let me guess. You want, you'll want heaters, and then you'll want troops to teach them how to use them. And then you'll attack the other bosses and take over the whole planet. Then we'll sit down and talk, right?
Wrong! I know Bela. He didn't offer you beans. Now, me, I'm a reasonable man. You give me what I want and I'll cut you in for, say, a third. Skimmed right off the top. Well, what do you think?
I got a better idea. This planet has to be united. You know that. Bela knows that. Let's sit down. You, me, Bela. Discuss this whole matter, contact the other bosses, and talk about it like reasonable men.
No, I don't think you're stupid. I just think your behaviour is arrested.
I haven't been arrested in my whole life! Listen, pally, I know how to get what I want. You want to live, don't you, Kirk? You bet you do. But after I get through with you, you're liable to be sorry unless you come across. Hold him here. Tell Cirl the Knife to sharpen up his blade. I just might have a job for him. Unless you come across with the heaters.
I'm sorry, Krako. No deal.
That's too bad. Put him on ice!
Futile, Doctor. No specifics. There is no record of such a culture based on a moral inversion.
You mean you're giving up?
No, Doctor. I'm merely saying the computers can offer us no logical, rational, factual way out of our current dilemma.
Mister Spock, Mister Oxmyx is making contact from the surface.
On audio, Lieutenant. Mister Oxmyx, this is Mister Spock.
Irrelevant, since we are here.
Oh, yeah. I tell you, you'd better come on back down.
Why would he put a bag on our captain?
If I understand you correctly, that would seem to be a problem.
Look, you guys got something I want. I can help you get your captain back.
I'm afraid I find it difficult to trust you, Mister Oxmyx.
What's to trust? Business is business. We'll call a truce. You come on down.
You'll show no further hostility?
I'm a businessman, pally. What do ya say?
Since we must have our captain back, I accept.
You mean you're going to trust him?
If we are to save the captain without blatant, forceful interference on this planet, Doctor, we must have the assistance of someone indigenous. We are therefore forced to trust Mister Oxmyx.
Mister Scott, though we hope to avoid interference, I suggest you set one of our phaser banks on a strong stun position.
Now you're beginning to make sense.
I trust we shall not have to use them, but it is best to be prepared. Energise.
You know what to do.
Don't worry, Boss. They can't do nothing till they're through sparkling.
Mister Oxmyx, I understood we had an arrangement, a truce.
I was hoping you'd think that, dummy.
We're trying to help you, Oxmyx.
Sir, you are employing a double negative.
I fail to see why you do not understand us. You yourself have stated the need for unity of authority on this planet. We agree.
Yeah, but I got to be the unity.
Hey, Captain, you got away from Krako. You know, that ain't easy.
I thought you were supposed to report to the ship, Mister Spock.
We did, Captain. The situation required our return.
It may be just as well. Did you find out anything from the computer?
Nothing useful. Logic and practical information do not seem to apply here.
To deny the facts would be illogical, Doctor.
Then you don't mind if I play a hunch?
I'm not sanguine about hunches, Captain, but I have no practical alternative.
What are we going to do now, Jim?
It ought to be. It cost a bundle.
You too! Get out of the clothes. Nobody's going to put the bag on me any more.
A fliwer, Captain.
Key in the ignition. Turn the ignition on. And nothing happens. Where's the starter? There's the starter. Yes!
Yes. Oh. I believe they had a device known as a clutch. Clutch, Captain. Perhaps one of those pedals on the floor.
Captain, you are an excellent starship commander, but as a taxi driver you leave much to be desired.
It was that bad?
Now, that could be a bit of a problem. If they were inside, where they couldn't be seen, we could stun them with our phasers, but not out here.
If we can get close enough to them, we should be able to render them harmless with reasonable rapidity.
They don't look like the trusting type.
I beg your pardon?
You're going to hit somebody. Can I watch?
Where'd you get them ears?
You going to hit Krako out here? You open up and you'll be scragged from every window in the street. I can fix it for ya.
Young man, this is likely to be quite hazardous.
Hold on, Spock. Out of the mouths of babes
Who you callin' a babe?
I'm calling you a babe.
What's in it for me?
What do you want?
A piece of the action.
You do not even know what the action is going to be.
I figure it's got to be a thick percentage or you wouldn't be trying to hit Krako.
All right, young man. We'll guarantee you a piece of the action if we can pull this thing off.
You'll know what to do.
And that! And how do you like that? Think you can gang up on me, huh? What are you, chicken?
That's it. Let's go.
What's the matter? Did you hurt yourself, kid?
I want my daddy!
Daddy! I want my daddy!
I want my daddy.
Sonny! Wait a moment. What have they done? What have they done to you? What have you done?
A piece of the action.
No one can see. Put your phaser on stun.
Well, ain't this nice? I was wondering how I was going to get you back, and here you deliver yourself! Who's your friend with the ears, Kirk?
I think you've got it reversed, Mister Krako.
I ain't, pally. Put down your heaters.
Captain, I believe that perhaps it would be wise to do as he says. I just heard the sound of
Mister Krako, I don't, er
So this is the fancy heater, huh? How does it work?
I'm trying to tell you, Mister Krako, that this is bigger than you, Oxmyx or anyone.
The only thing I want you to tell me is how it works.
Can you trust all your men?
Well, one of these can make a man a pretty big boss, you know.
I either trust 'em, or they're dead. Let's go in here and talk about it.
Now we got no busy little eyes to worry about. How does this thing work?
What do you think we're here for, to get a cut of your deal? Forget it. That's peanuts to an outfit like the Federation. Right?
A miniscule. A very small piece.
How much is that?
That's, er. We'll figure it out later.
I thought you guys had laws. No interference.
Who's interfering? We're taking over. Check?
What's your cut?
What do you care as long as you're being cut in? Course, there's always Bela Oxmyx.
All right, it's a deal. Call your ship. Bring down your boys and whatever else you need.
Kirk to Enterprise.
All right, Scotty. We made a deal with Krako.
Yeah. We're ready to make the hit. We're taking over the whole planet as soon as you get ready.
Do you think that's wise, sir?
Sure. We can trust Krako, but we don't have any choice. You know what I mean? He's standing about twelve feet in front of me, all ready to be our pal.
Aye. I know indeed.
Scotty, we'll need phasers to equip every one of Krako's men. We'll need advisors and troops to back him up on the hit. You got all that, Scotty?
Captain. We're preparing everything. It'll be ready when you give the word.
You mean you're going to start sending down your boys now?
It looks like we put the bag on you, doesn't it.
I got rights.
You've got nothing. You mind your place, mister, or you'll be wearing concrete galoshes.
It's faster than walking.
But not as safe.
Are you afraid of cars?
Not at all, Captain. It's your driving that alarms me.
Spock, I've got the hang of it. Now go on.
Where are they?
Knowing Krako, he'll probably send them back on a blotter.
Yeah, sure. Why didn't you say so in the first place? All you had to do was explain it to me.
Kirk to Enterprise.
You got Krako on ice?
Find the man at the other end of the phone
I sure don't know what you think you're talking about.
Get with it. I'm giving the orders here.
Yeah, you bet your life I've got a lot of nerve. What are you going to do about it?
I would advise you to keep dialing, Oxmyx.
All right. You know what to do. We hit Bela's place and nobody comes out alive. All right. Let's go.
All right! All right! All right! All right! Now the Federation's taking over whether you like it or not. You people, you've been running this planet like a piecework factory. From now on, it's going to be under one roof. You're going to run it like a business. That means you're going to make a profit.
And what's your percentage?
I'm cutting the Federation in for forty percent. You got any objections?
Yeah! I hear a lot of talk, but all I see here is you and a couple of your boys. I don't see no Federation.
Listen. They got a ship. I know. I was there.
Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Tepo's got a point. All we ever seen is them.
What, a couple of boys?
I'm not going to believe my eyes.
Let me say something. I only saw three guys in that ship. Maybe there ain't no more.
There are over four hundred guys there.
That's your story, buster.
Hey, it's my boys. They're making a hit at this place.
My boys will put you down.
Hey, that's great, Krako. Now we got hostages again. We can make a deal with the Feds up there.
Are you kidding? This one's all mine. From now on, nobody's going no place. I'm going to be the big boss in this here territory.
Now, wait a minute. Wait a minute. Get that heater down. Don't you want to take a look at what you're going to fight?
I already seen it. You're nothing, Fed.
All right, but at least let me call my ship one last time and say goodbye.
Well, all right. Go ahead. Don't get smart.
Hello, Scotty. This is Kirk.
Gee, that's some trick.
Hey, did you see that?
They're not dead, just knocked out for a while. But they might just as well have been that way if we wanted them to.
Okay, okay, Kirk, so we get the message. Now, what was this syndicate deal you were talking about?
He was talking about a percentage.
I was talking about both.
Okay. A syndicate makes sense to me. I'm a peaceful man at heart, but I'm sick and tired of all these hits. I hit Krako, Krako hits Tepo, Tepo hits me. There's too many bosses. We can't get anything done.
It's reasonable. It sounds reasonable. That sound reasonable to you?
It's reasonable, Mister Oxmyx. Let's break out some of your drinking stuff and celebrate the syndicate.
Gentlemen, you two have been brooding ever since we returned to the ship.
Brooding, Mister Spock. A sombre, emotional state. Now, do you wish to continue it or are you going to discuss it?
Captain, I'm neither brooding nor sombre. But I do have reservations about your solution to the problem of the Iotians.
Ah, yes. I understand that. You don't think it's logical to leave a criminal organisation in charge.
Highly irregular, to say the least, Captain. I'm also curious as to how you propose to explain to Starfleet Command that a starship will be sent each year to collect our cut.
Yes, that's a very good question, Mister Spock. I propose our cut be put into the planetary treasury and used to guide the Iotians into a more ethical system. Despite themselves, they'll be forced to accept conventional responsibilities. Isn't that logical? All right, Bones, in the language of the planet, what's your beef?
I don't know how serious this is, Jim, and I don't quite know how to tell you
But in all the confusion I
I think I left it in Bela's office.
Somewhere. I'm not certain.
You're not certain of what?
I left my communicator.
Captain. If the Iotians, who are very bright and imitative people, should take that communicator apart
They will, they will. And they'll find out how the transtator works.
The transtator is the basis for every important piece of equipment that we have.
You really think it's that serious?
How do you mean?
Well, in a few years, the Iotians may demand a piece of our action.
Ensign Chekov, Lieutenant Uhura, and I will beam down and make a routine check of its facilities.
Lieutenant Uhura, let's go.
It must be a transporter malfunction.
That was a rough trip.
This is the craziest landing pad I've ever seen.
That's a trinary sun.
Scott to Bridge.
Mister Spock, the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Chekov. they vanished. They got onto the transporter platform and they just vanished.
I presume you mean they vanished in a manner not consistent with the usual workings of the transporter, Mister Scott.
Aye, of course I mean that. You think I'd call if they just beamed down?
Have you reversed controls?
I've made all the proper checks. There was nothing. There was no flash of light, nothing. They were gone.
Not down here. All the dials were right and the transporter was functioning perfectly.
Recheck your equipment, Mister Scott. I'll scan for them on the planet's surface. Spock out.
But Captain, if we're not on Gamma Two, then where are we?
That's what I'd like to know. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Dead.
Excellent, Captain Kirk. Although we expected strength and competitive spirit, we are greatly pleased.
Either of you hurt?
I don't think so, Captain.
Admirable, Chekov. Admirable. You also, Uhura. Your spirit is as great as the captain's. I can see you all will prove invaluable here. I am Galt, Master Thrall of the planet Triskelion. I have been sent to welcome you.
There, Captain. Now you are prepared for your training.
How do you know our names?
The Providers were expecting you, Captain. They arranged your transportation.
These Providers of yours, are they
Correction, Captain. The Providers are not ours. We are theirs.
What do they want from us?
You are to be trained, of course. What other use is there for thralls?
Thralls? You must be mistaken. We're officers of a United spaceship on Federation business.
We're not going anywhere until we have some information. Who are you? What is this place? What do you think you're going to do with us?
I am Galt, the Master Thrall. This place is the planet Triskelion. You are to be trained and spend the rest of your lives here.
Mister Spock, I've checked that transporter from one end to the other. Every circuit works perfectly. Whatever that power surge was, it had nothing to do with the transporter or any other system aboard this ship.
I'm beginning to believe that, Mister Scott. I've conducted two sweeps of the planet's surface. There is no sign of life.
Then what the devil is happening? Does that mean their atoms are just floating around out there?
No, Doctor. Even that would show up on our sensors.
Where are they then?
The only answers are negative. No magnetic storms, no ionic interference, no breakdown in your equipment.
A negative attitude is no good to us. We can't just leave them out there, wherever they are.
We shall continue sensor scans, Doctor. At the moment, that is all we can do, except hope for a rational explanation.
Hope? I always thought that was a human failing, Mister Spock.
True, Doctor. Constant exposure does result in a certain degree of contamination.
These are your quarters. Open, thralls.
That was foolish, Captain. Escape is quite impossible, as demonstrated by your collars of obedience. Return to your quarters.
They are not within the confines of this solar system.
It's been nearly an hour. Can people live that long as disassembled atoms in a transporter beam?
I have never heard of a study being done, but it would be a fascinating project.
Fascinating? Those people are friends of ours out there, if they're still alive.
The odds are not good.
No. I would say approximately four hundred
Don't quote odds and don't give me anymore dispassionate logic, Mister Spock. Just keep looking for them.
I would welcome a suggestion, Doctor, even an emotional one, as to where to look.
First time you've ever asked me for anything, and it has to be an occasion like this.
Captain, the Enterprise. They will be trying to find us, won't they?
They'll try, but where do they look? We're here, and we don't know where it is.
This system's star is a trinary. Limits it a bit, but we're a long way from the Enterprise, if we're in the same dimension.
I am your drill thrall. I am called Lars.
What do you want from her?
Lieutenant, are you all right? Uhura! Lieutenant! Lieutenant, are you all right? Lieutenant, answer me! Lieutenant! What's happening to Lieutenant Uhura? Lieutenant, are you all right?
It is not allowed to refuse selection.
Interesting. It seems to be an ionisation trail.
What would account for that, Spock?
Exactly the question I have just fed to the computers, Doctor. And the answer is, nothing known to us would account for it.
Well, the transporter has neither the power nor the range to account for that.
You're going to leave here without them and run off on some wild goose chase halfway across the galaxy just because you found a discrepancy in a hydrogen cloud?
Doctor, I am chasing the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Ensign Chekov, not some wild aquatic fowl. This is the only lead we've had.
You, you have been selected for me?
You are a fine specimen. I like you better than the others. I will instruct you well, so my Provider will take you.
That's very kind of you, miss, but
If my Provider is pleased, we may even be selected for each other.
I didn't realise I was so hungry. Whatever you call this, it is very good.
It is nourishment. We call it that.
Nourishment. That's very practical. What do you call this collar?
It is a sign of our Provider. By the colour of the lights it can be known who holds us. When you are vended, you will also have a colour.
When you are developed. The Provider who offers the most quatloos puts his colour on us.
Our race has another name for it. Slavery. This collar of obedience, is Galt the only one who can operate it?
It is only to warn and punish.
How does he work it?
It is not permitted to talk of that.
Will you provide all my nourishment?
Of course. I am your drill thrall. I will train you well.
Yes, I'm sure you will. I must say, I've never seen a top sergeant who looked like you.
What does that mean?
It means you're a very beautiful woman.
What is beautiful?
Born? I have been here always.
Your parents. Where are they? Your mother and father.
She who bore me was killed in a freestyle match.
You will learn all these things.
Lars and Chekov's drill thrall. They weren't born here. Where do they come from?
This is ridiculous. There's nothing out there. Nothing at all.
We certainly seem to be heading into an empty sector.
Projecting back along the path of ionisation, the nearest system is M two four alpha.
That must be two dozen light years away.
Are you suggesting that they could have transported over a distance of? You're out of your Vulcan mind, Spock.
I'm suggesting nothing, Doctor. I am merely pursuing the only logical course available to us.
Hold. This thrall was slow in obeying a command. For his punishment, he will be practice target. As you charge, you will strike the practice target when you pass. You begin, Uhura.
It is not allowed to refuse a training exercise.
I don't care whether it's allowed or not. I will not do it.
None of us will do it, Galt.
It is part of your training. The Providers wish it.
The devil with the Providers.
No. No! I am responsible for the actions of my people. I demand to see the Providers.
He's pretty fast with that whip.
This will strengthen you. Drink it. Kloog's left eye is weak. Approach him from that side.
We're free people. We belong to no one.
Mister Spock, it just doesn't make sense they could have come this far. If there's any chance at all it is to continue to search in the area they were lost.
It's always possible to miss something.
Such as a failure in the transporter mechanism?
No, sir. There was no sign of failure.
There was no sign of them in the area of Gamma Two.
If they weren't there it's ridiculous to think they could still be alive. Not after all this time.
In that case, Doctor, we have nothing to lose by pursuing our present course.
Slow down. Slow down. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. We've covered over two miles. Can we take a breather? A rest?
Oh. well, it's good to get away from that development area, even for a while. Shahna, why do the Providers, why do they like to watch others being hurt, killed?
That is the way.
Their voices sound mechanical. Are they computers?
You've seen them. Do they have bodies?
Not such as ours.
What is this place?
It is not used.
It's very old. Does it have a name? Shahna, could it have been a city for the Providers?
I do not think it is well to ask such things.
They do have bodies, or did have.
One does not talk of such things.
Very pretty country. Very much like my home planet, Earth.
Where I was born. Shahna, don't you ever look at the night sky? The lights up there?
I have looked at them.
Well, those are stars. And around them are planets. And there are people that live on them, Just like us.
How can one live on a flicker of light?
From Earth, Triskelion's three suns are just a flicker of light. Actually, this is the darkest planet I've ever seen.
Dark? But all is lighted. Here, the chambers.
The thralls have no freedom, Shahna. You don't think or do anything but what the Providers tell you.
What else would one do?
What is love?
Love is the most important thing on Earth. Especially to a man and a woman.
We, too, have mates. When it is time to increase the herd, my Provider will select one for me.
On Earth, we select our own mate. Someone we care for. On Earth, men and women live together, help each other, make each other happy.
I do not think your words are allowed.
All right. All right. Tell me about the Providers. What do they look like? Where do they live?
I have never seen them, but they are said not to be like us. They stay in
Stop it. Stop it! I'm responsible! I made her talk! Stop it! You're killing her! She did nothing wrong! It was my fault. If you want to punish someone, punish me! Please.
It's all right. It's all right. You can stop crying now, Shahna. It's all right.
You risked bringing their anger on yourself. Why did you do it?
It's the custom of my people to help one another when we're in trouble.
And this. Is this also helping?
You could call it that.
It's my opinion that we've gone too far as it is, sir.
He's right, Spock. We've lost Jim and the others on Gamma Two. Now you've dragged us a dozen light years on some wild hunch that
No, it doesn't. It's still a fancy way of saying that you're playing a hunch. well, my hunch is that they're back on Gamma Two dead or alive and I still want another search.
Doctor McCoy speaks for me, too, sir.
Agreed. Mister Scott, could you manage warp seven?
I would be more than content to do so, sir, and maybe a wee bit more.
You're disturbed about what happened today.
Yes. You have made me feel strangely. If it were allowed, I would ask that you have another drill thrall.
I wouldn't like that, Shahna. I wouldn't like that at all.
This is going to kill our romance.
He's gone to report me. I said I didn't like the food.
I think Galt is the only one who controls these collars. If we can find the phaser that I threw at Lars, we can use the circuits to short out these collars.
Sensors indicate only one concentration of life forms on the planet, on the lower hemisphere. Humanoid readings.
Well, at least that gives our landing force a starting point.
There will be no landing force, Doctor. Assuming the captain and the others are still alive, it would be unwise to endanger them by beaming down a large contingent.
Well we're not going to leave them there while we just sit and wait.
And it may be just a wild goose chase like we've been telling you.
I shall beam down, Doctor. If I am unable to communicate, a landing party may be necessary.
Well, Mister Spock, if you're going into the lion's den, you'll need a medical officer.
Daniel, as I recall, had only his faith. But I welcome your company, Doctor. Mister Scott, you'll be in command.
Welcome to Triskelion, gentlemen.
What the voice said was true, sir. Nothing is functioning.
Providing for all their needs means using thralls, people stolen from other parts of the galaxy
But you are afraid.
A species that enslaves other beings is hardly superior, mentally or otherwise.
It's an unproductive purpose, unworthy of your intellect.
We have found that all life forms in the galaxy are capable of superior development. Perhaps you're not as evolved as you believe.
Our destruction will result only in your own. You may control the Enterprise, but you cannot match the force of the entire Federation.
And you call yourselves superior! You're murderers without the spirit to really wager for the lives you take.
My people pride themselves on being the greatest, most successful gamblers in the universe. We compete for everything. Power, fame, women, everything we desire, and it is our nature to win. And for proof, I offer you our exploration of this galaxy.
Well, then, I wager that with weapons of your own choice, right here and now, my people can overcome an equal number of thralls set against us.
Wait! Wait! Hear me! We can't wager for trifles like quatloos. The stakes must be higher.
If we win, the Enterprise and its crew leaves here in safety. Further more, all the thralls on the planet must be freed.
We have done the same with cultures throughout the galaxy. Are you willing to admit that we can do something you can't?
If we lose? We will remain here, the entire crew of the Enterprise. The most stubborn, determined competitors in the universe. We'll become thralls, enter your games, obey your orders without rebellion. You'll be assured of generations of the most exciting wagering you've ever had.
Not for true gamesters.
Three against one? Those are pretty high odds.
Your, your terms are unfair.
Well, in that case, I'll accept your terms.
Yes, that's clear.
What in the name of heaven is this?
Heaven's got very little to do with this.
You lied. Everything you said.
The thralls will be trained?
I think you'll find it a much more exciting game than the one you've been playing. I'm sorry, Shahna. I didn't lie. I did what was necessary. Someday, I hope you'll understand.
I understand, a little. You will leave us now?
To go back to the lights in the sky?
I would like to go to those lights with you. Take me?
Then teach me how, and I will follow you.
Goodbye, Jim Kirk. I will learn, and watch the lights in the sky, and remember.
Good. Mister Chekov, this flight is supposed to provide both experience and knowledge. How close will we come to the Klingon outpost if we continue on our present course?
One parsec, sir. Close enough to smell them.
That is illogical, Ensign. Odours cannot travel through the vacuum of space.
I was making a little joke, sir.
Mister Spock, immediate past history of the quadrant?
Under dispute between the two parties since initial contact. The battle of Donatu Five was fought near here twenty three solar years ago. Inconclusive.
Analysis of disputed area?
Undeveloped. Sherman's Planet is claimed by both sides, our Federation and the Klingon Empire. We do have the better claim.
The area was first mapped by the famous Russian astronomer Ivan Borkoff almost two hundred
Burke, sir? I don't think so. I'm sure it was
John Burke was the Chief Astronomer at the Royal Academy in old Britain at the time.
Oh, Royal Academy. Well
is the rest of your history that faulty, Ensign? Key points of dispute?
Under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, one side or the other must prove it can develop the planet most efficiently.
And unfortunately, though the Klingons are brutal and aggressive, they are most efficient.
I remember once Peter the Great had that problem like that. The
Go to warp factor six.
Code One emergency. That's a disaster call.
But there's nothing there. Just the station.
Priority One distress call, and it's just absolutely peaceful. Lieutenant Uhura, break subspace silence.
Mister Lurry, you issued a Priority One distress call. State the nature of your emergency.
You'll try to explain. You'd better be prepared to do more than that. Kirk out. Mister Spock, I'll need your help. Mister Chekov, maintain battle readiness. Lieutenant Uhura, see that the transporter room is standing by.
Mister Lurry, if there's no emergency, why did you issue a priority one distress call?
That was my order, Captain.
Captain Kirk, this is Nilz Baris. He's out from Earth to take charge of the development project on Sherman's Planet.
And that gives you the authority to put an entire quadrant on defence alert?
Mister Baris is the Federation Undersecretary in Charge of Agricultural Affairs in this quadrant.
This is my assistant Arne Darvin.
And this is my first officer Mister Spock.
Quadrotriticale is not wheat, Captain. Of course, I wouldn't expect you or Mister Spock to know about such things, but quadrotriticale is a rather
Mister Spock, you've made your point.
Quadrotriticale is the only earth grain that grows on Sherman's Planet. We have several tons of it here on the station. It's very important that grain gets to Sherman's Planet safely. Mister Baris thinks that Klingon agents may try to sabotage it.
You issued a priority one distress call for a couple of tons of wheat?
Of course, Captain, I realise that
Mister Baris, you summoned the Enterprise without an emergency. You'll take full responsibility for it.
What do you mean?
Misuse of the Priority One channels is a Federation offence.
I did not misuse the Priority One channel. I want that grain protected.
Captain, couldn't you at least post a couple of guards? We do have a large number of ships passing through.
It would seem a logical precaution, Captain. The Sherman's Planet affair is of extreme importance to the Federation.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Captain Kirk, how dare you authorise a mere two men for a project of this importance? Starfleet Command
I have never questioned the orders or the intelligence of any representative of the Federation. Until now.
Nevertheless Captain, the Klingons would not enjoy seeing us successfully develop Sherman's Planet.
I guess not.
I see you didn't waste time taking your shore leave.
She wants to shop, and I thought I would help her.
Oh, quadrotriticale. I've read about this, but I've never seen any before.
Does everybody know about this wheat but me?
Not everyone, Captain. It's a Russian invention.
I don't want any. I told you before, and I'm telling you again I don't want any more Spican flame gems. Thanks to you, I have enough Spican flame gems to last me a lifetime.
How sad for you, my friend. You won't find a finer stone anywhere. But I have something better. Surely you want some Antarian glow water.
I use that to polish the flame gems.
You're a difficult man to reach, but I have something from the far reaches of the galaxy. Surely you want
Not at your price.
What is it? Is it alive? May I hold it?
Oh, it's adorable. What is it?
What is it? Why, lovely lady, it's a tribble.
Only the sweetest creature known to man, excepting, of course, your lovely self.
Oh, it's purring. Listen, it's purring.
It's only saying that it likes you.
Are you selling them?
That's what we're trying to decide right now.
He won't bite, will he?
Sir, transporting harmful animals from one planet to another is against regulations, or weren't you aware of that? Besides, tribbles have no teeth.
Twice nothing is still nothing.
If you're not going to take him, I'm going to take him. I think he's cute.
That's my offer.
That's a joke.
You're an honest man. I'll tell you what I'm going to do I'm going to lessen my price to eight and a half credits.
You're talking yourself out of a deal, friend. Six credits. Not a credit more.
Done. When can I have them?
All right, what are you selling them for?
In fact, I'll sell you this one.
Hey! He's eating my grain.
That happens to be my sample, and I'll do with it as I please. And I please to give it to the lovely lady.
Oh, I couldn't. Could I?
What are you trying to do, ruin the market?
Once this lovely little lady starts to show this precious little darling around, you won't be able to keep up with them.
Yes, what is it?
Put it on visual, Lieutenant.
Now, that's just lovely.
Yes, Lieutenant, what is it?
Go to Red Alert. Notify Mister Lurry. We'll be right up.
What is the position of the Klingon ship?
Captain, I have Mister Lurry.
Mister Lurry, there's a Klingon warship hanging one hundred kilometres off your station.
Cancel Red Alert. We'll beam right down.
Let me assure you that my intentions are peaceful. As I've already told Mister Lurry, the purpose of my presence is to invoke shore leave rights.
We have been in space for five months. What we choose as recreation is our own business.
I might also add that under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, you cannot refuse us.
Yes, well, I don't make those decisions. Mister Lurry is in charge of those matters.
Well, I have the authority to act, and I'm going to use it. My dear Captain Koloth, you may indeed bring your men down on shore leave, but only twelve at a time. And I assure you, for every man you bring down here, I shall have one security guard. There will be no trouble.
Captain Kirk, there's been no formal declaration of hostilities between our two respective governments. So, naturally, our relationship will be a peaceful one.
Let us both take steps to keep it that way.
Don't you ever relax?
I am relaxing.
How long have you had that thing, Lieutenant?
Since yesterday, Doctor. This morning, I found out that he, I mean she, had had babies.
Well, in that case, you got a bargain.
Oh, Captain. Well, I hadn't intended to, sir, but the tribble had other plans.
Did you get this at the space station?
Lieutenant, do you mind if I take one of these down to the lab to see what makes it tick?
Well, all right, Doctor, but if you're going to dissect it, I don't want to know about it.
I won't harm a hair on its head, wherever that is.
Say, Lieutenant. Seeing as you're giving them away, can I have one?
Pipe it down here will you, Mister Chekov.
Yes, Mister Baris. What can I do for you?
Kirk, this station is swarming with Klingons.
I was not aware, Mister Baris, that twelve Klingons constitutes a swarm.
Captain Kirk, there are Klingon soldiers on this station. Now, I want you to keep that grain safe.
Captain, may I ask where you'll be?
Sickbay with a headache.
Bones, what have you got for a headache?
Let me guess. Klingons? Baris?
Both. How many of these did Uhura give you?
But you've got, er, eleven.
You noticed that, huh? Here. This ought to take care of it.
How do they? How do they?
I haven't figured that out yet, but I can tell you this much. Almost fifty percent of the creature's metabolism is geared for reproduction. Do you know what you get if you feed a tribble too much?
A fat tribble.
No. You get a bunch of hungry little tribbles.
Well, Bones, all I can suggest is you open up a maternity ward.
All you men going on shore leave to stay in groups. Avoid trouble with the Klingons.
I'll tell them before they go, sir.
Aren't you going on shore leave, Scotty?
I want you to go on shore leave. Make sure that everybody stays out of trouble.
Ah, friend. Can I offer you a charming little tribble?
Oh. Perhaps one of you other gents?
Ah, friend Klingon. Can I interest you in a harmless tribble?
Get it away from me.
I'm sorry. I can't understand it. I've never seen them act this way before.
Get out of here with that parasite.
He's only a harmless little
Yes. Ah, my good friend. How would you like to enter another little transaction? This time, a tribble for a spot
When are you going to get off that milk diet, lad?
This is vodka.
Where I come from, that's soda pop. This is a drink for a man.
It was invented by a little old lady from Leningrad.
The Earthers like those fuzzy things, don't they?
Frankly, I never liked Earthers. They remind me of Regulan blood worms.
Easy, lad. You ought to be more forgiving.
Take it easy, lad. Everybody's entitled to an opinion.
That's right, and if I think that Kirk is a Denebian slime devil, well that's my opinion too.
Don't do it, mister, and that's an order.
Forget it. It's not worth fighting for. We're big enough to take a few insults. Now, drink your drink.
Of course, I'd say that Captain Kirk deserves his ship. We like the Enterprise. We, we really do. That sagging old rust bucket is designed like a garbage scow. Half the quadrant knows it. That's why they're learning to speak Klingonese.
Laddie, don't you think you should rephrase that?
You're right, I should. I didn't mean to say that the Enterprise should be hauling garbage. I meant to say that it should be hauled away as garbage.
I want to know who started it. I'm waiting. Freeman, who started the fight?
I don't know, sir.
All right. Chekov. I know you. You started it, didn't you?
No, sir, I didn't.
I don't know, sir.
They insulted us, sir.
Must have been some insult.
You held? Why did Chekov want to start a fight?
Well, the Klingon, sir. Is this off the record?
No, this is not off the record.
No, sir. They also compared you with a Denebian slime devil.
And then they said you
I get the picture, Scotty.
After they said all this, that's when you hit the Klingons?
No, I didn't. You told us to avoid trouble.
And I didn't see that it was worth fighting about. After all, we're big enough to take a few insults. Aren't we?
What was it they said that started the fight?
I see. And that's when you hit the Klingons?
You hit the Klingons because they insulted the Enterprise, not because they
Well, sir, this was a matter of pride.
All right, Scotty. Dismissed. Scotty, you're restricted to quarters until further notice.
There's something disquieting about these creatures.
Don't tell me you've got a feeling.
Don't be insulting, Doctor. They remind me of the lilies of the field. They toil not, neither do they spin. But they seem to eat a great deal. I see no practical use for them.
Does everything have to have a practical use for you? They're nice, soft, and furry, and they make a pleasant sound.
It's a human characteristic to love little animals, especially if they're attractive in some way.
Doctor, I am well aware of human characteristics. I am frequently inundated by them, but I've trained myself to put up with practically anything.
Spock, I don't know too much about these little tribbles yet, but there's one thing that I have discovered.
What is that, Doctor?
I like them better than I like you.
They do have one redeeming characteristic.
They do not talk too much. If you'll excuse me, sir.
I don't know, sir. They do seem to be all over the ship.
Yes? Did you want to see me, Jim? Don't look at me. It's the tribbles who are breeding. If we don't get them off this ship, we're going to be hip deep in them.
The nearest thing I can figure out is they're born pregnant, which seems to be quite a time saver.
I know, but really
And from my observations, it seems they're bisexual, reproducing at will. And, brother, have they got a lot of will.
Captain, I am forced to agree with the doctor. I've been running computations on their rate of reproduction. The figures are taking an alarming direction. They're consuming our supplies and returning nothing.
But they do give us something, Mister Spock. They give us love. Well, Cyrano Jones says a tribble is the only love that money can buy.
Too much of anything, Lieutenant, even love, isn't necessarily a good thing.
Get the maintenance crew to clean up the entire ship, and then contact Mister Lurry and tell him I'm beaming down.
Captain Kirk, I'm mystified at your tone of voice. I've done nothing to warrant such severe treatment.
Of course. What did you say?
By removing the tribbles from their natural habitat, you have, so to speak, removed the cork from the bottle and allowed the genie to escape.
If by that, you mean do they breed quickly? Of course, that's how I maintain my stock. Breeding animals is not against regulations, only breeding dangerous ones. And tribbles are not dangerous.
Precisely, and at six credits a head, well, that is, a body, it mounts up. Now if you'll excuse me.
You should sell an instruction and maintenance manual for this thing.
If I did, what would happen to man's search for knowledge? Well, I must be tending my ship. Au revoir.
Captain Kirk, I consider your security measures a disgrace. In my opinion, you have taken this important project far too lightly.
On the contrary, sir. I think of this project as very important. It is you I take lightly.
I am going to report fully to the proper authorities that you have given free and complete access to this station to a man who is quite probably a Klingon agent.
That's a serious charge. To whom are you referring?
Cyrano Jones, a Klingon agent?
I heard you.
He simply could not believe his ears.
What evidence do you have against Mister Jones?
My assistant here has kept Mister Jones under close surveillance for quite some time, and his actions have been most suspicious. I believe he was involved in that little altercation between your men and the men from
Yes, yes. Go on. What else do you have?
Well Captain, I've checked his ship's log, and it seems that he was within the Klingon's sphere of influence less than four months ago.
The man is an independent scout, Captain. It is quite possible he is also a Klingon spy.
But he is after my grain!
Do you have any proof of that?
You can't deny he's disrupted this station.
People have disrupted stations before without being Klingon agents. Sometimes, all they need is a title, Mister Baris. Unfortunately, disrupting a space station is not an offence. Now, if you'll excuse me, I have a ship to tend to. Au revoir.
My chicken sandwich and coffee. This is my chicken sandwich and coffee.
I want these off the ship. I don't care if it takes every man we've got, I want them off the ship.
They're into the machinery, all right, and they're probably in all the other food processors too.
Probably through one of the air vents.
Captain, there are vents of that type on the space station.
Plenty, if what I think's happened has happened.
Yes, sir. Nothing could get in.
It's not working, sir. It seems to be stuck.
Here. Let me try it.
They seem to be gorged.
Gorged? On my grain? Kirk, I am going to hold you responsible. There must be thousands of them.
Hundreds of thousands.
One million seven hundred seventy one thousand five hundred sixty one. That's assuming one tribble, multiplying with an average litter of ten, producing a new generation every twelve hours over a period of three days.
That's assuming they got here three days ago.
And allowing for the amount of grain consumed and the volume of the storage compartment.
Kirk, you should have known. You are responsible for turning the development project into a total disaster.
And I'm through being intimidated, Kirk. You have insulted me, you have ignored me, you've walked all over me. You have abused your authority, and you've rejected my requests. And this, this is the result. I'm going to hold you responsible.
Mister Baris, I'll hold you in irons if you don't shut up.
Jim, I think I've got it. All we have to do is quit feeding them. We quit feeding them, they stop breeding.
Now he tells me.
Captain this tribble is dead. And so are these.
A lot of them are dead. A lot of them are alive, but they won't be for long.
The logical assumption is that there is something in the grain.
Yes. Bones, I want the tribbles, the grain, everything analysed. I want to know what killed these tribbles.
That isn't going to do you any good, Kirk. This project is ruined, and Starfleet is going to hear about it. And when they do, they will have a board of inquiry and they will roast you alive. And I am going to be there, Kirk, to enjoy every minute of it.
Really, Captain Kirk, I must protest this treatment.
Ah, Mister Jones, with an armful. A few questions.
What do you want?
An official apology addressed to the Klingon High Command. I expect you to assume full responsibility for the persecution of Klingon nationals in this quadrant.
Yes. You've harassed my men. You've treated them like criminals. You've been most uncourteous, Captain Kirk. If you wish to avoid a diplomatic incident
No, Kirk. You can't let him. That will give them the wedge they need to claim Sherman's Planet.
I believe that more than the word of an aggrieved Klingon commander would be necessary for that, Mister Baris.
Mister Spock, as far as Sherman's Planet is concerned, Captain Kirk has already given it to us.
Well, we'll see about that, but before I take any official action, I'd like to know Just what happened. Who put the tribbles in the quadrotriticale? What was in the grain that killed them?
Captain Kirk, before you go on, may I make a request?
Can you get those things out of here?
Hold on a minute. I thought you said tribbles liked everybody.
They do. I can't understand it. The last time I saw one act this way was at the bar.
What was in the bar?
Obviously tribbles are very perceptive creatures, Captain.
I wonder what Starfleet Command will say about that. What about the grain, Bones?
Oh, yes. It was poisoned.
Yes. It's been impregnated with a virus. The virus turns into an inert material in the bloodstream. The more the organism eats, the more inert matter is built up. So after two or three days, they reached a point where they couldn't take in enough nourishment to survive.
They starved to death. In a storage compartment full of grain, they starved to death.
That is essentially it.
Mister Darvin, are you going to talk?
And the tribbles had nothing to do with it?
I don't know. I never saw one before in my life, and I hope I never see one of those fuzzy miserable things again.
I'm certain that can be arranged, Darvin. Guards? If you'll excuse me, Captain.
You have six hours to get your ship out of Federation territory.
You know, I think I could learn to like tribbles.
Well, Captain, I suppose I'm free to go now.
No, you're not. There's something I want to show you. You know what the penalty is for transporting an animal proven harmful to human life?
Captain, one little tribble isn't harmful. Captain, you wouldn't do a thing like that to me, now would you? Would you?
The penalty is twenty years in a rehabilitation colony.
Captain Kirk. Friend. Friend Kirk. Surely we can come to some sort of mutual understanding. After all, my tribbles did put you wise to the poisoned grain, and they did help you to find the Klingon agent. You saved a lot of lives that way.
There is one thing you can do.
Pick up every tribble on the space station. If you do that, I'll speak to Mister Lurry about returning your spaceship.
It would take years.
Consider it Job security.
Captain, you're a hard man. All right! All right!
You'll do it?
He'll do it.
I'll do it.
Captain, Starfleet was able to divert that freighter.
Good. That means Sherman's Planet will get its quadrotriticale only a few weeks late. I don't see any tribbles around here.
And you won't find a tribble on this entire ship.
Bones, how did you do it?
I cannot take credit for another man's work. Scotty did it.
Scotty! Where are the tribbles?
Oh, er, Captain, it was really Mister Spock's recommendation.
Based on computer analysis, of course, taking into account the possibilities of
Gentlemen, I don't want to interrupt this mutual admiration society, but I'd like to know where the tribbles are.
Well, it was Mister Scott who performed the actual engineering.
Mister Scott. Where are the tribbles?
Where did you transport them? Scott, you didn't transport them into space, did you?
Where are they?
I gave them to the Klingons, sir.
Aye, sir. Before they went into warp, I transported the whole kit and caboodle into their engine room, where they'll be no tribble at all.
Captain, I think I'm going to like Argelius.
Obviously a man of good taste.
You mean to tell me all these women, that all this is
Yes, yes, yes. The Argelians think very highly of their pleasure.
That's an understatement if I ever heard one. This is a completely hedonistic society.
Do you like her, Scotty?
Aye. Why shouldn't I?
Good. I've invited her to join us at the table. I thought you might like to meet her.
Now that's what I call a real Captain. Always thinking of his men.
Scotty, Scotty. In Argelius they use the lights.
Have one of our pillows?
'Tis a fine foggy night tonight, and I doubt if anyone's ever told you of the marvellous fogs we have in Aberdeen.
Never a word, but I'm dying to learn.
Well then, why don't I show you? There's nothing like a walk in the fog with a bonny lass.
Or a handsome gentleman. Why don't we?
You don't mind, do you? I might even get back to the ship on time.
My work, Jim. This is prescription stuff. Don't forget, the explosion that threw Scotty against a bulkhead was caused by a woman.
Physically he's all right. Am I right in assuming that?
Oh, yes, yes. As a matter of fact, considerable psychological damage could have been caused. For example, his total resentment toward women.
He seems he's overcoming his resentment.
Of course, in my professional opinion, when he gets back to the ship, he's going to hate you for making him leave Argelius. But then he will have lost total resentment toward women.
Mission accomplished as far as Scotty is concerned. Bones, I know a little place across town where the women
Oh yes. I know the place. Let's go.
She's dead, Jim.
Stabbed, a dozen times.
We're just as shocked as you are, Mister Hengist.
If this was my home planet, Rigel Four, I'd have a dozen investigators working on the matter, but they don't exist here.
You're not a native of Argelius, sir?
I, I don't remember.
Really, sir. That is hardly helpful.
Scotty, you left the cafe with the girl. Do you remember that? What happened next?
We were walking in the fog. I was up ahead trying to lead the way. I heard the girl scream. I remember starting to turn. I don't remember another thing.
Scotty, you've got to remember.
You don't think by any chance that Scotty
It doesn't make any difference what I think.
But you don't just throw him to the wolves.
Bones, I have a diplomatic responsibility. This happened under Argelian jurisdiction. If they want to arrest him, try him, even convict him, I have to go along with it.
But he's suffering from a severe concussion.
We'll do what we can.
It's not promising, Captain. Mister Scott insists he remembers nothing, but my detector readings indicates that only his fingerprints are on the murder weapon.
Yes. Mister Hengist, there were other people in the cafe about the time of the murder. Several of them left just before Mister Scott and the girl did.
So I've been informed by the staff. They're being located and we will question them. But the outlook for your friend is quite grim.
The law of Argelius is love.
And this is my wife, Sybo.
And this man is Scott, the one I sent you the message about.
He does not look like a man capable of such an act. Still, it's been so long. Gentlemen, before our great awakening two hundred years ago, we had ways of learning the truth in such matters. We shall return to them.
You know of this?
Yes, we've heard of it. I assumed it was a lost art.
My wife is a descendent of the ancient priestesses of our land. She has the ancestral gift. Gentlemen, I have come to invite you to my home.
Prefect, don't you think this should be handled in an official manner through my office?
It shall be handled in an official manner, Mister Hengist, since I am the highest official. Gentlemen, let us proceed to my home where, with the aid of my wife, we shall learn the truth. Please.
Prefect, it will give us a detailed account of everything that's happened to Mister Scott in the last twenty four hours.
Oh, I'd advise against it, Prefect. This is purely an Argelian matter.
My wife must meditate for a time before she's ready. I see no reason why we should not use that time to good advantage. Very well, Captain.
Kirk to Enterprise.
There is a small chamber below this room. Perhaps that will suffice. Captain, news of this frightful murder is spreading among my people. They're greatly disturbed. I have already heard talk of closing Argelius to space vehicles.
There are other people we should question. Perhaps I should go expedite their arrival here?
Yes, please do so, Mister Hengist. Anyone with any connection with this murder should be present at the ceremony.
Lieutenant Karen Tracy reporting as ordered, Captain.
If you'll Just follow me, Lieutenant.
Captain, under normal conditions, Scotty would have never done such a thing.
But that blow on the head. It could put all his previous behaviour patterns into the junk heap.
Of course, there's another possibility.
Hysterical amnesia. When a man feels guilty about something, something too terrible to remember, he blots it out of his conscious memory.
Are you ready, Sybo?
I am ready. May I have the knife, please?
Certainly. Among other gifts, Sybo has the ability to receive impressions from inanimate objects. Do you have it, Captain?
But I put it here when we arrived. It's gone.
She's dead, Jim. Just like the other one.
Stabbed over and over again.
Lieutenant? Captain? Where's
Lieutenant Tracy is dead, Scott. You were found alone in the room.
Dead? But I
I was sitting there. She was taking her readings, and now I'm sitting here.
I tell you, I don't remember. I must have passed out.
It could be, Jim. That head injury.
Captain, I've been trying. I can't even believe this is really happening.
There's no way into that place from up here. Prefect, is there another entrance to that chamber?
Yes, there's a door that leads into the garden, but it's been locked for years.
Locks can be picked, Jim.
Prefect, both of these men were at the cafe the night of the murder.
Where've they been during the past few minutes?
Captain, if you don't mind please.
There's been another murder, Hengist. One of my crew.
The same as Kara.
Please, I know nothing about it. I didn't kill anyone.
Well, how was the girl killed?
Stabbed. And there's no sign of the weapon.
If only I had facilities.
You. You were a musician at the cafe. You played for the murdered girl.
Since she was a little girl, she danced for me. She was my daughter. Prefect, how could this thing have happened here? The man who did it must be found. He must be punished.
Is this true? Who are you?
Morla of Cantaba Street, Prefect. I was there. I have nothing to hide.
Did you know Kara?
Of course he knew her. They were to be married, but he behaved disgracefully. Unheard of. He was jealous of her.
That is very disquieting.
I know it was wrong, but I just couldn't help myself. I loved her, and when she went over to the table with these men, I could not stand to watch, so I left and went home.
Jealousy has often been a motive for murder.
Yes, I know. That is why the emotion is so strongly disapproved of here.
Prefect, I didn't kill anyone. I couldn't.
We shall see, Morla.
Sorry, Jim. The lock may or may not have been picked. It would be hard to tell even with the tricorder.
Can you prove you went directly home?
Captain, may I continue with the questions please?
Well get on with it, man. Just don't stand there.
Captain, Captain. You're behaving very much like a man who is desperately trying anything to save his friend. Would you be as desperate to save Argelius as a space port for your Starfleet?
Well of course I'm trying to save my friend, if he's innocent. And he hasn't been proven guilty.
Need I remind you of the circumstances, Captain? In both cases, your friend Scott was discovered over the body and later claimed to remember nothing.
I am ready, Jaris.
On one condition, Prefect. That the room be sealed so that no one can leave or enter while the ceremony is going on.
Captain, you mean my neck is going to have to depend on some spooky mumbo jumbo?
Concerning the situation you related to us. In my opinion, the Argelian empathic contact is an interesting phenomenon, but the technique is not sound enough to risk a man's life.
What do you suggest, Mister Spock?
Simply that we beam Mister Scott on board the Enterprise and employ our computers to learn the truth.
These are a proud people. They have their own customs, their own laws, and while we're here we're subject to them. It is absolutely imperative that this matter be resolved according to Argelian law. Is that clear?
I don't like it any more than you do, Spock, but there's nothing we can do about it. Kirk out,
Let us begin. Let the circle not be broken. Concentrate upon the flame which burns upon the altar of truth.
I don't care what the circumstances indicate, Jim. Scotty simply could not have done it.
Normally, no, but that blow on his head could
I agree with you, Captain. I'm perfectly satisfied Mister Scott is guilty.
That is unproven, sir.
We can prove it, if he's insane.
Gentlemen, please. How could any man do such monstrous things?
That's what we hope to find out, sir.
Sir, I swear to you I did not kill your wife or the other ladies.
Mister Hengist. On the Enterprise, we can make a recording of the registrations of Mister Scott's conscious and subconscious mind. They will tell us what happened to him in the recent past.
There would be no room for doubt. We would know. And after all, that's what we're after, isn't it, Prefect? To know?
You, sir, claim to remember nothing about the murders.
If this is so, you may have killed without knowing it. Will your machines tell us this?
No doubt will remain.
Very well. We will go to your ship, and he who is guilty will face the ancient penalties, barbaric and horrible though they may be. The ancient penalty for murder was death by slow torture. That law has never been changed. Do you understand that, Mister Scott?
Mister Scott, will you take the stand?
Sufficient abnormalities to account for periods of functional amnesia?
Captain, I don't see how that can be.
Unless Scotty's lying about his loss of memory.
I'm not lying, Captain. I don't remember a thing about the first two murders.
Captain? I didn't black out when Mister Jaris' wife was killed.
All right, Scotty, let's have it.
We were holding hands. When the lights went out, the circle was broken. I heard the poor lady scream, and as I was near the head of the table anyway I went toward her. But there was something in my way.
No, Captain. That I'm sure of.
He's been saying that right along. It means no more now than it did before.
Scotty, lie to me. How old are you?
After the lights went out, Mister Scott, who was holding your hand?
Morla on the one side and you on the other, sir.
But that doesn't mean anything, Captain, with a room that small. The lights were out. Anyone would've had time to kill the lady.
The verifier showed that he was telling the truth when he said he didn't kill her.
There were two other women murdered.
Mister Scott. Did you kill Kara?
I don't remember.
Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy?
All that proves is that he's telling the truth when he says he doesn't remember.
This is a waste of time.
Well, if you can convince me that the machine is incapable of error, and if it shows he did not kill the women.
There will be no error. As for the rest of it, the readings will show. You can step down, Mister Scott, if there are no objections.
I object to the entire procedure.
Prefect, I know you mean well, but I've had experience
For the time being, we will accept Captain Kirk's explanation of the machine's accuracy as factual. I do, however, reserve to myself the right to make the final determination.
We can ask no more. Mister Morla, will you take the stand?
Where were you at the time that Kara was murdered?
I'm not sure. Walking home, I assume. I was angry.
I've never done violence in my life. I don't think I could. You've got to believe me. I wouldn't kill her. I couldn't. I loved her, and she loved me.
That's not true! He might think she loved him, but she didn't. She told me. He was jealous. All the time. They fought constantly.
Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy?
Did you kill Sybo?
All right, Mister Morla, I think you can step down now. Sybo spoke of a hunger that never dies. Something that thrives on fear, terror, death. Mister Spock, maybe we're going about it in the wrong way. Let's assume that Sybo was a sensitive. That she did sense something, something evil.
Sensitivity of certain Argelian women is a documented fact, Captain.
My poor Sybo's talent was genuine, gentlemen. What she told you was true.
All right, then, what was it she said, exactly? A monstrous evil, ancient terror.
She said something else, words that didn't make sense.
Computer, linguistic bank. Definition of following word. Redjac.
There is no such word in the linguistics bank?
Working. Affirmative. A proper name.
Redjac. Source Earth, nineteenth century. Language, English. Nickname for mass murderer of women. Other Earth synonym, Jack the Ripper.
That's ridiculous. He lived hundreds of years ago.
A man couldn't survive all these centuries.
Just before she died, my wife said, it is a hunger that never dies.
Yes, all men die. And Jack the Ripper couldn't be alive if he were a man. But everything we've uncovered points to Jack the Ripper, which is an impossibility, isn't it? Or is it?
Humans and humanoids make up only a small percentage of the life forms we know of. There are entities possessed of extremely long life spans, virtually immortal.
We know that someone or something killed three women. If it's impossible for it to be human, it has to be something else. Something driven to kill.
Sybo said it feeds on death.
Which would tend to support the proposition that the murderer was not human. Deriving sustenance from emotion is not unknown in the galaxy, and fear is among the strongest and most violent of the emotions.
Surely, Prefect, this has gone far enough. Someone, some man has killed three women. We have the prime suspect in our hands. Are we going to let him go and start chasing ghosts?
No, Mister Hengist, not ghosts. Possibly not human, but not ghosts. Mister Spock, check out the possibilities.
Computer, digest log recordings for past five solar minutes. Correlate hypotheses. Compare with life forms register. Question. Could such an entity within discussed limits exist in this galaxy?
The Drella of Alpha Carinae Five derives nourishment from the emotion of love. There is sufficient precedent for existence of creature, nature unknown, which could exist on emotion of fear.
Computer, extrapolate most likely composition of such entity.
Working. To meet with specified requirements, entity would exist without form in conventional sense. Most probable mass of energy of highly cohesive electromagnetic field.
Affirmative. Precedent, mellitus, cloud creature of Alpha Majoris One.
No, I've seen the mellitus myself. In its natural state, it's gaseous. When it's at rest, it's solid. Mister Spock, let's assume the existence of this creature.
I point out that Jack the Ripper slew at will in the heart of the most populous city of old Earth and was never identified.
Doesn't seem likely, does it?
I suggest the possibility of a hypnotic screen, which blinds all but the victim to the presence of the killer.
Extremely possible There are many such examples that exist in nature.
This is fantasy! We all know the murderer is sitting right here. You're trying to cloud the issue. I've got a mind to
I am satisfied the course of this investigation is valid enough. Please be seated, Mister Hengist.
All right, Mister Spock, what do we have? A creature without form, that feeds on horror and fear, that must assume a physical shape to kill.
And I suspect preys on women because women are more easily and more deeply terrified, generating more sheer horror than the male of the species.
Computer. Criminological files. Cases of unsolved mass murders of women since Jack the Ripper.
Captain, those places are aligned directly between Argelius and Earth.
Yes. When man moved out into the galaxy, that thing must've moved with him. Computer, identify the proper names Kesla and Beratis.
Working. Kesla. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Deneb Two. Beratis. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Rigel Four. Additional data. Murders on Rigel Four occurred one solar year ago.
You come from Rigel Four.
Well, many people do. It's not a crime.
No, but what we're investigating is. Would you mind taking the stand, Mister Hengist?
I will not.
Prefect, this has gone far enough. I will not take the stand.
I can appreciate your position, sir. You are in charge of civil disturbances locally. If you are the entity for which we search, what better position from which to kill with impunity?
Just after you left Jaris' house, we discovered the murder knife was missing.
And you were unaccounted for when Lieutenant Tracy was murdered.
An entity which feeds on fear and terror would find a perfect hunting ground on Argelius, a planet without violence, where the inhabitants are as peaceful as sheep. The entity would be as a hungry wolf in that fold.
Gentlemen, I know something of the law. You're engaging in sheer speculation.
Computer. Report on analysis of Exhibit A.
Working. Exhibit A on visual. Composition of blade, boridium. Composition of handle, murinite. Details of carving on handle conform to folk art forms, indicating place of origin.
Specify. Point of origin.
Artefact produced by hill people of Argus River region, planet Rigel Four.
Now then, Mister Hengist
He's dead, Jim.
But that's impossible.
The computer will not respond to these controls. The entity is unquestionably controlling it.
It's no use, Captain. The bypass circuits are blocked.
What does it mean?
It means that thing can control the entire operation of the ship, including the life support systems.
You mean it could kill us all?
Indeed, it will try, but not immediately. We know it feeds on fear and terror. There are nearly four hundred and forty humans aboard this ship. Surely it will try to breed fear and terror before it kills.
All hands, this is the captain. Stay at your posts. Remain calm. Captain out. Bones. What's the sedative situation?
I've got some stuff that would tranquillise an active volcano.
Good. Start distribution immediately. The longer we can hold back that fear, the more time we'll have to get that thing out of the computer. Prefect, you'll all be safer here. Spock, come with me.
Spock, don't you have a compulsory scan unit built into the computer banks?
Yes we do, Captain, but with the entity in control
Aren't there certain mathematical problems which simply cannot be solved?
Indeed. If we could focus the attention of the computer on one of them.
That ought to do it.
Apparently our friends learned very quickly.
Out of control. Put it on manual. Bridge.
We don't have much time, Captain.
You said it yourself, Spock. It wants terror, not just death.
All right. Man your station, Mister Sulu.
This is the first time I heard a malfunction threaten us.
Normal environmental levels have been restored, Captain, but it will not last long. A few hours at best.
That should be enough time. Let's get at it.
You cannot stop me now, Captain. It will do you no good. I control all circuits. You cannot silence me. You cannot reach me. Your manual overrides are extremely limited in life.
Proceeding, Captain, but I will need some time.
If you destroy this ship, you destroy yourself.
It is attempting to generate terror, Captain.
Man your post, Mister. If any of the other systems go out, switch to manual override, and above all, don't be afraid.
With an armful of this stuff, I wouldn't be afraid of a supernova.
Computer, this is a Class A compulsory directive. Compute to the last digit the value of pi.
As we know, the value of pi is a transcendental figure without resolution. The computer banks will work on this problem to the exclusion of all else until we order it to stop.
Yes, that should keep that thing busy for a while. The Argelians will be the first to panic. Let's get back to the briefing room.
I wonder who it is we're not supposed to be afraid of.
I doubt very much whether the computers will be inhabited by more than a group of figures for a while.
There is resistance, Captain, but the directive is succeeding. Bank after bank is turning to the problem.
If you drive it out of the computers, it'll have to go somewhere else.
How are you doing?
I'm almost finished. Just Jaris and me.
Complete computer control, Captain. The entity has fled.
Yes, but where to? Bones, what would happen if that thing entered a tranquillised body?
Well, it might take up knitting, but nothing more violent than that.
You say everyone's had a shot but you and Jaris?
Well, I'm willing to take a chance on Mister Spock. Better give yourself a shot, Doc.
No, I don't think so. I think I ought to stay clear.
Do as I say.
Extend your arm, Mister Jaris.
Everybody keep back or I'll kill her! I'll kill her! Keep back!
You'd better be careful. You're going to hurt somebody with that thing.
Let's get him to the Transporter Room, quick!
You'll die, die, die. Everybody will die.
Kill, kill, kill you all.
Deep space. Full power. Widest angle of dispersion. Maintain.
No need to get excited, Captain. I'll do it.
You do it, Spock.
Everybody die. You'll all suffer.
You didn't have to shove me, Mister Spock. I'd have gotten round to it.
Well, Jaris is all right.
What did you do with that thing, Captain? Did you send it back to the planet?
No. We beamed it out into open space, Scotty. Widest possible dispersion.
That thing can't die.
Possibly, Doctor. Its consciousness may continue for some time, consisting of billions of separate bits of energy, floating forever in space, powerless.
But it will die finally. You seem very happy about the whole thing.
Why not? For a while there I didn't know whether I was innocent or guilty.
Bones, how long will it take for this tranquilliser to wear off?
I don't know. Five or six hours. I gave them a pretty big shot, Jim.
Yes, I can see that. Well Mister Spock, for the next five or six hours, we're going to have the happiest crew in space. Of course, we won't get much work done.
Captain, since you came to Argelius to rest, I suggest you take advantage of the opportunity.
That's a splendid idea, Mister Spock. I know a cafe where the women are so
Let's go see!
Our scanner survey was correct, Captain. There it is. Pure tritanium.
Twenty one point four times as hard, to be exact.
We won't be able to break it, Captain. I'll phaser off a specimen.
Do you smell that? A sweet odour like honey. It was years ago, on another planet. A thing with a an odour like that.
We're in the growing season in this hemisphere of this planet. There are doubtless many pollen aromas.
Negative, Scotty. We're checking something out.
It's gone. I could have been wrong. The last time I caught an odour like that was eleven years ago.
Seemed to read dikironium for a minute, and then I lost it. It's almost like something out there knows I'm scanning it. It kind of keeps changing itself into something different. That isn't possible. Nothing can do that.
Fire into it immediately!
Spock. Dead. And you'll find every red corpuscle gone from their body.
Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, lock in on us. Medical emergency.
You think you know what it was, Captain?
Something that can't possibly exist, but it does.
Kirk to bridge.
Hold your position.
Then you'll inform them that we might be a little late.
Jim, the Yorktown's ship surgeon will want to know how late. Those vaccines he's transferring to us are highly perishable.
Gentlemen, we are remaining in orbit until I find out more about those deaths, on my responsibility. I am perfectly aware that it might cost lives on Theta Seven. Kirk out. Autopsy report.
You saw their colour. There wasn't a red corpuscle left in their bodies.
Marks, cuts, incisions of any kind?
Not a one. What happened is medically impossible.
I suggest you look at the record tapes of past similar occurrences. You'll find the USS Farragut lists casualties eleven years ago from exactly the same impossible causes.
Thank you, Captain. I'll check those tapes immediately.
First, can you bring Ensign Rizzo to consciousness for a moment?
Yes, but it
Will it hurt him if you do so?
In his present condition, I don't think it would make much difference.
Transfusion completed, sir. His pulse and respiration are still far below normal.
Give him one cc of cordazine, nurse.
Rizzo. This is the captain. Can you hear me? Do you remember what happened to you?
Remember. I'm cold. I'm so cold.
You were attacked by something. When it happened, did you notice an odour of any kind? Rizzo. Rizzo! Do you remember a sickly sweet odour? Did you smell it?
Yes. Yes. A smell. A strange smell. It was like being smothered in honey.
Did you feel a presence, an intelligence?
It was trying to draw strength from us. I felt it. It was, it was, it was there.
He's beginning to sleep again. I can't risk another shot.
He's already told me what I wanted to know.
What's with the captain? I've never seen him like that before.
I intend to find out. I'll be in the medical record library.
Oh, Captain. Subspace message from Starfleet. They're inquiring
Not now. Have the security duty officer report to me immediately.
Continuing scanning. Still no readings of life forms on the planet.
Let's assume that it's something so completely different that our sensors wouldn't identify it as a life form.
Suppose it was composed of that rare element. A strange, gaseous creature.
I've scanned for that element, Captain. There's no trace of dikironium on the planet surface or in the atmosphere.
Suppose it camouflaged itself. Let's assume that it's intelligent, that it knows we're looking for it.
To hide from a sensor scan, it would have to be able to change its molecular structure, like gold changing itself to lead or wood changing itself to ivory.
You've just suggested something that never occurred to me. It may provide some answers to a tape record which I think you'll find Doctor McCoy is looking at this very moment.
Are you the new security officer?
Was your father
Yes, sir, but I don't expect any special treatment on that account.
You'll get none aboard this ship, Mister.
Captain, I have a report on Ensign Rizzo. He's dead, sir.
Yes, sir. We were good friends, graduated the Academy together.
You'll get a crack at what killed him. Interested?
I want four men armed with phaser two set for disrupter effect. Join me in the transporter room in five minutes. You'll accompany me to the planet surface.
Reading is changing, sir.
Spock was right. Notice the molecular shift?
Dikironium reading now, sir. Bearing ninety four mark seven, angle of elevation six degrees. Holding steady.
Over that rise. Take two men, circle around to the left. I'll take the other two and go the other way. That creature is dangerous. If you see it, fire full phasers.
Swensen, Bardoli come with me.
Mister Garrovick, we've studied your report. Mister Spock, begin.
What was the size of the thing you saw, Ensign?
I'd say it measured from ten to sixty cubic metres, sir. It varied in size, fluctuated as it moved.
It was like a, a gaseous cloud. Parts of it I could see through. Other parts were more dense.
Ensign, did you sense any intelligence in this gaseous cloud?
Did I what, sir?
Did you get any subconscious impressions that this was a creature. A living, thinking thing, rather than just a strange cloud of chemical elements?
But you didn't come to actual contact with it, did you?
No, sir. I was furthest away from it. It seemed to come out of nowhere, hovered for a moment, then moved toward my men. It was fast, incredibly fast.
Did you say it hovered?
You did fire at it, didn't you?
What distance were you from the creature?
Yes. I, er, well, I didn't fire while it was hovering, sir.
You mean you froze?
No, sir. I didn't exactly freeze.
What exactly were you doing?
Well, I was startled for a second. And then by the time I fired, the thing was already moving.
Do you have any further information?
Do you gentlemen have any further questions?
I only hesitated for a moment, sir. I'm sorry.
Ensign, you're relieved of all duties and confined to quarters until further notice.
You were a little hard on the boy, Jim.
He froze. One man was killed. Another may die.
You'll both be filing reports. Make your comments and recommendations then.
Captain, while we're waiting I've taken the liberty of cleaning the radioactive disposal vent on number two impulse engine, but we'll be ready to leave orbit in under half an hour.
We're not leaving orbit, Mister Scott. Not that quickly.
Captain, the Yorktown requesting information on how soon we expect to rendezvous with them.
The medicine for Theta Seven colony is not only needed desperately and has limited
I'm aware of the situation, Engineer, and I'm getting a little tired of my senior officers conspiring against me. Forgive me. Perhaps I shouldn't have used the word conspire.
Nothing, sir. Continuing to scan.
Are you aware it can change its molecular structure?
Are you scanning for any unusual movement?
Any type of gaseous cloud?
We've run a full scanner probe twice.
Then run it twenty times if that's what it takes!
I hope I'm not disturbing you, Doctor.
Interrupting another autopsy report is no disturbance, Mister Spock. It's a relief.
I need your advice.
I do not understand your reasoning.
You need advice from me? You must be kidding.
Jim and his creature?
Precisely. Have you studied the incident involving the USS Farragut?
No. With all these deaths and injuries, I've only had a chance to scan the tapes. There are eight or ten hours of record tape there.
Fortunately, I read somewhat faster. In brief, Doctor, nearly half the crew and the captain were annihilated. The captain's name was Garrovick.
The same as our Ensign.
Mind if I come in?
Kirk to bridge. Scanning report.
Maintain search. Kirk out. It can't have just vanished.
Sometimes they do, if we're lucky. Monsters come in many forms. You know the greatest monster of them all, Jim? Guilt.
Get to the point.
Jim, When a young officer is exposed to unknown dangers for the first time, he's under tremendous emotional stress. Now we all know that.
Am I? I was speaking of Lieutenant James T. Kirk of the starship Farragut. Eleven years ago, you were the young officer at the phaser station when something attacked. According to the tapes, this young Lieutenant Kirk insisted upon blaming himself.
You had a normal emotion. You were startled. You delayed firing for a grand total of perhaps two seconds.
If I hadn't delayed, it would have been killed.
The ship's exec didn't seem to think so. His log entry was quite clear on the subject. Lieutenant Kirk is a fine young officer who performed with uncommon bravery.
Don't you understand? It killed two hundred crewmen.
Captain Garrovick was very important to you, wasn't he, Jim?
Yes. He was my commanding officer from the day I left the Academy. One of the finest men I ever knew. I could have killed that thing if I'd fired soon enough the first time.
You don't know that, Jim. You don't know that any more than you know that Garrovick could have destroyed it.
I can't help how I feel. There's an intelligence about it, Bones. A malevolence. It's evil. It must be destroyed.
That you could destroy yourself, your career, a young boy who reminds you of yourself eleven years ago.
Don't push our friendship past the point where I have to take official
I'm not, Jim. This is professional, Captain. I am preparing a medical log entry on my estimation of the physical and emotional condition of a starship captain. Which requires a witness of command grade.
Do I take it, Doctor, Commander, that both of you or either of you consider me unfit or incapacitated?
Correctly phrased, Captain. As recommended in the manual. Our reply, also as recommended, is, sir, we have noted in your recent behaviour certain items, which, on the surface, seem unusual. We respectfully ask permission to inquire further
Blast it! Forget the manual! Ask your questions.
Sir, the USS Yorktown is waiting now at the rendezvous point. It carries perishable drugs
They need those vaccines on Theta Seven, Captain. Now why are we delaying here?
Because I'm convinced that this is the same creature that attacked the Farragut eleven years ago.
My report is on the tapes. As it attacked us eleven years ago, as I lost consciousness, I could feel the intelligence of the thing. I could sense it thinking, planning.
You say you could sense its intelligence, Captain? How did it communicate with you?
You state that it happened just as you lost consciousness. A semiconscious mind is a very tricky thing. A man never knows how much is real or how much is imagination.
Whatever it is, Doctor, whatever it is, wouldn't you call it deadly?
Yes, there's no doubt about that.
And what if it is the same creature that attacked eleven years ago from a planet over a thousand light years from here?
Obviously, Captain, if it is an intelligent creature, if it is the same one, if it therefore is capable of space travel, it could pose a great threat to inhabited planets.
A lot of ifs, I agree, but in my command judgment, they out weigh other factors. Intuition, however illogical, Mister Spock, is recognized as a command prerogative.
Jim, we're not trying to gang up on you.
And you haven't, Doctor. You've expressed the proper concern, you've asked the proper questions. You've both done your duty. Now may I ask what medical log entry you intend to make?
At this point, my medical log remains open.
In that case, gentlemen
I have a reading on the whatever it is, Captain. Leaving the planet surface, heading into space.
All decks, Red Alert. Red alert. Prepare to leave orbit.
Captain, we can't maintain warp eight speed much longer. Pressures are approaching the critical point.
We are barely closing in on it, Captain. We could be pursuing it for days.
If necessary. Do what you can to increase our speed, Scott.
Spock, how do you read that?
Conflicting data, Captain. It seems to be in a borderline state between matter and energy. Elements of both. It could possibly use gravitational fields for propulsion.
And you don't find that sophisticated, Mister Spock?
Extremely efficient, Captain. Whether that indicates intelligence is another matter.
We won't be using the impulse engines. Turn the alarm off.
Captain, we can't do it. If we keep this speed, we'll blow up any minute now.
Go to warp six.
Hi. Everyone else is at alert station, so I brought you some dinner.
I'm not hungry.
Are we still chasing that thing half way across the galaxy? Yes. Has the captain lost his sense of balance? Maybe. Is the entire crew about ready to explode? Positively. You're lucky you're out of it.
What do you mean, out of it? I caused it. You know that, too, don't you? If I'd fired my phaser quickly enough on Argus Ten, this wouldn't have happened.
I told you, Christine, I'm not hungry.
Doctor McCoy thought you might say something like that. This is his officially logged prescription for you. It has one word on it. Eat. Now if you don't follow his orders, Doctor McCoy could and possibly would have you hauled down to Sickbay and fed intravenously.
The creature is slowing. It's down to warp two.
I don't understand. It was outrunning us.
Maybe it's decided to fight. Phasers ready?
It's coming to a full halt, sir. Magnification one.
Captain, request permission to return to my post.
There. It's coming, sir.
The deflectors will not stop it, Captain.
I should have surmised this. For the creature to be able to use gravity as a propulsive force, it would have to have this capacity.
Five seconds to contact. All hatches and vents secure. All lights on the board show green. Sir! The number two impulse vent! we have a red light!
When it entered impulse engine number two's vent, it attacked two crewmen. It then got into the ventilating system, and now we have air for only two hours.
One man has a chance for survival. The other is dead. You can add that little price tag to your monster hunt.
That's enough, Bones.
It's not enough! You didn't care as long as you could hang your trophy on the wall. Well, it's not on it, Captain, it's in it.
May I suggest that we no longer belabour the question of whether or not we should have gone after the creature. The matter has now been rendered academic. The creature is now after us.
Yes, well, it could have been many light years away from us. Instead it chose to turn and attack here. Why?
Impossible to tell, Captain, until I can make a closer survey of the creature.
If you want to play analyst, Spock, use someone else, not me. My concern is with the ship and the crew.
I know you would prefer to wallow in emotion rather than
Mister Spock, it's very kind of you to come here
Sir, it's coming through the vent.
Get out of here! I'll attempt to seal it off.
On my way, Garrovick. Security to three four one. Medical alert. Scotty, reverse cabin pressure three four one.
If we let that thing into the ship, he'll have a lot of company.
I must have jammed the vent control when I hit it.
See if the reverse pressure has pulled it back into the ventilation system.
He saved my life, Captain. I should be lying dead in there, not him.
Fortunately, neither of us is dead, Ensign. The reverse pressure worked. The vent is closed.
Don't misunderstand my next question. Mister Spock, why aren't you dead?
It's that green blood of his.
My haemoglobin is based on copper, not iron.
I'll bet he left a bad taste in the creature's mouth, too.
Yes. The scent is different. I think I understand something now.
Do you believe you're in communication with the creature?
I don't know what it is, Mister Spock, but you remember I said the thing was alive. It may not be communication as we understand it, but I did know it was alive and intelligent, and I think I know something else now.
Captain Kirk is suffering from a, a peculiar physical degeneration which strongly resembles aging.
Is not his mental capacity degenerating even more rapidly?
Yes, yes, but he's a better man right now
Doctor, you heard the computer's analysis of Captain Kirk's physical age. Do you agree with it?
It's a blasted machine, Spock! You can't argue with a machine.
Do you agree with it, Doctor?
Yes. Yes, I do, agree. And I am sorry, Jim.
This board has no further questions. Unless you, Commodore Stocker, have something that you would like to add.
No. I am quite satisfied, Mister Spock.
Do you wish to call any witnesses, Captain Kirk?
I am perfectly capable of speaking in my own defence, Mister Spock.
Captain, I would suggest
No, no, no. It's all right, Spock. It's all right. There's only one reason, and one reason alone, for having this, hearing. I refused to leave Gamma Hydra Two
Yes. A slip of the tongue.
You're inability to remember having given commands, reading and signing important orders and then forgetting them, your physical analysis as compiled by our own chief surgeon. All these things would appear to be irrefutable proof of failing physical and mental conditions.
We have no more questions, Captain.
Ask me anything. Anything.
